Motivation: Gene regulatory networks grn s affect numerous cellular processes and every process of life, and abnormalities of GRN lead to breast cancer. Transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) are two of the best studied gene regulatory mechanisms. However, the architecture and feature of grn s by TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer and its subtypes were unknown. In this study, we investigated the grn s by TFs and miRNAs with emphasis on breast cancer clas-sifier genes at system level.

introduction the products of genes encoded by the genome of organism enable cell survival and many cellular functions (). Regulation of gene expression determines the amount and the temporal pattern of these products in the cell that are crucial to the processes of life (). Although there are many layers of gene regulation, transcription factors (TFs) and microRNAs (miRNAs) are two of the best studied gene regulatory mechanisms (). TFs regulate gene expression at the transcriptional level, whereas miRNAs, $ 22-nuleotide long non-coding RNAs, regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level (). Expression abnormalities of both coding and non-coding genes were involved in cancer, which is a complex genetic disease (). Cancer is a leading cause of human death. TFs play important roles in expression regulation of both coding and non-coding genes, and at least three main groups of TFs are known to be important in human cancer (). Alterations of miRNAs are involved in both the initiation and progression of human cancer, and the link between deregulated miRNAs expression and cancer had been well established (). Understanding gene regulatory networks grn s by TFs and miRNAs will shed light on the mechanisms of cancer, including breast cancer. Breast cancer is the most common cancer in women, and $ 1 million new breast cancer cases were diagnosed each year worldwide (). Recent studies provided valuable information on the molecular mechanism of breast cancer via integrating information from genome transcriptome to proteome of representative numbers of breast cancer patient samples (Cancer Genome). Gene regulations by TFs and miRNAs have been linked to breast cancer. Several TFs, e.g. oestrogen receptors, are known to be important in breast cancer (). MiRNAs, e.g. miR-200 family members, play important roles in breast cancer (). However, the architecture and feature of grn s by TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer and its subtypes were largely unknown. Breast cancer is a remarkably heterogeneous disease. Breast cancer cell lines and primary breast tumors were found to be consistently classified into three major subtypes: luminal (Lu), basal A (BaA) and basal B (BaB) (). The breast cancer cell lines were found to compromise a system exhibiting the substantial genomic, transcriptional and biological heterogeneity properties of primary breast cancers (). Breast cancer classifier genes b ccgs involved in the differentiation status of the cell type and or tumor biology were identified to be able to classify breast cancer cell lines into Lu, BaA and BaB groups (). Investigating the pattern and feature of grn s composed of TFs, miRNAs and b ccgs in breast cancer cell lines will provide valuable information for understanding the molecular mechanism of gene regulation in breast cancer and the molecular basis of breast cancer subtypes. In this study, we revealed the architecture and feature of grn s by TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer via systematically investigating grn s composed of TFs, miRNAs and b ccgs across 33 breast cancer cell lines representing three major breast cancer subtypes (Lu, BaA and BaB). First, TFs, miRNAs and b ccgs were collected from public database and published works, and the relationships among them were analyzed via computational methods combined with gene expression data. Second, for each breast cancer subtype, the correlation between tfs mirnas and their targets was calculated. After that, enrichment of miRNA target gene in b ccgs was analyzed, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. and the correlation between TFs and miRNA host genes was calculated. Finally, 3-node co regulatory motifs were identified and used to construct co regulatory networks. The workflow was deciphered in, and the detailed information was provided in Section 2. Our current work presented the architecture and feature of grn s by TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer at system level.

discussion numerous cellular processes and every process of life are affected by grn s (). Precise and coordinated control of gene expression is required for an organism to grow, develop and function normally.(). It is known for decades that a failure of normal regulation of expression of genes in cell growth and differentiation leads to the appearance and behavior of cancer cells (). abnorm ities in grn s causing gene expression abnorm ities play important roles in human cancer including breast cancer. Breast cancer is one of the most commonly diagnosed cancer types in the world and is one of the most investigated areas of oncology (). Although there are 4100 000 published papers on breast cancer in the past decade and grn s were claimed to be a new conceptual framework to analyze breast cancer behaviors (), the study on the architecture and the feature of the grn s in breast cancer is still limited. grn s can provide explanations of developmental and physiological functions at system level (). grn s contain many layers of gene regulation, including cell signaling; mRNA splicing, polyadenylation and localization; chromatin modifications; and mechanisms of protein localization, modification and degradation (). TFs and miRNAs are two of the best studied gene regulatory mechanism (). TFs are considered as key intrinsic regulators of cell fate via controlling gene expression directly (). Compared with TFs that regulate gene expression at the level of transcriptional regulation, miRNAs regulate gene expression at post-transcriptional level and raised entirely new mechanisms of gene regulation. More than 60% of human protein coding genes were predicted to be regulated by miRNAs (). Thus, investigation on grn s by TFs and miRNAs will provide valuable information for understanding the gene regulation mechanism of cancer, including breast cancer. In breast cancer, grn s by TFs have been the subject of intense scientific investigation over the past several decades, and the related studies also lead to the improvement of breast cancer treatment. Take oestrogen receptor esr1 which is one of the most extensively studied TFs in breast cancer, as an example. ESR1 is found to be the driving TF in majority of breast cancer and to target genes dictating cell growth and endocrine responses baa CAV2, COL4A2, DSC2, EGR3, EP300, FBN1, FOS, FOXO4, hsa-mir-133b, hsa-mir-494, hsamir-497, hsa-mir-656, MAP4K4, MEIS1, ne bl PLAU, REST, sgc b BaB AP1G1, BACH2, BTG3, E2F3, ERBB3, FOXF2, FOXJ2, hsa-mir-107, hsa-mir-17, hsa-mir-181d, hsa-mir-182, hsa-mir-183, hsa-mir-708, hsa-mir92 b, hsa-mir-936, LLGL2, MEF2A, NFATC3, NFIB, POU2F2, RFX1, RUNX1, SHANK2, TAF1,TBC1D1 Lu ALDH1A3, ARID5B, CUX1, E2F2, FLRT2, FOXO1, FSTL1, hsa-mir-200 b, has mir626 SCHIP1, TCF3, VSX1(). The studies on ESR1 and its grn s lead to the development of hormone therapy, which is the mainly current systemic therapy (). Recent technological advances improve the genome wide map of GRN by ESR1 from model systems to breast cancer (). Compared with TFs, miRNAs, which are short (2023 nucleotides) regulatory RNAs that cause destabilization or translational repression of target mRNAs, are rising to be important new mechanisms of gene regulation in breast cancer (Le ques ne and Caldas, 2010). It has been mostly investigated on the role of individual miRNAs in breast cancer, and a new framework for studying the biology of miRNAs in breast cancer was presented recently via analyzing the miRNA expression profiles of 1302 breast tumors with matching detailed clinical annotation, long term follow-up and genomic and miRNA expression data (). Several studies have demonstrated the regulation between TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer. For examples, c myc directly transacted the miR-17-92 cluster to modulate E2f1 expression in breast cancer (O'), and miR-221/222 directly target Esr1 mRNA to function in tamoxifen resistance in breast cancer (). However, little is known on the pattern and features of grn s by TFs and miRNA in breast cancer. Besides targets can 410 integrative approaches have been developed for miRNA target prediction (). In these approaches, approaches including mmi a (), mirc on nx () and MAGIA () were correlation based approaches, which directly consider the correlation between miRNA and mRNA expression. Besides correlation based approaches, linear mode approaches, including gen mir + () and Bayesian network approach () predict miRNA target via formulating mRNA and miRNA expression with linear model with latent variables, and via using Bayesian network to model the mirna mrna regulatory network, respectively. Regarding to the TFs and their targets, many approaches and databases, including UCSC database (), have been developed. However, none of these was able to be directly applied for analyzing GRN by miRNA and TF. To investigate the grn s by the miRNA and the TF in breast cancer and among breast cancer subtypes, a pipeline shown in was designed to integrate the established approaches from miRNA target prediction to transcription targets analysis to decipher the architecture and features of grn s consisted of miRNAs, TF and b ccgs in breast cancer and among breast cancer subtypes. There are two types of GRMs in breast cancer: Type I and Type II GRMs (). All the three breast cancer subtypes (BaA, BaB and Lu) have the two GRM types with significant variation number of nodes and edges (and Supplementary). Basal subtype (BaA and bab has significantly more nodes and edges in co regulatory motif group than luminal subtype (Lu) (,and Supplementary). To study the combinatorial regulation pattern of grn s by miRNAs and TFs in breast cancer, for each breast cancer subtypes, the grn s by miRNAs and TFs were created via joining all 3-node co regulatory motifs and merged three co regulatory networks into the entire grn s (5 and Supplementary Figs S1 and S2). The number of intersection nodes and edges between BaA and BaB is much higher than that between Lu and BaA and between Lu and BaB (Figs 6 and 7). Different breast cancer subtypes have their unique nodes and edges (and Supplementary Tables S9 and S10). These features support the significant differences between breast cancer subtypes on many aspects from molecule to prognosis to some extent. Interestingly, a much smaller gene list containing only protein coding gene nodes from the grn s is able to classify breast cancer subtypes as efficient as the gene list containing all b ccgs (Supplementary Figs S3 and S4). This result indicates that it might be potentially used analysis of the architecture and features of the grn s in breast cancer and among breast cancer subtypes to build a more accurate and efficient breast subtype discriminator. Interestingly, most common nodes are TFs or miRNAs. This might be the consequence of restriction to b ccgs as TFs and miRNA targets in current study. Further studies would be required to confirm whether this phenomenon is a feature of breast cancer. Identification of breast cancer driver genes will lay the ground for developing new diagnostics and individualizing cancer treatment. In the grn s by TFs and miRNAs, 18 genes were common in grn s across all breast cancer subtypes and designated non subtype specific genes (NSG) (). Nine of these 18 n sgs are TFs. In the nine TFs, eight (CREB1, ESR1, FOSL1, PBX1, POU2F1, SOX9, SP1 and ZEB1) were reported to play roles in breast cancer. CREB1 was reported to be a positive transcription regulator of aromatase (), and its expression was correlated with the prognosis of breast cancer (). ESR1 roles in breast cancer were well established (). FOSL1 was found to modulate growth, vacuo lization and death of ant estrogen resistant MCF-7 cells (). PBX1, pre b cell leukemia homeobox 1, was reported to act as a TF to function as a pioneer factor defining aggressive er positive breast cancer (). POU2F1 was found to be a hub gene in grn s across all breast cancer subtypes (5 and Supplementary). POU2F1, octamer TF 1 (OCT1), is reported to be associated with epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) and breast tumor malignancy (). SOX9 was recently reported to cooperate with SLUG to determine the mammary stem cell state (). SP1 was reported to interact with ESR1 and play important roles in breast cancer (). ZEB1 was reported to control proliferation and epithelial to mesenchymal transition of breast cancer cells (). Besides the eight TFs in n sgs as discussed above, little is known about roles of ANK3 and POU3F2 in breast cancer, and ank3 and Pou3f2 are considered to be new breast cancer gene candidates. In comparison, the eight miRNAs in n sgs are much less studied. Only two miRNAs in n sgs were reported to play roles in breast cancer: has mir130a was recently reported to modulate Hoxa5, which is a critical mediator of a breast cancer chemoprevention agent retinoic acid induced cell growth inhibition (), and has mir19a was found to target Pten to play a role in breast cancer chemo resistance () and regulate the expression of tissue factor, which is an important regulator of tumor angiogenesis and metastasis in both luminal and basal breast cancer cells (). The remaining six miRNAs has mir195 has mir200c hsa-mir543, hsa-mir-300, hsa-mir-381 and hsa-mir-29c) in n sgs are new miRNAs that could be play roles in breast cancer. Besides n sgs the remaining genes were designated as breast cancer subtype related genes srg s (and). Although srg s can not be simply interpreted as breast cancer subtype specific genes whose functions are limited to specific breast cancer subtypes, srg s would also play roles in breast cancer, and further studies are needed to validate whether the functions of srg s in breast cancer are highly depended on the context of breast cancer subtypes. MiRNA regulatory networks were found to alter their configuration to conform to the stable TF regulatory networks with an increased circuit redundancy, and a marked reduction in the repertoire of composite feed-forward circuits targeted genes and this redundancy adding role is preferentially attributable (). Although it is difficult to compile human breast cancers to other mammals including mice to study evolution of related grn s our grn s by TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer and subtypes might be likely to retain similar properties. Further investigations are required to verify whether the redundancy adding role would serve as a niche for many miRNA connections to survive avoiding conflicts with the stable TF regulatory networks in breast cancer. More importantly, the grn s raise important clues for further functional validation the grn s by certain TFs and miRNAs and facilitate profound understanding of the functions of breast cancer genes. Several regulatory relationships have been experimentally validated. For example, a recent study showed that microrna 34 directly targets Fosl1 to suppress breast cancer invasion and metastasis (). Thus, our results give important clue for the experimental validation of grn s in breast cancer. Our results reveal that the architecture and feature of grn s by TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer have both distinct and common features among breast cancer subtypes. In addition, our results raise abundant clues for further experimental investigation of gene regulation by TFs and miRNAs in breast cancer via providing the new candidate breast cancer genes and regulatory relationship. Taken together, our results shed light on the mechanism of breast cancer development and subtyping.
