Motivation: Gene clusters are arrangements of functionally related genes on a chromosome. In bacteria, it is expected that evolutionary pressures would conserve these arrangements due to the functional advantages they provide. Visualization of conserved gene clusters across multiple genomes provides key insights into their evolutionary histories. Therefore, a software tool that enables visualization and functional analyses of gene clusters would be a great asset to the biological research community. Results: We have developed gene cluster viz a java based tool that allows for the visualization, exploration and downstream analyses of conserved gene clusters across multiple genomes. gene cluster viz combines an easy to use exploration interface for gene clusters with a host of other analysis features such as multiple sequence alignments, phylogenetic analyses and integration with the KEGG pathway database. Availability:

introduction recent advances in sequencing technology and ortholog detection methods have given rise to several methods for the detection of gene clusters conserved across two or more genomes (). However, gene cluster information obtained from these programs has been very difficult to analyze for bench scientists due to the lack of a more intuitive analysis tool. The visualization of gene clusters in multiple genomes, with respect to their spatial and functional features is a fundamental problem in this area. There are currently several visualization tools that have been developed for a variety of applications in comparative genomics * To whom correspondence should be addressed.. A subset of these have been designed for the visualization of gene clusters. However, these tools are limited in different ways. In some cases, only paired genome visualization is supported. Even in multi genome visualization, scalability is a challenge and, thus, limits the utility of web based tools. Moreover, web based tools rely on server hosted data and can not utilize data provided by users. This is true even in the case of abs yn te a tool that was recently developed specifically for the task of visualizing bacterial and archaeal clusters. Standalone applications overcome these drawbacks but involve cumbersome installation procedures or database setups that demand programming skills beyond that of most end users. Finally, existing gene cluster visualization tools are limited in their support for further downstream analyses. We have implemented gene cluster viz a robust and dynamic standalone tool that provides a global and local view of gene clusters. Moreover, with a host of flexible sequence and function analysis features, we believe gene cluster viz can be a very useful tool in comparative genomics.

discussion gene cluster viz serves not only as a user friendly tool for the visualization of gene clusters across multiple genomes but also as a workspace for extensive research on these clusters. It tackles the non-trivial task of providing access and information about multiple conserved clusters across multiple genomes. There are several applications that gene cluster viz can be used for including phylogenetic studies, pathway studies and gene function assignment. Thus, it is expected to help bench scientists in understanding the functional relationship between genes in conserved clusters across the evolutionary spectrum of genomes.
