Many simulation methods and programs have been developed to simulate genetic data of the human genome. These data have been widely used, for example, to predict properties of populations retrospectively or prospectively according to mathematically intractable genetic models, and to assist the validation, statistical inference and power analysis of a variety of statistical models. However, owing to the differences in type of genetic data of interest, simulation methods, evolutionary features, input and output formats, terminologies and assumptions for different applications, choosing the right tool for a particular study can be a resource intensive process that usually involves searching, downloading and testing many different simulation programs. Genetic Simulation Resources (GSR) is a website provided by the National Cancer Institute (NCI) that aims to help researchers compare and choose the appropriate simulation tools for their studies. This website allows authors of simulation software to register their applications and describe them with well defined attributes, thus allowing site users to search and compare simulators according to specified features. Availability: http://popmodels.cancercontrol.cancer.gov/gsr. Contact:

introduction owing to the cost and availability of genetic samples, lack of knowledge of causal variants that contribute to observed phenotypes and mathematical intractability of complex evolutionary models, computer simulations have been widely used, among many applications, to predict outcomes under realistic genetic scenarios (e.g.), to compare and verify analytical methods or tools (e.g.) and to estimate parameters of evolutionary models (e.g.). With increasing power of personal computers and the availability of computer clusters, novel simulation methods and sophisticated simulation programs have been and continue to be developed to simulate genetic data for new application areas such as large scale genomic studies (). Despite the availability of a large number of simulation programs, choosing appropriate simulation programs for a particular research topic can be a time consuming process that usually involves studying, downloading and testing many different tools with varying quality. Adding to the difficulties is the fact that many software applications lack comprehensive documentation, and use implicit assumptions and terminologies that are familiar only to researchers in particular research areas. As a result, at an nci sponsored conference, meeting participants recommended creating a web resource that summarizes available genetic simulation programs (). Genetic Simulation Resources (GSR) is a website provided by NCI that aims to help researchers compare and choose the right simulation tools for their studies. This website allows authors of simulation software to register their applications and describe them with standardized attributes that are understandable to researchers in diverse research areas. Visitors of this website can browse a catalogue of genetic data simulators, review simulators of interest and search and compare simulators according to specified features. This pre sorting allows researchers to focus on the most applicable simulators before starting the time consuming process of downloading and testing the packages themselves.
