Motivation: The analysis of metabolic processes is becoming increasingly important to our understanding of complex biological systems and disease states. Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR) is a particularly relevant technology in this respect, since the NMR signals provide a quantitative measure of the metabolite concentrations. However, due to the complexity of the spectra typical of biological samples, the demands of clinical and high throughput analysis will only be fully met by a system capable of reliable, automatic processing of the spectra. An initial step in this direction has been taken by Targeted Profiling (TP), employing a set of known and predicted metabolite signatures fitted against the signal. However, an accurate fitting procedure for 1 H NMR data is complicated by shift uncertainties in the peak systems caused by measurement imperfections. These uncertainties have a large impact on the accuracy of identification and quantification and currently require compensation by very time consuming manual interactions. Here, we present an approach, termed Extended Targeted Profiling (ETP), that estimates shift uncertainties based on a genetic algorithm (GA) combined with a least squares optimization lsq o. The estimated shifts are used to correct the known metabolite signatures leading to significantly improved identification and quantification. In this way, use of the automated system significantly reduces the effort normally associated with manual processing and paves the way for reliable, high throughput analysis of complex NMR spectra. Results: The results indicate that using simultaneous shift uncertainty correction and least squares fitting significantly improves the identification and quantification results for 1 H NMR data in comparison to the standard targeted profiling approach and compares favorably with the results obtained by manual expert analysis. Preservation of the functional structure of the NMR spectra makes this approach more realistic than simple binning strategies. Availability: The simulation descriptions and scripts employed are available under:

introduction the quantitative profiling of metabolites and the mathematical modeling of metabolic networks is set to make a major contribution to our understanding of complex biological systems, including the processes underlying development and tissue homeostasis (). The most commonly used methods for metabolite detection are mass spectrometry (MS) and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR). While each has its specific advantages, the inherently quantitative nature of NMR makes it most attractive for providing data for the development of mathematical models. However, the current challenge is to extract reliably quantitative data from experimental spectra, which are often complex and subject to background variability. Here, we focus on the exact extraction of metabolite information from 1 H NMR measurements. The general strategy involves pre-processing steps such as phase and baseline correction, smoothing and data reduction (), followed by the identification of distinct metabolite signatures in the signal and the estimation of metabolite concentrations with respect to the original biological samples. Details of the basic pre-processing used in this work are provided in (). A number of approaches have been reported to help in the subsequent identification and quantification of individual metabolites from pre-processed data (). However, none of the methods currently available can be applied in the reliable, automated fashion necessary for the high throughput processing of complex biological samples (). As an initial step toward automatic processing, targeted profiling (TP) () employs a set of known and predicted metabolite signatures (targets) fitted against the signal. However, an accurate fitting procedure for 1 H NMR data is complicated by small but significant shift uncertainties in the peak systems, caused by even minor variations in parameters such as temperature and pH (). These uncertainties have a large impact on the accuracy of identification and quantification and currently need to be compensated by very time consuming manual interactions. Independent correction of the shift followed by fitting of the corrected target descriptions against the signals is not generally feasible because of the strong overlaps typical of 1 H NMR spectra. Generic methods for the compensation of peak shifts are typically based on a specific or average reference signal taken from the page 525 524533

conclusion in summary, this work has shown that an approach combining GAs with lsq o leads to highly effective error estimates for the shift uncertainties in 1 H NMR measurements. The simultaneous fit outperforms the standard TP approach with respect to identification and quantification accuracy and compares favorably to the expert analysis. We have further shown that the usage of a data specific functional distance measure to calculate the fitness values is preferable to a standard Euclidean measure. It also significantly improved the convergence rate of the GA. The interpretation of the obtained shifts over time with the best model allows an in depth analysis of the optimization, revealing potentially unreliable fits. This provides initial guidance for the expert to focus further manual improvement of the obtained fit where necessary, reducing the demand for extensive shift corrections in order to generate correct uncertainty estimates. Furthermore, the approach also allows the manual specification of concentration values in the fit for known concentrations by additional constraints. Overall, the combined approach can improve the identification and quantification accuracy of nmr based targeted profiling to allow a semiautomatic high page 533 524533
