Motivation: Over the last decade, numerous methods have been developed for inference of regulatory networks from gene expression data. However, accurate and systematic evaluation of these methods is hampered by the difficulty of constructing adequate benchmarks and the lack of tools for a differentiated analysis of network predictions on such benchmarks. Results: Here, we describe a novel and comprehensive method for in silico benchmark generation and performance profiling of network inference methods available to the community as an open source software called gene netweaver (GNW). In addition to the generation of detailed dynamical models of gene regulatory networks to be used as benchmarks, GNW provides a network motif analysis that reveals systematic prediction errors, thereby indicating potential ways of improving inference methods. The accuracy of network inference methods is evaluated using standard metrics such as precision recall and receiver operating characteristic curves. We show how GNW can be used to assess the performance and identify the strengths and weaknesses of six inference methods. Furthermore, we used GNW to provide the international Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM) competition with three network inference challenges dream 3 dream 4 and dream 5. Availability: GNW is available at http://gnw.sourceforge.net along with its Java source code, user manual and supporting data.

introduction a challenging issue in systems biology is the development of computational tools for the reverse engineering of gene regulatory networks from quantitative experimental data. Over the last decade, high throughput assays for mRNA expression have opened the door to the inference of regulatory networks by allowing simultaneous measurements of the expression levels of thousands of genes. Technologies such as spotted microarrays () and oligonucleotide chips () have enabled * To whom correspondence should be addressed. genome wide quantification of differential gene expression profiles and, more recently, short read sequencing technologies such as rnase q () have provided more precise quantification of mRNA levels. Researchers have proposed a plethora of methods for reverse engineering the complex network of interactions between the genes and their RNA and protein products (also called regulatory program) from spatial and temporal high throughput gene expression data (). Regulatory networks are often represented as directed, signed graphs in which nodes represent genes or transcription factors (TFs). In this context, edges correspond to enhancing or inhibitory regulations that affect gene transcription rates. Network inference methods rely on various computational approaches such as correlation (), mutual information (MI) (), ordinary differential equations (ODE) models (), Bayesian networks () or hybrid algorithms (). Numerous methods have been developed for inference of gene regulatory networks; however, relatively little effort has been put into evaluating the performance of those methods on adequate benchmarks. So far, three main strategies have been proposed to generate benchmark networks. A first strategy consists in evaluating network predictions made by reverse engineering algorithms on well studied in vivo pathways from model organisms (). However, those networks are incomplete maps of the physical interactions in the cell that are responsible for cellular functions and using them as benchmarks imply making error when evaluating network predictions. Another strategy consists of genetically engineering synthetic in vivo networks (). The main drawback of this strategy is that only a few small networks are available. Yet another strategy consists in developing in silico gene regulatory networks that can be simulated to produce artificial gene expression data. The simulation of in silico networks has the advantages of being fast, easily reproducible and less expensive than biological experiments. A few instances of small in silico networks with handcrafted topologies () have been proposed as benchmarks for reverse engineering algorithms. More recently, several generators have been developed to automate the construction of in silico regulatory networks including up to thousands of genes to be used as benchmark networks for reverse engineering algorithms ().Page: 2264 22632270

discussion we propose a comprehensive and powerful framework for in silico benchmark generation and performance profiling of network inference methods. We implemented this framework as an open source tool called gene netweaver (GNW). Biologically plausible network structures are generated by extracting modules from known biological interaction networks such as those of E.coli and the yeast S.cerevisiae. Network structures are then endowed with detailed dynamical models of gene regulation describing both transcription and translation processes. Transcriptional regulation is modeled using a thermodynamic approach accounting for both independent ('additive') and synergistic ('multiplicative') interactions. In addition, our models account for stochastic molecular noise as well as experimental noise observed in microarrays. The generated in silico benchmark networks can be simulated in GNW to reproduce wild type knockout null mutant knockdown (heterozygous) and multifactorial perturbation gene expression experiments. As an example of the application, we have used GNW to generate the target networks for three international competitions on gene network reverse engineering: dream 3 (2008), dream 4 (2009) and dream 5 (2010). In total, 91 teams have submitted over 900 network predictions on gnw generated networks, making GNW one of the most widely used benchmark generators by the community. In contrast to the previously proposed benchmark generators, GNW also integrates tools for systematic evaluation of the predictions from inference methods on benchmark networks. A unique feature of GNW is the ability to perform a network motif analysis from a set of network predictions and their corresponding benchmark networks. The network motif analysis reveals systematic prediction errors made by inference method on specific network motifs, thereby indicating potential ways of network reconstruction improvements. The accuracy of network inference is assessed using standard metrics such as PR and ROC curves. We have used GNW to generate in silico benchmark suites to assess the performance and identify the strengths and weaknesses of six network inference methods. We show that Z-score, and the inference methods developed by Pinna et al. and Yip et al. make more accurate network predictions than the two widely used methods, ARACNE2 and CLR. This good performance is achieved apparently because those methods target the inference of causal relationships between genes. However, ARACNE2 and CLR do not require systematic knockout gene expression data, which are not always available in practice, to infer undirected networks. Yet ARACNE2, CLR and GENIE3 methods can be applied to infer regulatory networks even if no systematic knockout or knockdown experiments are provided. Furthermore, our results show that at some point simply giving more expression data to inference methods does not necessarily imply performance improvement. Therefore, the integration of additional information about the target regulatory networks should be considered, for instance using prior knowledge about the network structures. The novelty of GNW is that it additionally provides a unique network motif analysis, which we used to show that the structural properties of the target regulatory networks affect the performance of inference methods. We observed that the performances of Z-score, and the methods developed by are impeded by the presence of cascade motifs in the target networks. Thus, we show that those methods make significantly less accurate network predictions on the yeast S.cerevisiae, whose structure includes more cascade motifs than E.coli transcriptional network structure. Finally, we also provide evidence that in silico benchmark networks can be used to identify the most informative type of gene expression data that a given inference method could use to achieve the best possible reconstruction from in vivo experiments.
