Due to the big data produced by next generation sequencing studies, there is an evident need for methods to extract the valuable information gathered from these experiments. In this work, we propose gene cost a novel scoring based method to evaluate every gene for their disease association. Without any prior filtering and any prior knowledge, we assign a disease likelihood score to each gene in correspondence with their variations. Then, we rank all genes based on frequency, conservation, pedigree and detailed variation information to find out the causative reason of the disease state. We demonstrate the usage of gene cost with public and real life Mendelian disease cases including recessive, dominant, compound heterozygous and sporadic models. As a result, we were able to identify causative reason behind the disease state in top rank-ings of our list, proving that this novel prioritization framework provides a powerful environment for the analysis in genetic disease studies alternative to filtering based approaches. Availability and implementation: gene cost software is freely available at wwwig bambi l gem. tubitak govt ren softwares gene cost en index html. Contact:

introduction the progress in next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have led to an increased usage of whole exo me and whole genome sequencing in medicine. The practice of high throughput methods in identifying disease causing genes is becoming more prevalent with the aim of exploring the unresolved Mendelian diseases. Hence, there is still a need for effective tools to analyze the big data coming out of sequencing experiments. An important step in extracting information from huge amount of data produced by high throughput technologies is 'variant prioritization'. Variety of tools have been proposed in the literature for identifying the causative reason behind Mendelian diseases such as bier app (), pri var (), mendel scan (), kg g seq () and eXtasy (). Most of these methods actually rely on tight filtering approach to reduce the number of variants. However, NGS technology is prone to errors at many steps such as optical reading and alignment. Therefore, filtering based approaches have the possibility of missing the real causative reason behind the disease state. Additionally, some of the programs are web based and require the uploading of the variant file to the program owners' server which may compromise the privacy of the individuals. Furthermore, most of the programs can only operate on a single individual's data hence they are not able to use the whole information coming from the pedigree. In this study, we propose a novel scoring based approach for evaluating disease causing genes. Unlike any other method, gene cost focuses on genes instead of single variations. Hence, if several different mutations in a single gene are causing the same disease which is observed at sporadic cases, gene cost would perfectly identify that gene as well. By adopting a scoring based approach we aim to overcome the problems coming with the quality of the data. Thus, we show in our work that gene cost is superior to other prioritization tools no matter the data is faulty or not. Moreover, gene cost has a wider range of applicability than any other existing methods since it can make use of the pedigree information. It can accept multiple affected and healthy individuals' information, which is crucial for sporadic cases. Our method works offline on personal computers and users are not obliged to upload the vcf file to our servers which carries sensitive information. Additionally, gene cost does not require any prior knowledge of the disease such as phenotype information and can be easily applied using the command line.
