Motivation: In biomedical research transcript omic proteomic or meta bolo mic profiles of patient samples are often combined with genomic profiles from experiments in cell lines or animal models. Integrating experimental data with patient data is still a challenging task due to the lack of tailored statistical tools. Results: Here we introduce guided clustering, a new data integration strategy that combines experimental and clinical high throughput data. Guided clustering identifies sets of genes that stand out in experimental data while at the same time display coherent expression in clinical data. We report on two potential applications: The integration of clinical microarray data with (i) genome wide chromatin immunoprecipitation assays and (ii) with cell perturbation assays. Unlike other analysis strategies, guided clustering does not analyze the two datasets sequentially but instead in a single joint analysis. In a simulation study and in several biological applications, guided clustering performs favorably when compared with sequential analysis approaches. Availability: Guided clustering is available as a r package from

introduction today molecular profiling technologies allow the characterization of clinical biopsies which capture complementary cellular properties including genotype, methylation state, transcriptome, proteome and metabo lome snapshots. Moreover, the same technologies are used in experiments with cell lines or primary cell cultures where they are complemented by chromatin immunoprecipitation assays like chips eq protein protein interaction screens or protein localization assays. Each profiling technology sheds different, and partly complementary light on the functioning and malfunctioning of cells. However, their joint full potential can only be realized when the two information sources are combined. Thus, integrating data from different sources is an important part of modern biomedical research. An important aspect of data integration is the development * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of tailored statistical methods that are able to leverage knowledge contained within a diverse range of data sources and at the same time, being able to provide evidence to answer the types of question being posed by the research community as a whole. While the concept of statistical data integration is self evident, its realization in genomics is challenging. Obstacles include the heterogeneity of experimental setups, study designs, profiling platforms, sample handling and data management. Furthermore, missing metadata and insufficient documentation of heuristic and complex multistep analysis procedures complicate the endeavor. Heterogeneities can in part be overcome by data integration on the level of gene lists [. All datasets are analyzed individually and gene sets or ranked list of genes are produced. In a subsequent meta analysis step, the studies are integrated by detecting significant overlaps of gene sets (), enrichment of genes sets in ranked lists () or similarities of multiple ranked lists (). This strategy avoids the need for joint quantitative data models that describe the dependencies between individual quantitative profiles. A quantitative approach is the concatenation of feature vectors from different platforms in the context of classification problems. If several types of high dimensional readouts are available for the same group of samples, predictive signatures can be constructed by combining selected features across all data types, thus exploring potential complementary information. Somewhat surprisingly, several authors observed only marginal improvements in classification accuracy resulting from data integration. In complementary work, data integration has been used to aggregate information across clinical and experimental sample populations rather than platforms combined data generated experimentally by overexpression of active oncogenes in non-malignant breast epithelial cells with tumor samples of various carcinomas. Signatures of pathway activation were learnt on the primary cell culture data and applied to tumor profiles for predicting pathway activation status, outcome and treatment efficiency of the cancer samples. The exact opposite sequential analysis strategy is described by. The authors start their analysis on the clinical data by identifying clusters of strongly coexpressed genes, which they subsequently test for joint differential expression between experimental conditions. Here, the experimental data can not influence the formation, but the selection of gene clusters. The first analysis approach to combine both data sets from the outset is described in. Applying a class discovery method by von in a semi supervised setting, the authors find classifications of patient page 2232 22312238

conclusion we introduce guided clustering, a new method for the combined analysis of clinical microarray gene expression data and experimental data. Our method is controlled by two parameters  and . While  is selected automatically,  has to be specified by the user. With the help of these parameters, guided clustering circumvents the need for crisp cutoffs of gene lists and clusters used by most competing methods. Even though both parameters are chosen based on the training data, they are not tuned to enhance any fit. Their purpose is to balance the influence of both datasets. In fact, we did not observe any overfitting phenomenon in simulations with separate test and training data (data not shown). Guided clustering is flexible and can be adapted to various data integration challenges. Here, we applied it in the context of a study on DLBCL that was guided to focus on aspects of BCL6 and toll like receptor signaling. We could establish a novel prognostic index in DLBCL, which holds more prognostic information than existing predictors of survival. The composition of the genes underlying this index point to a link between BCL6 activity and toll like receptor signaling. We experimentally strengthened this link by an LPS stimulation experiment combined with a second guided clustering analysis. We observed that targets of lps mediated toll like receptor signaling, and BCL6 targets are coherently expressed in a large collection of DLBCL, suggesting that BCL6 in fact influences the transcriptional program by toll like receptor signaling in DLBCL.
