Motivation: Despite rapid progress in sequencing technology, assembling de novo the genomes of new species as well as reconstructing complex meta genomes remains major technological challenges. New synthetic long read (SLR) technologies promise significant advances towards these goals; however, their applicability is limited by high sequencing requirements and the inability of current assembly paradigms to cope with combinations of short and long reads. Results: Here, we introduce Architect, a new de novo scaffold er aimed at SLR technologies. Unlike previous assembly strategies, Architect does not require a costly subassembly step; instead it assembles genomes directly from the SLRs underlying short reads, which we refer to as read clouds. This enables a 4 to 20-fold reduction in sequencing requirements and a 5-fold increase in assembly contiguity on both genomic and meta genomic datasets relative to state of the art assembly strategies aimed directly at fully sub assembled long reads. Availability and Implementation: Our source code is freely available at https://github.com/kule shov architect
introduction genome sequencing technology has had an enormous impact on modern science and medicine. Information gleaned from the genome has become a crucial ingredient in numerous industrial and medical applications, such as breeding disease resistant crops, identifying infectious microbes or diagnosing human health problems. Yet, despite rapid progress in sequencing technology, fully reconstructing de novo the genomes of new organisms or complex meta genomes still remains a major technological challenge. The main obstacle in de novo genome assembly remains sequencing read length. Current technologies can only read short hundred base substrings of the genome; recovering the original sequence from these substrings is impossible, as they fundamentally can not resolve the true position of repetitive sequences that are longer than their own length. This results in highly fragmented assemblies that need to be further improved with more sophisticated and expensive techniques. Recently, new synthetic long read (SLR) technologies have offered great promise towards making inexpensive and accurate de novo assembly a reality. These technologies exhibit read lengths in the tens of kilobases and theoretically have the power to reconstruct a large fraction of an organism's genome. Nonetheless, SLRs have not yet realized their full potential. Most existing approaches involve a two stage process in which long fragments are first assembled from short reads, and then the genome is assembled from the long fragments. Such strategies typically require prohibitively large amounts of short read sequencing for each long fragment; in some cases, attaining this high level of coverage may not even be feasible. In addition, long reads often must be complemented by short reads (e.g. to compensate for sequencing bias); yet, there are currently very few assemblers that can effectively handle both types of data. Here, we introduce Architect, a new de novo scaffold er for SLR technologies that aims to address these shortcomings. Unlike previous assembly strategies, Architect does not require a costly subassembly step; instead it assembles genomes directly from the SLR's underlying short reads. Moreover, by dealing only with short reads, it avoids difficulties that arise from jointly assembling reads of highly differing lengths. In practice, Architect leads to a 4 to 20-fold reduction in sequencing requirements and up to a 5-fold increase in assembly contiguity compared with current state of the art assembly strategies aimed directly at fully sub assembled long reads. We demonstrate the improvements offered by Architect on the genomes of Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans as well as on two meta genomic samples: the synthetic mock community from the human microbio me project, and a bona fide human gut meta genome from a healthy male individual. Our results suggest that Architect may lower the cost of accurate de novo assembly and facilitate the V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
