We present a software tool called genome laser that determines the haplotypes of each person from un phased high throughput genotypes in family pedigrees. This method features high accuracy, chromosome range phasing distance, linear computing, flexible pedigree types and flexible genetic marker types. Availability and implementation:

introduction haplotype refers to a group of alleles inherited together on a single chromosome (). Haplotype is essential for mapping disease signals, finding functional cis acting loops among non-coding elements, imputing the missing values in big data. Genotypes can be obtained directly from high throughput genotyping or next generation sequencing, but haplotypes can not be obtained directly. Given that current high throughput haplo typing technologies are still expensive () and statistical haplo typing approach suffers from ambiguities (), phasing by pedigrees is the most cost effective and accurate approach for haplotype determination whenever pedigree genotypes are available (). Most of the phasing programs by pedigrees assume zero or minimal recombinations and difficult for large complicated and looping pedigrees (). The lack of efficient and accurate methods for long range haplotype determination has hampered the functional interpretation of non-coding cis acting elements in human genome. Here, we present a computational tool, genome laser to reconstruct personal haplotypes from un phased genotypes, it can also handle the looped pedigrees and missing genotype data.

conclusion genome laser provides an efficient computational tool for determination of molecular haplotypes from un phased genotype data in pedigrees. Accurate chromosome range personal haplotypes will be extremely useful to explore those long distance cis regulatory networks and epigenetic controls of chromosome function. It is not suitable for those scenarios (such as very small genomic regions) in which pedigree information are not available. Briefly, Laser III may be affected by admixture. Laser I and Laser II are based on the Mendelian Law of Inheritance and they will not be affected by genetic admixtures, but Laser III is a reference based imputation, it will be affected by the admixture. The performance may be improved by the following operations. First, locus specific ancestry may be determined in parallel with genome laser to monitor the admixtures (). Second, the reference panels should be either chosen according to the admixture background or based on the pooled reference panels (). The statistical haplo typing approaches also use similar strategies to improve imputation performance for admixed samples by either improving the algorithm or careful selecting reference panels ().
