Motivation: Comparative genomic sequence analysis is a powerful approach for identifying putative functional elements in silico. The availability of full genome sequences from many vertebrate species has resulted in the development of popular tools, for example, the phast cons software package that search large numbers of genomes to identify conserved elements. While phast cons can analyze many genomes simultaneously, it ignores potentially informative insertion and deletion events and relies on a fixed, precomputed multiple sequence alignment. Results: We have developed a new method, grape foot which simultaneously aligns two full genomes and annotates a set of conserved regions exhibiting reduced rates of insertion, deletion and substitution mutations. We tested grape foot using the human and mouse genomes and compared its performance to a set of phast cons predictions hosted on the UCSC genome browser. Our results demonstrate that despite the use of only two genomes, grape foot identified constrained elements at rates comparable with phast cons which analyzed data from 28 vertebrate genomes. This study demonstrates how integrated modelling of substitutions, indels and purifying selection allows a pairwise analysis to exhibit a sensitivity similar to a heuristic analysis of many genomes. Availability: The grape foot software and set of genome wide functional element predictions are freely available to download online at

introduction despite the wealth of currently available DNA sequence, the important task of identifying functionally important biological regions remains difficult. One popular approach is to search for regions that are putative targets of purifying selection by virtue of being conserved at a variety of evolutionary distances (). While mutational cold spots could also explain the existence of conserved elements, population genetics studies refute this hypothesis and conclude that purifying selection maintains * To whom correspondence should be addressed. conserved elements in both Drosophila and human genomes (). There exists a clear need for general methods that identify functional DNA in large mammalian and vertebrate genomes. Previous genome wide conservation studies have estimated that 38% of the human genome is under purifying selection (). However, protein coding elements have been estimated to make up only 12% of the genome (International Human Genome Sequencing). non protein coding conserved material, thus, represents a large fraction of all functional DNA, and specialized techniques such as exon finders can not identify the majority of the dark matter present in the human genome. Two general techniques have been used for identifying putative functional regions in the human genome by searching for regions with reduced rates of mutation. An example of an approach focusing solely on substitution data is the phast cons software package (). phast cons utilizes a phylogenetic hidden Markov model phylo hmm which annotates regions in a given multiple sequence alignment as conserved and non conserved by modelling conserved regions with reduced rate of point mutations. The use of an HMM framework allows phast cons to estimate all model parameters, including the length and expected level of conservation, directly from the sequence data. Theoretical studies have concluded that comparative studies may exhibit increased statistical power when analyzing datasets with larger numbers of genomes, and phast cons has been applied to both a set of 17 and a set of 28 vertebrate genomes (). A complementary approach, implemented in the cons in del software package, searches a precomputed multiple sequence alignment for regions with a reduced rate of insertion and deletion in del mutations (). In this approach, the annotated set of ancestral repeats (ARs) is analyzed to determine the distribution of un gapped regions (sequences between in del events) in neutral regions. When the entire genome is examined, long un gapped regions that deviate from this null distribution were found to be highly enriched with previously annotated functional elements. Both phast cons and cons in del have dedicated tracks on the UCSC genome browser (). While these techniques successfully identify many previously annotated functional elements, both make their predictions based on a paucity of either substitution or in del mutations. Additionally, both techniques make their predictions based on a fixed multiple sequence alignment. While this reduces the computational complexity of both methods, uncertainty or errors in the alignment will impact
