Motivation: Genome resequencing and short read mapping are two of the primary tools of genomics and are used for many important applications. The current state of the art in mapping uses the quality values and mapping quality scores to evaluate the reliability of the mapping. These attributes, however, are assigned to individual reads and do not directly measure the problematic repeats across the genome. Here, we present the Genome mapp ability Score (GMS) as a novel measure of the complexity of resequencing a genome. The GMS is a weighted probability that any read could be unambiguously mapped to a given position and thus measures the overall composition of the genome itself. Results: We have developed the Genome mapp ability Analyzer to compute the GMS of every position in a genome. It leverages the parallelism of cloud computing to analyze large genomes, and enabled us to identify the 5–14% of the human, mouse, fly and yeast genomes that are difficult to analyze with short reads. We examined the accuracy of the widely used b was am tools polymorphism discovery pipeline in the context of the GMS, and found discovery errors are dominated by false negatives, especially in regions with poor GMS. These errors are fundamental to the mapping process and can not be overcome by increasing coverage. As such, the GMS should be considered in every resequencing project to pinpoint the dark matter of the genome, including of known clinically relevant variations in these regions. Availability: The source code and profiles of several model organisms are available at http://gma

INTRODUCTION

discussion short read mapping has become one of the most important tools in molecular biology, with many significant applications to understanding human health and disease, plant and animal genomics and basic biological processes. The algorithms for efficiently mapping reads to the genome are now rapidly maturing, but until now it was an open question of how to interpret the reliability of those mappings. Prior working focusing on the mapping quality score or the unique ome were narrowly focused on individual reads or individual subsequences and missed the larger genomic context. Here, we have presented a novel probabilistic metric, the GMS for identifying and quantifying the regions of the genome that can be reliably mapped under various experimental conditions. We have also developed the GMA pipeline for computing the GMS profile
