Motivation: Moonlighting proteins (MPs) show multiple cellular functions within a single polypeptide chain. To understand the overall landscape of their functional diversity, it is important to establish a computational method that can identify MPs on a genome scale. Previously, we have systematically characterized MPs using functional and omics scale information. In this work, we develop a computational prediction model for automatic identification of MPs using a diverse range of protein association information. Results: We incorporated a diverse range of protein association information to extract characteristic features of MPs, which range from gene ontology (GO), protein protein interactions, gene expression , phylogenetic profiles, genetic interactions and network based graph properties to protein structural properties, i.e. intrinsically disordered regions in the protein chain. Then, we used machine learning classifiers using the broad feature space for predicting MPs. Because many known MPs lack some proteomic features, we developed an imputation technique to fill such missing features. Results on the control dataset show that MPs can be predicted with over 98% accuracy when GO terms are available. Furthermore, using only the omics based features the method can still identify MPs with over 75% accuracy. Last, we applied the method on three genomes: Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Caenorhabditis elegans and Homo sapiens, and found that about 2–10% of proteins in the genomes are potential MPs. Availability and Implementation: Code available at http://kiharalab.org/MPprediction

introduction as the last decade has witnessed a momentous expansion in the number of functionally well characterized proteins as well as rapid progress in large scale proteomics studies, protein multi-functionality has become a highly perceived phenomenon (). These multifunctional, 'moonlighting' proteins demonstrate multiple autonomous and usually unrelated functions within a single polypeptide chain, which can not be individually assigned into separate domains. It has become evident that the functional diversity of these proteins is neither specific to genomes or certain protein families nor facilitated by common function switching mechanisms. Many of the known moonlighting proteins (MPs) were originally recognized as enzymes, but there are also others that are known as receptors, channel proteins, chaperone proteins, ribosomal proteins or scaffold proteins (). There are speculations that MPs evolved to broaden the functional aspects of a genome without expanding the genome size () as well as roles in important biochemical pathways (). Despite the potential abundance of MPs in various genomes and their important roles in pathways and disease developments, the size of existing databases () that contain experimentally confirmed MPs is still too small to obtain a comprehensive picture of the cellular mechanisms underlying their functional diversity. This quantitative insufficiency is due in large part to the tendency for the additional function of these proteins to be found serendipitously in the course of unrelated experiments. Hence, a systematic bioinformatics approach could make substantial contributions in identifying novel MPs on a genome scale and also to an overall understanding of the underlying biology of their multi-functional nature. The functional diversity of MPs poses a significant challenge to computational protein function annotation as current methods do not explicitly consider the possibility of dual functions for a protein. Conventional sequence based functional annotation methods, based on the concept of homology () or conserved motifs domains (), will have problems identifying secondary functions because there are cases where a homolog of a MP does not possess the secondary function () or has a different secondary function (). Due to these intrinsic computational challenges, systematic studies of MPs are still in an early stage for obtaining a comprehensive picture of proteins' moonlighting functions or for developing computational methods for predicting MPs [review by (. Existing bioinformatics approaches for detection of MPs have two general shortcomings. First, they rely heavily on the existence of functional annotation of a protein (), which is a major bottleneck of the problem. Second, all the existing methods address different aspects of MPs' functional diversity: sequence similarity (), motifs/ domains, structural disorder (), or protein protein interaction (PPI) patterns combined with existing gene ontology (GO) annotations (). However, the diverse nature of MPs' functions, cellular locations, function switching mechanisms, and the organisms in which they are found gives compelling evidence that in order to understand and identify the overall functional aspects of these proteins, one should characterize these proteins in a wider functional proteomic space. Previously, we have identified functional characteristics of MPs in different proteomic aspects using a computational framework (). Here, we have constructed an automated prediction model to identify MPs based on features we characterized in our previous study. To address the diverse nature of MPs, we have used a wide feature space ranging from GO (Gene Ontology) and several omics scale data, namely PPI, gene expression (GE), phylogenetic profiles (Phylo), genetic interactions (GIs) and network based graph properties (such as node betweenness, degree centrality, closeness centrality to protein structural properties such as the number and the length of intrinsically disordered regions in the protein chain. Based on our computed GO and the omics based protein feature space, we used machine learning classifiers as the framework for MP prediction and used an existing MP database to cross validate our prediction model. Because a significant fraction of proteins do not have certain functional network features in databases, we have additionally developed an imputation technique using random forest (RF) to predict missing features for proteins. cross validation results on the dataset of known moonlighting and non mps (control dataset) show that if GO information is available, MPs can be predicted with over 98% accuracy. More importantly, leveraging just the non go based features, our imputation classification models can predict MPs with over 75% accuracy. The latter result is very important because it indicates that MPs without sufficient function annotations can be identified by analyzing available omics data, which is the first such development. Lastly, we have run our imputation classification models with the best performing omics based feature combinations on three genomes, Saccharomyces cerevisiae (yeast), Caenorhabditis elegans and Homo sapiens (human), and found that about 210% of the proteomes are potential MPs.

discussion we proposed a novel computational approach, mpf it for detecting MPs from GO annotations or omics based features. mpf it can be applied to a large fraction of proteins in a genome due to the use of several omics based features and the implemented imputation protocol for filling missing features. As the mechanisms by which MPs exhibit multiple functions differ from case by case, using various feature types is reasonable to capture MPs of different nature. Although there is a possibility that some predictions made by mpf it are not correct, the overall estimation is probably not too far from the truth and serves as workable hypotheses for future research projects. We believe that our work is an imperative step toward a systematic and integrative approach of studying MPs and it will open up new opportunities to investigate the multi-functional nature of proteins at a systems level.
