Motivation

introduction genomes encode the instructions for life, and within genomes are many different features with different roles (e.g. genes, CpG islands, microRNAs). high throughput (HT) technologies have enabled us to experimentally examine whether or not genomic variations associate with certain conditions (e.g. disease). These variations in features of interest (FOI) such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) come from various technologies like genome wide association (GWA) studies, peaks called from chip on chip and chips eq experiments and other data from deep sequencing experiments. Regardless of the type of data, each FOI has genomic coordinates that uniquely identify it within the genome. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tools to prioritize FOIs usually analyze local genomic features (e.g. evolutionary conservation) of individual FOIs and do not consider the set of experimentally identified FOIs as a whole. Functional interpretation of FOI sets is often performed using gene and pathway based tools adopted from microarray data analysis (). These tools perform mapping of FOIs to genes, prioritize lists of FOIs and calculate gene and pathway enrichment statistics. They, however, rely upon a gene's role being known and, for humans, approximately one third of genes have no known function (). Plus, as projects like ENCODE are showing, there are many non-coding regions of interest in the genome (). As such, we're lacking a way to automatically explore the genome and associate our FOIs with genomic features beyond well annotated gene regions. The idea of automating genome exploration is not new (), but automated exploration of correlations is complicated by the heterogeneous nature of the HT data versus annotated genomic features (GF) types. Many efforts have been devoted to developing tools for prioritizing individual SNPs (), but analysis of what annotated genomic features other than well annotated gene regions may be associated with FOI sets has not received as much attention, particularly with regards to data driven exploration. The GREAT tool, for example, associates genomic regions with their putative target genes and calculates Gene Ontology enrichment statistics (), but is gene centric whereas genome runner is designed as a much more general purpose association tool. Galaxy has a variety of tools for operating on genomic intervals and SNP prioritization (), and gen gen () provides a set of Perl scripts for the association of FOIs with genes, transcription factor binding sites, microRNAs, ev of old regions and other user provided data but requires programming skills and data formatting. genome runner differs from these tools in that it annotates SNPs and regions, and automatically searches for any statistically significant enrichment of FOIs with multiple GFs.

conclusion genome runner is designed to scan a large set of genomic features, including non gene regions such as nc rnas and epigenetic marks, in search of correlations with genomic FOI. The open ended structure of genome runner can and will be adapted to be included in the Galaxy suite. Currently, human and mouse genome annotations are available for genome runner and new organisms will be added in the near future. Besides automatic correlation of FOIs with known genomic features, genome runner will calculate enrichment against either the whole genome or a user defined background. In summary, we provide the scientific community with a tool for automated exploration of statistically significant associations between experimental FOIs and annotated genomic features.
