Here we present the open source r bioconductor software package BEAT bs seq epi mutation Analysis Toolkit). It implements all bioinformatics steps required for the quantitative high resolution analysis of DNA methylation patterns from bisulfite sequencing data, including the detection of regional epi mutation events, i.e. loss or gain of DNA methylation at CG positions relative to a reference. Using a binomial mixture model, the BEAT package aggregates methylation counts per genomic position, thereby compensating for low coverage, incomplete conversion and sequencing errors. Availability and implementation: BEAT is freely available as part of

introduction bisulfite sequencing bs seq is a sequence based method to accurately detect DNA methylation at specific loci, which involves treating DNA with sodium bisulfite (). The method is based on bisulfite conversion of unmethylated cytosine s into uracil and has become a standard in DNA methylation profiling. Its advantage is accuracy, as the degree of methylation at each cytosine can be quantified with great precision (). More recently, bisulfite sequencing has been applied in a genome wide manner, which requires advanced computational analysis for determining DNA methylation patterns and changes therein. Thus far, such analysis has been limited to the comparison of individual CpG sites between samples. However, because of the bisulfite conversion of cytosine s into uracil s and eventually thymine s sequence complexity is much reduced, with no account for incomplete conversion and or sequencing errors. Bisulfite sequencing also often suffers from low coverage. Here, we present bs seq epi mutation Analysis Toolkit (BEAT), a novel tool for analyzing bisulfite converted DNA sequences. To overcome the aforementioned limitations in the estimation of methylation rates, BEAT aggregates data from consecutive cytosine s into regions by using a Bayesian binomial beta mixture model. The model is derived, described in detail and evaluated in our Supplementary Material. For each region, it calculates a posterior methylation probability distribution that can be used for the comparison of DNA methylation between samples. Anticipating technological progress in the DNA methylation field, BEAT includes an error model adapted to single cell bs seq data.

conclusion the BEAT package delivers methods for the estimation of methylation levels, methylation status and for calling epi mutation events in a two sample comparison. To our knowledge, it is the first tool providing a rigid statistical model for handling bs seq samples. It has an in built correction for conversion errors and is therefore tailored to the analysis of bs seq samples with possibly different bs conversion rates. Funding: NIH grants (AG17242, AG034421, AG032117 and SENS Foundation to J.V. and S.G.). Jeff Schell professorship for Computational Biology grant (SFB680) from the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (to A.T.). BMBF e bio grant (to K.A.). Conflict of Interest: none declared ba Methylation estimates and epi mutation calls on a DNA segment. For all regions with sufficient read coverage, the black curves show the methylation estimates for a single cell sample (top), a reference sample (bottom) and their difference (middle). Regions with methyl ating epi mutations are marked in red, while regions with de methyl ating epi mutations are marked in blue. Samples used for our analysis in this article were obtained from neuronal cells of young mice (data unpublished). (b) Scatterplot of methylation estimates of a multi-cell reference sample x axis versus those of a sample (y-axis) for all common regions with sufficient coverage. Each dot represents a single region that is covered by both samples. Red dots indicate methyl ating epi mutations in the sample, while blue dots indicate de methyl ating epi mutations in the sample. Four dots representing exemplary regions with epi mutations at the corresponding boundary value ranges for de methyl ating and methyl ating epi mutations have been annotated with their values of methylated (k) and total (n) counts. Note that there exists no boundary line separating the red and the blue region because our Bayesian model assigns different methylation estimates to tuples (k1, n1), (k2, n2) with equal empirical methylation level k1/n1  k2/n2
