Motivation: Genetic heterogeneity, the fact that several sequence variants give rise to the same phenotype, is a phenomenon that is of the utmost interest in the analysis of complex phenotypes. Current approaches for finding regions in the genome that exhibit genetic heterogeneity suffer from at least one of two shortcomings: (i) they require the definition of an exact interval in the gen-ome that is to be tested for genetic heterogeneity, potentially missing intervals of high relevance, or (ii) they suffer from an enormous multiple hypothesis testing problem due to the large number of potential candidate intervals being tested, which results in either many false positives or a lack of power to detect true intervals. Results: Here, we present an approach that overcomes both problems: it allows one to automatically find all contiguous sequences of single nucleotide polymorphisms in the genome that are jointly associated with the phenotype. It also solves both the inherent computational efficiency problem and the statistical problem of multiple hypothesis testing, which are both caused by the huge number of candidate intervals. We demonstrate on Arabidopsis thaliana genome wide association study data that our approach can discover regions that exhibit genetic heterogeneity and would be missed by single locus mapping. Conclusions: Our novel approach can contribute to the genome wide discovery of intervals that are involved in the genetic heterogeneity underlying complex phenotypes. Availability and implementation: The code can be obtained at: http://www.bsse.ethz.ch/mlcb/ research bioinformatics and computational biology sis html
introduction genetic heterogeneity is the phenomenon that several distinct sequence variants may give rise to the same phenotype (); one refers to allelic heterogeneity if these variants are located in the same gene, and to locus heterogeneity if they occur in several distinct genes. This phenomenon is of the utmost importance to the exploration of the genetic basis of complex phenotypes, as most complex phenotypes have been found to be affected by numerous loci, rather than a single locus (). The common ways of computing associations between genotype and phenotype are rather limited in their ability to detect genetic heterogeneity. Standard genome wide association studies g was compute correlations between single genome positions, primarily single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and the phenotype of interest (Wellcome Trust). The smaller the sample size and the more SNPs that are involved in a phenotype, the less likely it is that genetic heterogeneity can be detected by this type of single locus mapping. gene based tests quantify whether or not the number of sequence variants in one gene is enriched in cases versus controls (). Although this approach does consider the combined effect of several SNPs, it is also restrictive in the sense that it only checks entire genes for association. It will
