Visualizing and summarizing data from genomic studies continues to be a challenge. Here, we introduce the gen vis r package to addresses this challenge by providing highly customiz-able, publication quality graphics focused on cohort level genome analyses. gen vis r provides a rapid and easy to use suite of genomic visualization tools, while maintaining a high degree of flexibility by leveraging the abilities of ggplot2 and Bioconductor.

introduction the continued development of massively parallel sequencing technologies has led to an exponential growth in the amount of genomic data produced (). This growth has in turn enabled scientists to investigate increasingly large, cohort level genomic datasets. Generating intuitive visualizations is a critical component in recognizing patterns and investigating underlying biological properties in cohorts under study. A significant bottleneck exists, however, between data generation and subsequent visualization and interpretation (). Additionally, generating publication quality figures for effective communication of these data typically requires ad hoc methods such as manual creation or extensive graphic manipulation with third party software. This process is both time intensive and difficult to automate reproduce. Further, the absence of software supporting multiple species can make this process even more demanding. Here, we present gen vis r a Bioconductor package to address these issues. gen vis r provides a user friendly flexible and comprehensive suite of tools for visualizing complex genomic data in three categories (small variants, copy number alterations and data quality) for multiple species of interest.

conclusion gen vis r provides features and functions for many popular genomic visualizations not otherwise available in a single convenient package (). By leveraging the abilities of ggplot2 () it confers a level of customizability not previously possible. Virtually any aspect of a plot can be changed simply by adding an additional layer onto the graphical object. Thus, gen vis r allows for publication quality figures with a minimal amount of required input and data manipulation while maintaining a high degree of flexibility and customizability.
