ge pdb integrates both genome wide association studies and expression quantitative trait loci information, the two primary sources of genome wide mapping for genotype phenotype and genotype expression associations together with phenotype associated gene lists. The ge pdb provides simultaneous interpretation of both genetic risks and potential gene regulatory pathways toward phenotypic outcome by establishing the ternary relationship of genotype expression phenotype (GEP). The analytic scope is further extended by linkage disequilibrium from five different populations of the international HapMap Project. Availability and implementation: http://ercsbweb.

introduction genome wide association studies g was and expression quantitative trait loci e qtl are the principal methods for genome scale mapping of genotype phenotype and genotype expression relationships, respectively. In most cases, g was provides little information on the underlying mechanism at the molecular and cellular levels. A recent survey showed that 516% of the g was hits fall into coding regions () allowing direct interpretation of protein structural and functional impacts. The majority of hit single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) may have some regulatory function through transcriptional regulation, miRNA targeting or epigenetic changes. Therefore, if there are common SNPs shared by both g was and e qtl the e qtl genes are good candidates for the underlying pathological process and its phenotypic outcome (). Many dedicated databases have been developed for either g was () or e qtl (). There are few integrated databases for both g was and e qtl data that (i) support a mechanistic interpretation of g was results, and (ii) infer causal genetic variations responsible for differential expression of disease signature genes via e qtl mapping. We developed ge pdb that seamlessly integrates a comprehensive collection of g was e qtl and phenotype associated gene lists. Such integration provides a novel opportunity to analyze the ternary relationship of genotype expression phenotype (GEP) in a genome scale. The hit SNPs (tagging SNPs) may belong to a haplotype block, whereas their neighboring SNPs may be actually functional in both g was and e qtl mapping by linkage disequilibrium (LD). ge pdb supports expansion of SNPs using LD information.

discussion a critical question regarding the GEP ternary relationship is to what extent the expression signatures (DEGs) can be interpreted by g was hit SNPs, via (i) e qtl and further by (ii) LD information. Among the datasets compiled in the ge pdb we analyzed paired sets of the g was hit SNPs and the gene signatures from GAD and genesi gdb annotated by the same disease using MeSH terms and manual inspection. The coverage of the signature genes by g was hit SNPs via e qtl (+LD) varied highly depending a genesi gdb and (B) GAD by the g was hit SNPs via e qtl mapping (blue) and LD + e qtl mapping (green). The g was hit SNPs are merged together for each disease if there are multiple g was for a single disease on the disease category and individual study. The median coverage was 0100 and 2.3100% by e qtl and LD + e qtl respectively, and some signature genes resulted in no outcome (). The overall low coverage may, at least partially, result from inaccurate mapping between g was and the corresponding expression signatures because of disease subtypes or heterogeneity. Nevertheless, a significant fraction of known gene signatures were traced back to their potential genetic risks using ge pdb (G:E mode). Similarly, any set of gene signatures or candidate SNPs can also be analyzed using the G4E4P or P4E4G modes to generate testable hypotheses.
