Motivation: The majority of disease associated variants identified in genome wide association studies reside in noncoding regions of the genome with regulatory roles. Thus being able to interpret the functional consequence of a variant is essential for identifying causal variants in the analysis of genome wide association studies. Results: We present ger v (generative evaluation of regulatory variants), a novel computational method for predicting regulatory variants that affect transcription factor binding. ger v learns a km er based generative model of transcription factor binding from chips eq and dnase seq data, and scores variants by computing the change of predicted chips eq reads between the reference and alternate allele. The km ers learned by ger v capture more sequence determinants of transcription factor binding than a motif based approach alone, including both a transcription factors canonical motif and associated co-factor motifs. We show that ger v outperforms existing methods in predicting single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with allele specific binding. ger v correctly predicts a validated causal variant among linked single nucleotide polymorphisms and prioritizes the variants previously reported to modulate the binding of FOXA1 in breast cancer cell lines. Thus, ger v provides a powerful approach for functionally annotating and prioritizing causal variants for experimental follow-up analysis. Availability and implementation: The implementation of ger v and related data are available at

introduction genome wide association studies g was have revealed genetic polymorphisms that are strongly associated with complex traits and diseases (). Missense and nonsense variants that occur in protein coding sequences are simple to characterize. However, many g was detected variants reside in non-coding regions with regulatory function (). The influence of non-coding variation on gene expression and other cellular functions is not well understood. Previous work has observed that non-coding DNA changes in the recognition sequences of transcription factors can affect gene expression and cellular phenotypes (). Thus, predicting the effect of genomic variants on transcription factor (TF) binding is an essential part of interpreting the role of non-coding variants in pathogenesis. Most of existing computational approaches to predict the effect of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) on TF binding such as sTRAP and haplo greg are based on quantifying the difference between the presented reference and alternate alleles in the context of canonical TF binding motifs (). Recent work () uses km er weights learned from a gapped km er SVM () to score the effect of variants, taking into account the frequency of km er occurrences but not the spatial effect of km ers. Here, we present ger v (generative evaluation of regulatory variants), a novel computational model that learns the spatial effect of km ers on TF binding de novo from whole genome chips eq and dnase seq data, and scores variants by the change in predicted chips eq read counts between the reference and alternate alleles. ger v improves on existing models in three ways. First, ger v does not assume the existence of a canonical TF binding motif. Instead it models transcription factor binding by learning the effects of specific km ers on observed binding. This allows ger v to capture more subtle sequence features underlying transcription factor binding including non-canonical motifs. Second, ger v accounts for the spatial effect of km ers and learns the effect of cis regulatory regions outside of the canonical TF motif. This enables us to model the role of important auxiliary sequences in transcription factor binding, such as cofactors. Third, ger v incorporates chromatin openness information as a covariate in the model which boosts the accuracy of the predicted functional consequence of a variant. We first demonstrate the power of ger v on the chips eq data for transcription factor nf jb. We show that ger v learns a vocabulary of km ers that accurately predicts held out nf jb chips eq data and captures the canonical nf jb motifs and associated sequences such as known co-factors. Applying ger v to six transcription factors on which allele specific binding as b analysis is available, we show ger v outperforms existing approaches in prioritizing SNPs associated with as b. We demonstrate the application of ger v in post g was analysis by scoring risk associated SNPs and their linked SNPs for breast cancer and show that ger v trained on FOXA1 chips eq data achieves superior performance in prioritizing SNPs previously reported to modulate FOXA1 binding in breast cancer cell lines.

discussion despite the recent substantial advances in characterizing the genome wide transcription factor binding sites with chips eq experiments, it remains a challenge to interpret variation in the noncoding region of the genome and to determine variants that cause transcription factor binding changes in post g was analysis. Our work improves the prediction of causal non-coding variants when compared with other contemporary methods.. ROC curve (first row) and PRC (second row) for discriminating as b SNPs from the second type of negative variant set (10 times of the size of positive set) using ger v (red), ger v without covariates (yellow), delta svm (blue) and sTRAP (green). gray dashed line in ROC curves indicates random chance. In each figure, 95% confidence intervals of the true positive rate (for ROC) or precision (for PRC) are plotted. The performance of sTRAP on jun d is not measurable as jun d motif is not included in its built in motif database the 29 variants previously reported to modulate FOXA1 binding had significantly higher (Mann Whitney U test P  0.0011) ger v scores than the rest of the AVS
