The characterization of the complex phenomenon of cell differentiation is a key goal of both systems and computational biology. ges to different is a Cytoscape plugin aimed at the generation and the identification of gene regulatory networks grn s describing an arbitrary stochastic cell differentiation process. The (dynamical) model adopted to describe general grn s is that of noisy random Boolean networks nr bns with a specific focus on their emergent dynamical behavior. ges to different explores the space of grn s by filtering the nr bn instances inconsistent with a stochastic lineage differentiation tree representing the cell lineages that can be obtained by following the fate of a stem cell descendant. Matched networks can then be analyzed by Cytoscape network analysis algorithms or, for instance, used to define (multiscale) models of cellular dynamics. Availability: Freely available at http://bimib.disco.unimib.it/index php retro net ges to different or at the Cytoscape App Store

introduction cell differentiation is the process by which the progeny of to ti and multi-potent stem cells progressively develops in more specialized cell types, characterized by particular properties and functions. The characterization of this complex and still mostly un deciphered phenomenon is of key importance for both computational and systems biology. To address this problem, we here introduce ges to different a plugin for Cytoscape () that builds on the dynamical model of cell differentiation introduced in. The key hypothesis of the model is that cell types are characterized by coherent gene activation patterns of the underlying gene regulatory networks grn s and that the degree of differentiation is correlated with the stability of these patterns to noise and perturbations (e.g. mutations). In particular, more differentiated cells would show more sophisticated control mechanisms against noise and mutations (compare Hoffman et al., 2008 and references therein). In, this is achieved by considering noisy random Boolean networks nr bns as a GRN model and by focusing on the dynamical behavior that emerges from the interaction of a large number of genes. The model is general (i.e. it does not refer to any specific organism) and was proven to reproduce some key properties of the differentiation process, namely, (i) the presence of different degrees of differentiation, i.e. from to ti multipotent stem cells to intermediate states, to fully differentiated cells; (ii) the stochastic differentiation process, according to which a population of to ti multipotent cells generates progenies of distinct types by means of a stochastic process; and (iii) the induced plur i potency phenomenon, according to which fully differentiated cells can achieve a pluripotent stage through the perturbation of some key genes (). Within this framework, ges to different can generate according to some specific user defined features and select grn s that display an appropriate emergent behavior matching an input cell lineage differentiation tree (e.g. that of intestinal crypts or hematopoietic cells). The Cytoscape environment then allows for further network specific analysis and matching against well known biological databases. Our group is working on meshing different simulation levels for intestinal crypt development in conjunction with colorectal cancer development. ges to different has been used to identify grn s describing the lineage commitment tree of cell populations in colonic crypts in De matte is et al. (submitted for publication). Matched networks have been subsequently used within a multicellular and multiscale simulation model (), which we used to study some key cellular processes, such as cell growth, migration, sorting, division and lineage commitment; the selected nr bns are consistent with the expected behaviour and are amenable to perturbation studies. Finally, new matching filters could in principle be devised to consider epigenetic factors pertaining to the cell differentiation process.
