Motivation: rnase q has been widely used in transcriptome analysis to effectively measure gene expression levels. Although sequencing costs are rapidly decreasing, almost 70% of all the human rnase q samples in the gene expression omnibus do not have biological rep-licates and more un replicated rnase q data were published than replicated rnase q data in 2011. Despite the large amount of single replicate studies, there is currently no satisfactory method for detecting differentially expressed genes when only a single biological repli-cate is available. Results: We present the g fold (generalized fold change) algorithm to produce biologically meaningful rankings of differentially expressed genes from rnase q data. g fold assigns reliable statistics for expression changes based on the posterior distribution of log fold change. In this way, g fold overcomes the shortcomings of p value and fold change calculated by existing rnase q analysis methods and gives more stable and biological meaningful gene rankings when only a single biological replicate is available. Availability: The open source C/Cþþ program is available at

introduction in rnase q high throughput sequencing is applied to transcriptome analysis to effectively measure gene expression levels, identify alternative splicing variants and reconstruct novel or fusion transcripts. Since the first publications in a series of studies in 2008 (), rnase q has quickly gained popularity for use in transcriptome analysis (). One fundamental use of transcriptome analysis is to measure the level of gene expression and to identify genes that are differentially expressed between conditions. For this purpose, rnase q produces gene expression profiles with much smaller technical variance () than traditional microarray technologies. Specifically, in a typical rnase q experiment, millions of short reads are sampled from expressed transcripts and the expression level of a gene is then measured by the number of reads mapped back to this gene. The variance in the read count of a gene may be decomposed into the variance due to the random sampling of reads and the variance due to other sources of variation including technical and biological noise. The variance due to read sampling can be closely approximated by a Poisson distribution (), which serves as the lower bound on the overall variance. When biological variance is taken into consideration, the number of reads mapped to a gene should resemble an over dispersed Poisson distribution. A natural distribution for modeling over dispersed count data is the negative binomial (NB) distribution, which has been applied to build tools such as edgeR (), de seq () and bay seq (). Models other than the NB have also been developed. For example built a tool, referred to as ASC, based on the observation that log fold changes obey the normal distribution. The same assumption has also been adopted by proposed an ma based method that approximates the distribution of the M value (log fold change) at given A value (log intensity sum) with a normal distribution. Srivastava and Chen (2010) adopted a two parameter generalized Poisson model to fit the nucleotide wise read distribution on each gene independently. Cufflinks () adopts the delta method, a commonly used method in microarray expression analysis, to estimate the variance of the log fold change. When comparing rnase q data between two conditions, existing methods calculate a p value for the differential expression of each gene. These p values however, do not measure how much a gene is expressed in one condition relative to the other. Highly significant p values can result from even miniscule relative differences in gene expression, if the number of sequencing tags available for the comparison is large enough. This type of result is contrary to what is of fundamental biological interest. In most studies of gene expression, the genes of highest interest are those with large relative differences. The relative difference, or fold change, is a basic and widely used measure for identifying differential gene expression. Unfortunately, the raw fold change is unreliable because it does not take into account the uncertainty of gene expression measures under the two conditions being compared. In particular, the fold changes of genes with low read counts are less reliable than those of genes with high read counts. In other words, fold changes based on read counts are not comparable for genes with different expression levels or genes of different lengths. In microarray analysis, a well known variance stabilization method is fold change with offset (or start log (), which adds an offset before calculating fold changes. Researchers have also attempted to combine the fold change and p value to provide more meaningful results by setting cutoffs for both the fold change and p value as in the well known volcano plot (). However, such an ad hoc technique does not result in meaningful gene rankings. Although sequencing costs are rapidly decreasing, experimentalists are reluctant to sequence replicate RNA samples without pilot data that demonstrate the utility of the study. By comparing single rnase q treatment samples from control conditions, experimentalists can obtain valuable information that allows them to adjust the experimental plan before scaling up to include multiple replicates. That may partially explain why almost 70% of all the human rnase q samples in the gene expression omnibus () do not have biological replicates and more un replicated rnase q data were published than replicated rnase q data in 2011 (Supplementary). Despite the importance of single replicate studies, there is currently no satisfactory method for detecting differentially expressed genes when only a single biological replicate is available. In this article, we describe a technique for estimating fold change that takes into account the uncertainty of gene expression measurement by rnase q. We argue that this new measure of fold change is more informative for the biology of a perturbed system than either p values or raw fold change especially for single biological replicate experiments. From a Bayesian perspective, our representation of fold change is derived from the posterior distribution of the raw fold change. This representation, denoted as g fold balances the estimated degree of change with the significance of this change. g fold is more reliable than raw fold change for estimating the relative difference of gene expression and facilitates the comparison of genes with different expression levels or of different lengths. To validate its effectiveness, we applied g fold to several datasets with biological replicates and compared it with edgeR, de seq deg seq Poisson, Cufflinks and fold change with offset. By comparing the results of different methods when biological replicates are not available with the results when biological replicates are available, we were be able to estimate the performance of different methods using information from single replicates. We also explored the biological significance of gene rankings produced using different methods. Comparisons show that g fold outperforms all other methods in most cases when there is only a single replicate. We built a hierarchical model for cases in which biological replicates are available. In such cases, g fold provides comparable results to existing methods.

discussion an experiment with multiple treatment and control replicates should be considered better designed and more informative than one that has single treatment and control samples. However, it is common for experimental groups to have biological material that is sufficient for only single replicate rnase q experiments. The data from such experiments provide imperfect information which is nevertheless far better than no information at all. In many experimental settings when it is not clear which downstream experiment is better, single replicate experiments are efficient for collecting useful knowledge that allows informed decisions to be made. In this study, we have shown that g fold provides a more consistent and more biologically meaningful approach to ranking differentially expressed genes than other commonly used methods for rnase q data without biological replicates, Although raw fold change does not take the variance of gene expression into account, and many p value estimation methods rely too much on variance estimates, g fold seeks a balance between estimates of expression change and variability. The g fold value for each gene can be considered as a robust fold change, which measures primarily the relative change of the expression level instead of the significance (i.e. p value of differential expression. The evaluation results conducted on real datasets showed that in the analysis of a single pair of replicates, the gene ranking by g fold is better than other methods in terms of consistency with rankings based on multiple replicate data. The results from the ENCODE and grose q dataset suggest that when using single replicate data the rankings produced by g fold are more biologically meaningful than the gene rankings by other methods. We stress that while useful information can be obtained from single replicate experiments, an analysis of variation between samples is necessary to draw sound conclusions, especially on the individual gene level. In comparison with other methods, besides fold change with offset, g fold is simple and intuitive. If there is no biological replicate, g fold is based on only one assumption that the read count of a gene follows a Poisson distribution. On the contrary, p value is likely to be inaccurate without reliable measurements and modeling of gene expression variation because it is in the tails of the null distribution. Even if the biological variance has been captured accurately, p values from other methods tell only of whether a gene is differentially expressed and not directly of the relative difference in expression. In comparison with g fold fold change with offset is even simpler and could give comparable results if the optimal offset is selected; however, it is hard to select the optimal offset. Furthermore, the optimal offset seems uncorrelated with the sequencing depth. In contrast, g fold with the default cut off performed well on all five datasets we have tested. g fold is generalizable to isoform level analysis of differential expression. The main challenge is that a system of linear equations has to be solved before calculating the posterior distribution of log fold change (), which is out of scope of this study. In general, we believe that the ranking of gene expression changes by g fold using a reliable measure of fold change, is more biologically meaningful than ranking by p value. This concept can be broadly applied, beyond rnase q or grose q to other types of genomic data, including chips eq
