Over the past years growing knowledge about biological processes and pathways revealed complex interaction networks involving many genes. In order to understand these networks , analysis of differential expression has continuously moved from single genes towards the study of gene sets. Various approaches for the assessment of gene sets have been developed in the context of gene set analysis (GSA). These approaches are bridging the gap between raw measurements and semantically meaningful terms. We present a novel approach for assessing uncertainty in the definition of gene sets. This is an essential step when new gene sets are constructed from domain knowledge or given gene sets are suspected to be affected by uncertainty. Quantification of uncertainty is implemented in the r package GiANT. We also included widely used GSA methods, embedded in a generic framework that can readily be extended by custom methods. The package provides an easy to use front end and allows for fast parallelization. Availability and implementation: The package GiANT is available on CRAN.

introduction differential expression analysis investigates the association of measurements of single genes to a predefined phenotype (e.g. tumour versus inflammation). Frequently yielding thousands of differentially expressed genes, such analyses are often hard to interpret in a biological context (). Gene set analyses aim at assigning a meaning to differentially expressed genes by comparing them to sets of genes whose relevance in processes or pathways is known. Such gene sets can be derived, e.g. from Gene Ontology (), KEGG (), age fact db (), Reactome (), wiki pathways () or other collections of gene sets (). Albeit frequently used, gene set analysis suffers from pitfalls concerning the significance assessment (). Also the large variety of methods makes the choice of which analysis to use often difficult. Beside that, issues arise from the crafting of the gene sets. For example, rapidly changing knowledge may not only affect the members of sets, but also the mapping of probe sets to gene identifiers ((e.g. if a gene set is only enriched in the data because of genes that have been wrongly assigned to the gene set). To address these issues of generating gene sets, we present a novel method to quantify the uncertainty in gene set analyses. This method assesses the impact of changes in the gene set definition on the result of a gene set analysis. We apply a bootstrap type resampling strategy in which parts of the original gene set are replaced by randomly choosen genes. By analyzing the derived credibility intervals, an estimate of the certainty in the definition of the gene set can be derived. Such robustness assessments are essential for the validation of custom hand-crafted gene sets and are also of interest for sets extracted from the knowledge bases mentioned above.

application we demonstrate the handling of the GiANT package using a dataset of six p53 deficient liver tumor samples and seven samples of den induced liver tumors in mice. The dataset includes 30 278 genes and no missing values. following we extracted the gene expression values and performed a preprocessing of the dataset using the standard workflow. For normalization, baseline and percentile (75%) shifts were performed after log 2 transformation showed a significant enrichment of a hand-crafted Rb pathway gene set in this dataset. The set consists of 123 up-stream genes, interaction partners and downstream targets related to the Rb pathway. All genes were collected from literature using the PubMed database. Expression levels of the Rb pathway genes in the data are illustrated in. In the following we evaluate the uncertainty in the definition of this hand-crafted Rb pathway gene set. As a test statistic the average absolute (Spearman) correlation to the class label of all genes in the set is calculated. Statistical significance is of the gene set is based on a computer intensive resampling test: evaluate gene set uncertainty dat  dataset data labs  dataset labs gene set  rb pathway analysis  gsa tools average correlation method  " spearman " , num samples uncertainty  1000, num samples  1000, k  seq(0.01,0.99, by  0.01)) A detailed step by step example is give in the vignette of the GiANT package visualizes the distributions with different degrees of uncertainty: For each value of k the quantiles of the resulting distribution are given. k  0 gives the null distribution with the lower horizontal (green) line showing the corresponding 95 quantile. The upper horizontal (red) line gives the value of the test statistic for the Rb pathway t . The black vertical line indicates the degree of uncertainty where the two distributions (null distribution and distribution with a fixed degree of uncertainty) do not overlap. As we can see, even for 15% of random genes, the perturbed gene sets achieve higher scores than the 95% quantile of the null distribution and are thus statistically significant with respect to the null distribution. This indicates that the Rb pathway gene set is robustly enriched (k  0.85) in the dataset., we developed a new robustness analysis that assesses and quantifies the performed enrichment analyses using a partial resampling approach. These any lses are especially important for newly found pathways, but also well established and curated databases suffer from errors and uncertainty in their gene set definitions. Our method allows now a quantification of the gene set uncertainty and therefore an assessment of the validity of the enrichment analyses. The approach is implemented in the R package GiANT, which also provides a comprehensive toolkit for generic gene set analysis. Apart from standard methods like g sea user defined workflows can be constructed readily within the flexible pipeline mechanism. This allows the user to build new high level analyses, adapted to the specific context of use.

Conclusion
