Motivation: genome scale metabolic models have been used extensively to investigate alterations in cellular metabolism. The accuracy of these models to represent cellular metabolism in specific conditions has been improved by constraining the model with omics data sources. However, few practical methods for integrating metabolo-mics data with other omics data sources into genome scale models of metabolism have been developed. Results: GIM 3 E (Gene Inactivation Moderated by Metabolism, Metabolomics and Expression) is an algorithm that enables the development of condition specific models based on an objective function, transcript omics and cellular metabolomics data. GIM 3 E establishes metabolite use requirements with metabolomics data, uses model paired transcript omics data to find experimentally supported solutions and provides calculations of the turnover production consumption flux of metabolites. GIM 3 E was used to investigate the effects of integrating additional omics datasets to create increasingly constrained solution spaces of Salmonella Typhimurium metabolism during growth in both rich and virulence media. This integration proved to be informative and resulted in a requirement of additional active reactions (12 in each case) or metabolites (26 or 29, respectively). The addition of constraints from transcript omics also impacted the allowed solution space, and the cellular metabolites with turnover fluxes that were necessarily altered by the change in conditions increased from 118 to 271 of 1397. Availability: GIM 3 E has been implemented in Python and requires a cobra py 0.2.x. The algorithm and sample data described here are freely available at: http://opencobra.sourceforge.net/ Contacts:

introduction the extraction and integration of biological knowledge from large, omics datasets is an active area of research (). genome scale metabolic models (GEMs) provide a 'context for content' for metabolic information and facilitate interpreting large datasets in terms of the resulting functional state of the network (). As opposed to an inference based analysis of omics datasets (), GEMs enable the calculation of the flux through network reactions (). However, sufficient information to uniquely determine all of the fluxes for network reactions is generally not available (). constraint based modeling approaches are useful for calculating network states at the genome scale, establishing bounds of allowed operation of the network from available information (). Omics datasets can be used to better constrain the allowed operations of a metabolic network model and improve the accuracy of flux predictions, especially when the regulatory logic of the network is not fully known (). The value of model guided analysis of omics data is evident from its application in a variety of contexts in systems biology research (). For example, constraint based models have been used to assess the impact of alternate conditions on growth rate, biofilm formation and other functions that pathogens require to effectively implement a virulence program (). In the context of mammalian metabolism, constraint based models have been used to study metabolic alterations in diseases of interest to medical research () and drug development (). Algorithms have been developed and used to automatically constrain GEMs by using a variety of data types, especially transcript omics and proteomics (). Metabolomics has also been used to develop model constraints () and infer altered reactions from GEMs (). When isotopically labeled metabolic substrates are used for cellular uptake, GEMs facilitate the calculation of metabolic fluxes directly from metabolomics data (). In addition, GEMs can be used with transcript omics data to infer transcriptional control of cellular metabolites (). Metabolomics data can also be used to develop model flux constraints, but using measures of cellular metabolite concentrations to develop model reaction flux constraints requires additional information (). For example, reaction directionality can be bound by the calculated Gibb's free energy change of a reaction from metabolite concentrations (or more precisely, activity) (). However, the free energy *To whom correspondence should be addressed. change for all reactions in the model often is not available and must be estimated from group contribution theory (). Also, free energy varies as a function of cellular pH (), which might be unknown. Furthermore, the concentration of all reaction participants may not be known. Finally, available metabolomics data may be qualitative or semi-quantitative and may not give the absolute concentration of detected metabolites. Here, we present an algorithm to enable the integrated functional analysis of intracellular metabolomics data and gene expression microarray data, guided by a GEM. The algorithm, GIM 3 E (Gene Inactivation Moderated by Metabolism, Metabolomics and Expression), uses metabolomics data to ensure that the detected species are used in the calculated network operating states. transcript omics data are used in GIM 3 E to further constrain the model fluxes. The models created with the GIM 3 E algorithm report the modeled rate of creation or consumption (turnover) of metabolites. GIM 3 E can also be implemented with metabolomics data that report the identity of detected metabolites and does not require their absolute concentrations. We developed and used GIM 3 E during an investigation of alterations in s typhimurium metabolism in 'rich' and 'virulence' media specifically to combine the broad semi-quantitative metabolomics dataset we developed for this infectious microbe with transcript omics data (). Our purpose was to better constrain the model and perform an investigation of alterations in the network that was focused on metabolite turnover. Unexpectedly, we discovered alterations in metabolites with previously postulated immunomodulatory roles () and a preferential maintenance of cellular pathways implicated in virulence. However, we did not provide a detailed description of the steps in the algorithm or perform a holistic investigation of the impact of transcript omic and meta bolo mic constraints on the conclusions drawn to better validate GIM 3 E. Therefore, we expand on our previous analysis, detail GIM 3 E and elucidate the impact of additional omics data sources on the model guided interpretation of metabolism.

conclusion the GIM 3 E algorithm uses metabolomics and transcript omics data to develop constraints for a GEM. GIM 3 E requires a cellular objective and condition matched omics datasets, preferably transcript omics data with good coverage of model genes and metabolomics data that may be qualitative or semi-quantitative in nature. In our previous investigation, we illustrated the utility of GIM 3 E to develop biological insights into the cellular metabolism of s typhimurium in both rich and virulence media (). Here, we also demonstrate that omics data integrated into the model with GIM 3 E also yields insight into metabolites and reactions that must be active to be in agreement with model constraints but that are not necessarily detected in the metabolomics experiments. Metabolomics and transcript omics yielded distinct constraints on the solution space. The calculation of metabolite turnover is an additional benefit of using the GIM 3 E algorithm, and omics derived constraints impacted the allowed metabolite turnover flux ranges model reactions that were not implicated in loops that could carry flux greater than the solver tolerance in at least one condition were included. bAll model cellular metabolites that were not implicated in loops were included.
