Accurate prediction of transcription factor binding motifs that are enriched in a collection of sequences remains a computational challenge. Here we report on gimme motifs a pipeline that incorporates an ensemble of computational tools to predict motifs de novo from chip sequencing chips eq data. Similar redundant motifs are compared using the weighted information content (WIC) similarity score and clustered using an iterative procedure. A comprehensive output report is generated with several different evaluation metrics to compare and evaluate the results. Benchmarks show that the method performs well on human and mouse chips eq datasets. gimme motifs consists of a suite of command line scripts that can be easily implemented in a chips eq analysis pipeline. Availability: gimme motifs is implemented in Python and runs on Linux. The source code is freely available for download at

introduction the spectacular development of sequencing technology has enabled rapid, cost efficient profiling of DNA binding proteins. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high throughput deep sequencing chips eq delivers high resolution binding profiles of transcription factors (TFs) (). The elucidation of the binding characteristics of these TFs is one of the obvious follow-up questions. However, the de novo identification of DNA sequence motifs remains a challenging computational task. Although many methods have been developed with varying degrees of success, no single method consistently performs well on real biological eukaryotic data (). The combination of different algorithmic approaches, each with its own strengths and weaknesses, has been shown to improve prediction accuracy and sensitivity over single methods (). Here, we report on gimme motifs a motif prediction pipeline using a ensemble of existing computational tools (Supplementary). This pipeline has been specifically developed to predict TF motifs from chips eq data. It uses the wealth of sequences (binding * To whom correspondence should be addressed peaks usually resulting from chips eq experiments to both predict motifs de novo, as well as validate these motifs in an independent fraction of the dataset. gimme motifs incorporates the weighted information content (WIC) similarity metric in an iterative clustering procedure to cluster similar motifs and reduce the redundancy which is the result of combining the output of different tools (see Supplementary Material). It produces an extensive graphical report with several evaluation metrics to enable interpreti on of the results ().

conclusion we present gimme motifs a de novo motif prediction pipeline ideally suited to predict transcription factor binding motifs from chips eq datasets. gimme motifs clusters the results of several different tools and produces a comprehensive report to evaluate the predicted motifs. We show that gimme motifs performs well on biologically relevant datasets of different TFs and compares favorably to other methods.
