Motivation: Genomic analyses of many solid cancers have demonstrated extensive genetic heterogeneity between as well as within individual tumors. However, statistical methods for classifying tumors by subtype based on genomic biomarkers generally entail an all or none decision, which may be misleading for clinical samples containing a mixture of subtypes and or normal cell contamination. Results: We have developed a mixed membership classification model, called GLAD, that simultaneously learns a sparse biomarker signature for each subtype as well as a distribution over subtypes for each sample. We demonstrate the accuracy of this model on simulated data, in vitro mixture experiments, and clinical samples from the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project. We show that many TCGA samples are likely a mixture of multiple subtypes.

introduction genomic analyses of many solid cancers have demonstrated extensive genetic heterogeneity between () as well as within individual tumors (). Microdissection and DNA sequencing have recently validated at high resolution the existence of intra tumor heterogeneity (). Characterizing such heterogeneity is important because it may be a contributing factor to mono therapy treatment failure (). Accurately detecting subtypes in an individual tumor may lead to improved combinatorial therapies. Many cancers have been classified into distinct genetic subtypes that develop by means of activation or repression of different driver pathways. These tumor subtypes are commonly identified and characterized by clustering the genomic data from hundreds of samples (). In an effort to disambiguate driver from passenger mutations, the genomic signatures associated with each subtype are sparse and comprised only of those aberrations that are thought to be involved in oncogenesis. New tumors are then classified based on their similarity to the centroids or signatures of those subtypes. However, this classification approach makes an all or none assumption about the primary tumor that is incorrect for heterogeneous tumors. Mixture models have been used extensively to analyze gene expression patterns in complex experiments. Gasch and Eisen (2002) used fuzzy k means clustering to identify functionally co regulated trans cip tional networks took a less heuristic non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) approach to decompose the gene expression data matrix into a product of a meta gene matrix and a sample weight matrix. The NMF approach was extended to allow for sparseness in either of the factor matrices (). mixed membership models have emerged in recent years as a tool for data where the all or none clustering assumption is inappropriate. In text classification, the topic modeling framework, which includes mixed membership models, captures the structure in large document corpora, where each document may exhibit a mixture of topics (). mixed membership models have been used in population genetics (), social network analysis (), and elsewhere (). Our model achieves the dual purposes of (i) representing each sample as a mixture of genomic subtypes, and (ii) representing each subtype signature as a sparse set of genomic features that delineate driving oncogenic pathways. Our model provides a more general framework for representing mixed samples than all or none classification methods and we show that we obtain a more accurate estimate of mixture proportions than a mixed membership model without subtype sparsity. We demonstrate our model on RNA expression data from primary glioblastomas (GBM), comprising thousands of genomic features and hundreds of samples. There we show that we recover known subtypes with a sparse set of driving aberrations, and we give evidence that many of the primary samples are mixed.

discussion we have presented GLAD, a new statistical model for the genomic classification of solid tumors. The model does not make an all or none classification for each sample; instead, it estimates a per sample distribution over subtypes. Simultaneously, the model estimates a sparse expression signature for each subtype. We provide an interpretation of the model as a regularized form of matrix factorization. We compared GLAD with LPD, another clustering and classification model, using simulated data. At small dataset sizes, we found that GLAD overestimates the amount of mixing for pure samples, whereas LPD is quite imprecise for any particular sample; in our view, one should expect heterogeneity to be the norm in applications. As we increased the simulated sample size, the performance of GLAD improved quickly, owing to the decreased weight of the prior in the inference about i. GLAD is able to identify gene expression patterns associated with different tissue types from real microarray data, even when the sample is a. Sparse subtype signatures for GBM data. Upregulated genes are shown in a lighter shade (green), and downregulated genes are in a darker shade (blue). Genes identified by the TCGA analysis are shown in bold. There is high concordance between this sparse subtype signature and the more dense TCGA signatures (color online) heterogeneous mixture. An analysis of TCGA GBM data shows that there is significant heterogeneity in those clinical samples. Our Laplace variational inference algorithm provides a fast method for statistical inference using GLAD. However, it is an approximation. A markov chain Monte Carlo approach has potential to reduce bias, at the expense of possibly much higher computational cost. Our variational approximation is also one of many possible factorizations of the model. We are actively testing other ways of approximating the posterior distribution that retain the computational advantages while improving the quality of the approximation. When fitting GLAD, we optimize a non-convex objective function by coordinate ascent. As such, we are only able to identify a local maximum in the variational auxiliary function, not necessarily a global maximum. Restarting the algorithm using random initializations can help, and we found it important to do so. Estimating the number of clusters, K, is a universal problem for clustering algorithms. Our approach, using the BIC, provides only a rough guideline. However, this approach may require much more data for accurate parameter estimation than needed in the current model. Another alternative is to choose K by cross validation. This shifts the problem from choosing K to choosing an appropriate cross validator y accuracy metric. Recent studies in breast cancer () and colon cancer (De Sousa E) have suggested different subtypes, which show distinct survival outcomes. As more samples are analyzed a clearer picture of cancer subtypes and number of subtypes develops. We can extend GLAD in several directions. Other data types such as imaging, DNA copy number variation and DNA methylation may be incorporated as additional x and y outcomes. Structured sparsity may be incorporated into the hyper parameter. Finally, a hierarchical Dirichlet process may be incorporated into to learn the number of subtypes K.
