Motivation: Protein interaction networks provide an important system level view of biological processes. One of the fundamental problems in biological network analysis is the global alignment of a pair of networks, which puts the proteins of one network into correspondence with the proteins of another network in a manner that conserves their interactions while respecting other evidence of their homology. By providing a mapping between the networks of different species, alignments can be used to inform hypotheses about the functions of unannotated proteins, the existence of unobserved interactions , the evolutionary divergence between the two species and the evolution of complexes and pathways. Results: We introduce GHOST, a global pairwise network aligner that uses a novel spectral signature to measure topological similarity between subnetworks. It combines a seed and extend global alignment phase with a local search procedure and exceeds state of the art performance on several network alignment tasks. We show that the spectral signature used by GHOST is highly discriminative, whereas the alignments it produces are also robust to experimental noise. When compared with other recent approaches, we find that GHOST is able to recover larger and more biologically significant, shared sub-networks between species. Availability: An efficient and parallelized implementation of GHOST, released under the Apache 2.0 license, is available at

introduction we present a novel method for the global pairwise alignment of biological networks. Such alignments are crucial in analyzing the increasing amount of experimental data being generated by high throughput techniques, such as yeast two hybrid screening (), tandem affinity purification mass spectrometry () and chips eq () that reveal biological interactions within the cell. A solution to the global network alignment problem is an injective mapping f from the nodes of one network G  V G , E G  into another network H  V H , E H  such that the structure of G is well preserved. This global mapping allows us to measure the similarity between proteins in G and those in H in terms of shared interaction patterns. By exposing large subnetworks with shared interactions patterns across species, a network alignment allows us to transfer protein function annotations from one organism to another using more information than can be captured by sequence alone. For example, it has been shown that, across species, the protein with the most similar sequence does not always play the same functional role (), and that topological information can be used to disambiguate sequence similar proteins and determine functional orthology (). Additionally, by looking at the magnitude of structure conserved between G and H, we can measure the similarity between these networks and infer phylogenetic relationships between the corresponding species (). We can also hypothesize the existence of unobserved interactions (missing edges), remove noise from error prone high throughput experiments and track the evolution of pathways. Our approach to the global network alignment problem uses a novel measure of topological node similarity that is based on multiscale spectral signatures. These signatures are composed from the spectra of the normalized Laplacian for subgraphs of varying sizes centered around a node. We combine this highly specific yet robust node signature with a seed and extend alignment strategy that explicitly enforces the proximity of aligned neighborhoods. The initial alignment is improved by means of a local search procedure. We implement these ideas in our network alignment software, GHOST, which exceeds state of the art accuracy under several different metrics of alignment quality. There has been significant interest in the network alignment problem, and previous work can naturally be divided into three main categories: approaches to local network alignment, approaches to network querying and approaches to global network alignment. Because we are introducing a system for global network alignment, we restrict our discussion to the relevant work in this area introduced iso rank which uses a recursively defined measure of topological similarity between nodes in different networks. They proposed an eigenvector based formulation to discover a high scoring matching developed iso rank n which extends iso rank with a new algorithm for multiple network alignment based on spectral clustering use a local search heuristic, which they call pi swap to iteratively improve an initial alignment that is based solely on sequence data. The grae ml in aligner was originally developed by to discover evolutionarily conserved modules across multiple biological networks. Later, it was extended () to perform global multiple network alignment. However, this approach *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com relies on a variety of additional information about the networks being aligned, including phylogenetic information. Further, sample alignments are required for the parameter learning phase of Graemlin2. Recently, multiple attempts have been made to tackle the biological network alignment problem using graph matching. Klau (2009) introduced a non-linear integer program to maximize a structural matching score between two given networks and then showed how the problem can be linearized, yielding an integer linear program, and finally suggested a Lagrangian relaxation approach to the integer linear program. Later, el extended this approach and improved the upper and lower bounds of the relaxation, implementing their approach in the Natalie 2.0 software package. The hope map approach of Tian and sama to va (2009) used an algorithm that iteratively merges conserved connected components explore the use of a number of graph matching methods, particularly the PATH and graduated assignment methods, which attempt to find a permutation matrix between vertices of the networks being aligned that maximizes a score that is a combination of the structural similarity and conserved interactions of the matched vertices. This optimization is NP hard, and they must rely on a relaxation to discover an approximate solution. Many similar graph matching approaches have been applied to shape matching in computer graphics and computer vision (). All of these matching based approaches require a large number of constraints to be placed on the set of potential alignments, usually in the form of homology information between the proteins of the networks being aligned, to run in a reasonable amount of time. These constraints vastly reduce the search space and help bring these computationally burdensome methods into the realm of tractability. However, the hard constraints introduced by the homology information can have a negative effect on the ability of these methods to discover truly novel functional homologs between highly divergent species. In a way, these methods focus more on discovering conserved patterns of interactions between proteins that are already posited to be homologous, rather than on performing a truly de novo and unconstrained alignment of biological networks that is merely guided by homology information. GHOST takes a hybrid approach, where the initial alignment can be constrained by some aspect of the scoring function, but the local search procedure allows exploration into regions of the alignment space that do not adhere to the original constraints. The GRAAL family of programs, like iso rank performs unconstrained and global pairwise alignments of biological networks originally introduced GRAAL, which measures the topological similarity of nodes in different networks based on the distance between their graph let degree signatures and aligns the networks using a seed and extend strategy. milenko vice t milenko vice t al. (2010) then introduced h graal which relies on the same graph let degree signatures used by GRAAL but performs the alignment of the networks by solving the linear assignment problem via the Hungarian algorithm (). finally introduced migra al which combines these two alignment strategies. It relies on a seed and extend alignment procedure but uses the Hungarian algorithm only to compute the assignment between local neighborhoods of the two graphs that maximizes the sum of their linear scoring function. migra al also incorporates a number of other topological metrics, in addition to the graph let degree signatures, to help quantify the topological similarity between nodes. Our network aligner, GHOST, combines a novel spectral signature to measure topological similarity with a seed and extend alignment procedure, and an iterative local search step. In Sections 3.1 and 3.2, we show that GHOST performs much better than current aligners at the network self alignment task. In Section 3.3, we compare an ensemble of alignments produced by different aligners, as we vary their parameter settings to trade off between the topological and biological quality of the alignments they produce. GHOST consistently outperforms the other aligners in these tests and is able to produce alignments higher overall quality. This improved quality will be useful for more accurate comparative systems biology.

discussion we have introduced GHOST, a novel framework for the global alignment of biological networks. At the heart of GHOST is a new spectral, multiscale node signature that we combine with a seed and extend approach and a local search procedure to perform global network alignment. The spectral signature is highly discriminative and robust to small topological variations. We verify this robustness in Section 3.2 showing that GHOST outstrips the competition in aligning the S. cerevisiae protein interaction network to noisier variants of itself. In these experiments, as well as the self alignment of the M. loti network, the accuracy of GHOST is significantly higher than that of either iso rank or migra al. These experiments are of particular interest, as the ground truth is known and the ability of different aligners to uncover shared topological structure can be accurately measured. We find that the alignments produced by GHOST consistently dominate those produced by the other aligners. When producing an alignment of approximately the same biological quality, GHOST yields alignments with substantially higher topological quality than either iso rank or Natalie 2.0. Furthermore, at a similar level of topological quality, GHOST produces alignments that have far more biological relevance than those produced by migra al. Finally, GHOST consistently produces alignments that exhibit a more competitive trade off between topological and biological quality than the other aligners we considered (see).
