The evolutionary analysis of presence and absence profiles (phyletic patterns) is widely used in biology. It is assumed that the observed phyletic pattern is the result of gain and loss dynamics along a phylogenetic tree. Examples of characters that are represented by phyletic patterns include restriction sites, gene families, introns and indels, to name a few. Here, we present a user friendly web server that accurately infers branch specific and site specific gain and loss events. The novel inference methodology is based on a stochastic mapping approach utilizing models that reliably capture the underlying evolutionary processes. A variety of features are available including the ability to analyze the data with various evolutionary models, to infer gain and loss events using either stochastic mapping or maximum parsimony, and to estimate gain and loss rates for each character analyzed.

introduction numerous biological characteristics are coded using binary characters to denote presence ('1') versus absence ('0'). The 0/1 matrix is termed a phylogenetic profile of presence absence or phyletic pattern and is equivalent to a gap free multiple sequence alignment (MSA), in which rows correspond to species and columns correspond to binary characters. Phyletic pattern representation is useful in the analysis of various types of biological data including restriction sites (); indels (); introns (); gene families () and morphological characters (). Interestingly, even questions in fields other than biology can be addressed by this approach. For example, the evolution of human languages was studied by analyzing the phyletic patterns of lexical units (). Following the development of realistic probabilistic models describing the evolution of DNA and protein sequences, the analysis of phyletic patterns data has progressed from the traditional parsimony () to models, in which the dynamics of gain (0  1) and loss (1  0) is assumed to follow a continuous time Markov process (;). probabilistic based analysis of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. phyletic patterns is currently available in programs such as rest ml (), mr bayes () and Count (). Nevertheless, for the inference of branch site specific events the parsimony criterion is still the most commonly used methodology. However, the parsimony paradigm may be misleading (), especially in characters experiencing multiple (recurrent) events along longer branches (). Towards a more accurate inference of gain loss events, we have recently integrated stochastic mapping approaches () to accurately map gain and loss events onto each branch of a phylogenetic tree. The analysis is based on novel mixture models, in which variability in both the gain and loss rates is allowed among gene families (). We have shown that our mixture models are robust and accurate for the inference of gene family evolutionary dynamics (). Here, we developed the user friendly Gain and Loss Mapping Engine gloom e web server. The main novelties of our web server are: (i) we implement probabilistic models that are not implemented elsewhere, which better capture gain loss dynamics; (ii) we provide accurate estimates of the expectations and probabilities of both gain and loss events using stochastic mapping; and (iii) the interface via a user friendly web server should make 0/1 analyses more accessible compared to other stand-alone programs.
