Motivation: Over the last decades several gly comics based bioinformatics resources and databases have been created and released to the public. Unfortunately, there is no common standard in the representation of the stored information or a common machine readable interface allowing bioinformatics groups to easily extract and cross reference the stored information. Results: An international group of bioinformatics experts in the field of gly comics have worked together to create a standard Resource Description Framework (RDF) representation for gly comics data, focused on glycan sequences and related biological source, publications and experimental data. This RDF standard is defined by the glyco rdf ontology and will be used by database providers to generate common machine readable exports of the data stored in their databases. Availability and implementation: The ontology, supporting documentation and source code used by database providers to generate standardized RDF are available online (http://www.glycoinfo. org glyco rdf
introduction over the last decade the growth in publicly accessible data collections has steadily increased in complexity and coverage in all life science fields, including gly comics. However, compared with other fields, the content of the gly comics databases and the representations of glycan sequences used in these databases remain diverse and are not standardized (). The discontinuation of carb bank (), the first publicly available carbohydrate structure database csd b in the mid-1990s led to the development of a number of independent databases and carbohydrate related web resources. Many have been developed by individual research groups and few are collaborative projects, all providing their own unique datasets and functionalities as reviewed by,), one of the earliest web portals for gly comics data, developed at the German Cancer Research Center was seeded from the efforts of carb bank and is now focused on the three dimensional conformations of carbohydrates. In the early 2000s, KEGG GLYCAN () was added to the KEGG resources () as a new glycan structure database that is linked to genomic and pathway information. Around the same time, the Consortium for Functional gly comics developed a glycan structure database to support their glycan array, mass spectrometry profiling, glycogen e knock-out mouse and glycogen e microarray data resources (). In Russia, the bacterial () and plant and fungal egorov a and) cs dbs were developed, containing carbohydrate structures and nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) data from bacterial, plant and fungal species collected from the scientific literature. Meanwhile in Japan, the Japan Consortium for Glycobiology and glyco technology j cgg developed a web portal and databases to integrate all national carbohydrate resources (http://jcggdb.jp/ index en html. One of the major databases incorporated into j cgg database jc ggdb is glyco epitope () (http://www.glycoepitope.jp), which is a database of carbohydrate epitopes and antibodies, accumulated from the literature. jc ggdb also has released a glycoprotein database called glyco prot db (), which contains experimentally verified glycosylation site information. In 2005, the European Union funded euro carb db a design study focused on developing a framework for storing and sharing experimental data of carbohydrates (von der). An integrated module of euro carb db was monosaccharide db (http://www.monosaccharidedb.org), which provides a controlled vocabulary of unique monosaccharide residues. The dynamic, self extensible dictionary and translation routines of monosaccharide db ensure monosaccharide name consistency and allow translation and mapping of monosaccharide names used in different resources. After the end of the euro carb db project, the data resources and software, which are all available as open source software, were taken on by the uni carb kb project (). glyco suited b (), originally developed as a commercial database in Australia, contains published glycoprotein glycan structures together with information on the glycoproteins and further knowledge of the biological context in which the glycans have been identified. glyco suited b has recently become a part of the ExPASy portal and is now integrated into uni carb kb. In addition, several other small databases used in local laboratories have been developed in parallel providing overlapping or complementary information. Although all these databases contain valuable data, a lack of interoperability hampers development of data mash-up applications. Despite some efforts to standardize and exchange their data (), most gly comics databases still have to be regarded as 'disconnected islands' (). The standardization of carbohydrate primary structures is more difficult than in genomics or proteomics, partly due to the inherent structural complexity of saccharides exemplified by complex branching, glycosidic linkages, anomeric ity and residue modifications. Individual databases developed their own formats to cope with these problems and encode glycan primary structures in machine readable ways (, b) creating a large collection of incompatible glycan sequence formats. gly come db was designed to integrate all glycan structures and species information from most of these databases by converting them into one consistent representation and providing a single web portal allowing for searching across all these databases for particular structures (). Using the cross references to the original databases provided for each structure, it became possible to access the web pages of these databases and to retrieve the provided information related to a glycan. All databases provide their information using web pages, restricting the query possibilities to the limited search options provided by the developers. Only a few provide web service interfaces allowing retrieval of the data in a machine readable non hypertext Markup Language format. The few web service interfaces that have been implemented return proprietary non-standard formats making it hard to access and integrate data from several resources into a single result.
