Motivation: Glycosylation is a ubiquitous type of protein post-translational modification (PTM) in eukaryotic cells, which plays vital roles in various biological processes (BPs) such as cellular communication, ligand recognition and subcellular recognition. It is estimated that 50% of the entire human proteome is glycosylated. However, it is still a significant challenge to identify glyco-sylation sites, which requires expensive laborious experimental research. Thus, bioinformatics approaches that can predict the glycan occupancy at specific seq u ons in protein sequences would be useful for understanding and utilizing this important PTM. Results: In this study, we present a novel bioinformatics tool called glyco mine which is a comprehensive tool for the systematic in silico identification of Clinked , n linked and o linked glycosyla-tion sites in the human proteome. glyco mine was developed using the random forest algorithm and evaluated based on a well prepared up-to-date benchmark dataset that encompasses all three types of glycosylation sites, which was curated from multiple public resources. Heterogeneous sequences and functional features were derived from various sources, and subjected to further two step feature selection to characterize a condensed subset of optimal features that contributed most to the type specific prediction of glycosylation sites. Five-fold cross validation and independent tests show that this approach significantly improved the prediction performance compared with four existing prediction tools: net ng lyc ne to gly c ensemble gly and GPP. We demonstrated that this tool could identify candidate glycosylation sites in case study proteins and applied it to identify many high confidence glycosylation target proteins by screening the entire human proteome. Availability and implementation: The web server Java Applet, user instructions, datasets, and predicted glycosylation sites in the human proteome are freely available at http://www.structbioinfor. org lab glyco mine
introduction glycosylation is a dynamic enzymatic process where glycans (or carbohydrates) are attached selectively to proteins or lipoproteins. Glycosylation is an important and ubiquitous post-translational modification (PTM) () and numerous studies have shown that glycosylation plays a crucial role in various BPs, ranging from protein folding, subcellular localization, and degradation () to extracellular recognition and cell cell interactions (). It is commonly understood that glycosylation occurs in all cellular compartments and that 50% of all polypeptides are covalently modified (). Serine (S), threonine (T), asparagine (N) and tryptophan (W) are the usual targets of protein glycosylation (). Glycosylation can modulate the physicochemical and biological properties of proteins (). For example, glycan occupancy in a protein can influence the ligand binding mode and affect its biological activity. It can also influence protein stability and solubility, as well as modifying the susceptibility to proteolysis (). Glycosylation can be divided into four main categories according to the chemical linkage between the specific accept or amino acid and the glycan, i.e. n glycosylation o glycosylation c glycosylation (or c mannosyl ation and glycosyl phosphatidylinositol anchor attachment (). Each of these types has characteristic seq u ons or sequence motifs (). The three most abundant types of glycosylation, i.e. N-, o and c glycosylation are of particular interest. During n glycosylation the glycan is linked to the amide nitrogen in N residues. The seq u on for n glycosylation is nxt s or nx c in some rare cases, where X can be any residue except proline (). During o glycosylation the glycan is attached to the hydroxy groups of S and T side chains. No specific sequence motifs are defined for o glycosylation although experimental studies indicate that most o linked glycosylation sites occur on S or T residues with a beta conformation that are in close proximity to proline residues (). In addition, o glycosylation is frequent in secretory and membrane binding proteins in a number of mammalian species. c glycosylation involves the attachment of the glycan to the carbon of the first W residue in the following sequence motifs: w xxw wx xc or wx xf (). The key to understanding the mechanisms and other functional roles of glycosylation is identifying its substrates and the corresponding glycosylation sites. However, the experimental detection of glycosylation sites is still a challenging task, which often requires extensive laboratory work and considerable expense. Thus, computational approaches that accurately predict the glycan occupancy at specific seq u ons based on protein sequence information would be highly valuable and they may provide important insights into the functional roles of glycosylation. This is very important, because sequence based analyses are currently the simplest and most readily deployed approach for predicting glycosylation targets and their respective glycosylation sites. A number of computational approaches based on sequences or sequence derived information have been developed to address this task. Gupta and Brunak developed net ng lyc which is a web tool based on neural networks that predicts n glycosylation sites from protein sequences ().developed ne to gly c based on sequence context and surface accessibility. Cornelia et al. used ensembles of support vector machine (SVM) classifiers to predict amino acid residues that were likely to be glycosylated and implemented the ensemble gly web server (). The SVM classifiers were trained using a dataset of experimentally determined N-, o and C-linked glycosylation sites in 242 proteins extracted from the og lyc base database (version 6.0) (). Hamby and Hirst (2008) identified the pairwise patterns around glycosylation sites and combined these with the predicted secondary structure, predicted surface accessibility and hydrophobicity of the amino acids to train random forest rf based predictors in an effort to improve the prediction accuracy. The developed GPP tool had an accuracy of 90.8% for S, 92.0% for T and 92.8% for N sites, respectively, based on an evaluation using a dataset of 242 proteins and 2415 glycosylation sites developed an svm based approach called cks a apo gly site which employed a sequence encoding scheme based on the composition of k spaced amino acid pairs ck saap to predict o linked glycosylation trained SVM models using the local sequence features around glycosylation sites, and the characteristic subcellular localization of glycoproteins and achieved $90% accuracy for both n linked and o linked glycosylation sites. Incorporation of structural features around the glycosylated sites, including the local contact order, surface accessibility, and secondary structure, have proved useful for improving the prediction accuracy of n glycosylation (). More recently developed an svm based tool, glyco ep based on the datasets with eukaryotic proteins of C-, Nand o linked glycosylation sites. glyco ep yielded accuracy of 84.3, 86.9 and 91.4% for prediction of N-, o and C-linked glycosylation sites, respectively. There has been considerable success in the development of useful approaches for glycosylation site prediction, but several problems still exist in most of the currently available methods that need to be addressed to develop better methods, as follows i The datasets used for model training are relatively small, which limits the predictive power of the method. In particular, many of the experimentally verified novel glycosylation sites that were discovered recently using high throughput proteomic techniques were not included in the curated datasets. (ii) The majority of the available methods only predict specific types of glycosylation sites, such as N-or o glycosylation. Few methods exist that predict all three of the major types of glycosylation sites, with the exceptions of net ng lyc (), ne to gly c () and svm gly c (), although they are outdated. (iii) The feature space used by existing methods to construct models is incomplete and not comprehensive. Other potentially useful features also remain that need to be characterized. (iv) Biological features are intrinsically heterogeneous, noisy, and multidimensional, but most existing methods do not employ feature selection techniques to quantify the importance and the contributions of the features used for the model performance, thereby leading to only a partial understanding of the sequence glycosylation relationships. Given these deficiencies, it would be very useful to develop more accurate tools that facilitate the systematic prediction of all the major types of glycosylation. In this study, we propose a novel bioinformatics approach called glyco mine that addresses these problems and significantly improves the prediction performance for C-, N-and o linked glycosylation by integrating various informative features derived from protein sequences. glyco mine uses the RF algorithm coupled with a novel feature selection strategy to boost the performance. Specifically, an effective two step feature selection method based on information gain (IG) () and minimum redundancy maximum relevance mr mr () is used to determine the features that are important for glycosylation site specificity, as well as identifying condensed subsets of optimal features that contribute most to the prediction. A 5-fold cross validation and independent tests using curated datasets demonstrated that glyco mine outperformed other tools, including net ng lyc (), ne to gly c () ensemble gly () and GPP (). Two case studies demonstrated that glyco mine can be applied rapidly to accurately identify potential novel glycosylation sites in a protein of interest.

conclusion in this study, we developed a novel machine learning approach called glyco mine for predicting C-, N-and o linked glycosylation sites in the human proteome. glyco mine combines various informative features from multiple sources. A two step feature selection method based on mr mr or IG with IFS is used by glyco mine to select the most contributory and useful features. Extensive cross validation and independent tests using benchmark and independent datasets suggested that glyco mine outperformed existing tools: GPP, ensemble gly and net ng lyc. This study represents the first systematic effort to select and characterize the most important features that are relevant for predicting the three major types of glycosylation using intensive feature selection techniques. A user friendly web interface and a Java Applet are available as an implementation of this approach. Compared with experimental approaches, bioinformatics tools such as glyco mine can provide a powerful and cost effective approach that allows the proteome wide prediction of potential glycosylation sites. These predictions are likely to have a number of important applications, such as identifying novel glycosylated substrate proteins, examining the effect of point mutations on the gain or loss of glycosylation sites, and the rational design of glycoproteins by inserting neo glycosylation sites. We consider that the web server and Java program will be useful tools for large scale glycosylation site prediction and they may facilitate hypothesis driven experimental design.
