Motivation: Novel tools need to be developed to help scientists analyze large amounts of available screening data with the goal to identify entry points for the development of novel chemical probes and drugs. As the largest class of drug targets, G protein coupled receptors (GPCRs) remain of particular interest and are pursued by numerous academic and industrial research projects. Results: We report the first GPCR ontology to facilitate integration and aggregation of gpcr targeting drugs and demonstrate its application to classify and analyze a large subset of the PubChem database. The GPCR ontology, based on previously reported BioAssay Ontology, depicts available pharmacological, biochemical and physiological profiles of GPCRs and their ligands. The novelty of the GPCR ontology lies in the use of diverse experimental datasets linked by a model to formally define these concepts. Using a reasoning system, GPCR ontology offers potential for knowledge based classification of individuals (such as small molecules) as a function of the data. Availability: The GPCR ontology is available at http://www.bioas-sayontology.org/bao_gpcr and the National Center for Biomedical Ontologies Web site.

discussion gpcrs continue to remain a 'hot' target of research as new structural information, signal processing pathways and large scale compound screening results become validated and available (). Acquired data come with challenges of integration and analysis to derive new knowledge. Here, we report GPCR ontology to facilitate integration of various GPCR resources. The GPCR ontology includes relevant classes and relations to characterize and link receptors and compounds that are known binders or show activity on gpcr related assays. To more effectively disseminate biological data on GPCRs with the goal to drive innovation involving biologists, chemists and bioinformatic ians requires a flexible framework to integrate GPCR data from various resources. To enable identification of novel GPCR probe and drug lead candidates via more efficient data integration and analysis, we first researched and then aggregated available and relevant GPCR pharmacological data sources. GPCR target and ligand features are captured in the ontology to enable more versatile and integrative views on GPCR function. For example, classifying different ligand types based on chemical structure composition (amine, peptide and lipid) as well as different receptor types am in ergic peptide r gic and lipid ergic can guide compound library design to maximize structure activity relationship (SAR) studies; we have illustrated how the major receptor categories can be inferred. Ligands are also classified based on their efficacy at a particular GPCR (full agonist, allosteric modulator, etc.) yielding insight into selective ago nism issues that are becoming more apparent in GPCR pharmacology gest y palmer and). In addition, ligands are grouped based on their indication (endogenous, promiscuous and radioactive) and the type of the receptor they interact with. For example, ligand S1P is classified as a full agonist, endogenous, lipid compound targeting the class A, lipid ergic ly so phospholipid family of S1P receptors. To illustrate use of the GPCR ontology the activity of screened compounds was categorized based on assay details (stage, technology, detection, alternate targets, etc.) and receptor information (type, class, etc.). The query to identify how often a compound has been screened against a given type of gpcr facilitated calculation of receptor type specific promiscuity. For example, SID 14729216 was tested in 10 assays targeting peptide r gic GPCRs and was 'active' in 9 of them pc idx  0.9). Categorization of compound data into various activity groups ('functionally active', 'target selective', non functionally active' and un selective across a single campaign illustrates how the GPCR ontology can be applied. The process included sorting/ tagging the data based on confidence of each data point and using only the highest quality results. Analysis was performed within and across screening campaigns to identify the most interesting and relevant compounds according to several categories. The identification of known MLP probes, in addition to many other compounds that are potential probe or drug development candidates, validates our approach ('target selective' category) (). Compounds not tested in confirmatory assays were filtered out in the analysis pipeline ensuring only high quality likely replicable outcomes were used for the cross campaign categorization. Relaxing the confidence score may thus identify many additional potentially relevant compounds. Promiscuity calculations and compound categories were performed using a rule based system, in contrast to reasoning, because we wanted to report statistics and consider confidence of assay results, but also because of the difficulty to reason across large datasets. The GPCR ontology enables additional levels of analytical complexity, e.g. tissue expression. Linking receptor and tissue expression pattern is another example (among many others) of how the ontology adds value by enabling integration of data sources; this would allow inferring if a compound acts at a receptor in the brain versus another (peripheral) tissue, thus enabling quick identification of potential brain penetrable properties. Analyses as described earlier in the text can be performed for any concept class in the GPCR ontology.
