Motivation: The Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) is one of the most widely used bioinformatics tools. The widespread impact of BLAST is reflected in over 53 000 citations that this software has received in the past two decades, and the use of the word blast as a verb referring to biological sequence comparison. Any improvement in the execution speed of BLAST would be of great importance in the practice of bioinformatics, and facilitate coping with ever increasing sizes of biomolecular databases. Results: Using a general purpose graphics processing unit (GPU), we have developed gpu blast an accelerated version of the popular ncbi blast. The implementation is based on the source code of ncbi blast thus maintaining the same input and output interface while producing identical results. In comparison to the sequential ncbi blast the speedups achieved by gpu blast range mostly between 3 and 4. Availability: The source code of gpu blast is freely available at

introduction blast was introduced as a sequence alignment heuristic that was an order of magnitude faster than earlier approaches for analyzing biological information. Very quickly, this software became a landmark enabling technique for bioinformatics. According to the Web of Science, the paper that describes the first version of un gapped BLAST () has been cited more than 28 000 times. In addition, the paper that describes the gapped version of the algorithm and a technique to speed up the earlier version by a factor of three () has been cited more than 25 000 times. The level of usage of BLAST suggests that any improvement in its execution speed will result in significant impact in bioinformatics. Research efforts in this direction have been substantial and have relied mainly on custom designed hardware () and parallel supercomputing (). Even though these efforts have resulted in impressive speedups of up to three orders of magnitude, neither custom hardware nor supercomputers are easily accessible by the majority of BLAST users. * To whom correspondence should be addressed with the advent of multicore processors, there have been several efforts to parallelize BLAST and speed up its execution on commodity hardware. The National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) has developed a version of BLAST that exploits multicore processors for the first phase of the algorithm (). Another parallel version of BLAST () exploits two features of modern microprocessors SSE instructions and multithreading and achieves speedups of up to 5.6 times compared with ncbi blast. However, the resulting protein alignments are up to 5.9% different than those produced by ncbi blast (in). Recently, Graphics Processing Units (GPUs) became available as a general purpose processing platforms. We were drawn to GPUs because of their exceptionally high performance to cost ratio. For around $1500, it is possible to combine a personal computer with a GPU and achieve trillions of peak floating point operations per second (FLOPS) performance. GPU technology brings supercomputing power to the desktop, thus facilitating the widespread use of parallel algorithms by bioinformatic ians. However, algorithms that perform well on a CPU may not perform as well on a GPU (c.f.). Algorithm developers must develop new algorithms in order to harvest the GPU's massive parallel nature. GPUs were designed to accelerate graphics processing and quickly outperformed CPUs by over an order of a magnitude in terms of FLOPS and memory bandwidth performance. This potential was initially difficult to harness in applications beyond graphics. The situation changed in 2007 with the introduction of nvidia s Compute Unified Device Architecture (CUDA), a software and hardware environment that facilitates the adoption of GPUs in general purpose computing (). Since then, the use of GPUs has proved advantageous in a number of computationally intensive bioinformatics problems, including the smith waterman alignment algorithm (), molecular docking (), the protein folding problem (), DNA sequencing (), computational proteomics (), statistical phylogenetics (), biological systems simulation () and cellular level simulation (). Several gpu based bioinformatics software can be found at http:
