Motivation: Prediction of protein function from protein interaction networks has received attention in the post genomic era. A popular strategy has been to cluster the network into functionally coherent groups of proteins and assign the entire cluster with a function based on functions of its annotated members. Traditionally, network research has focused on clustering of nodes. However, clustering of edges may be preferred: nodes belong to multiple functional groups, but clustering of nodes typically can not capture the group overlap, while clustering of edges can. Clustering of adjacent edges that share many neighbors was proposed recently, outperforming different node clustering methods. However, since some biological processes can have characteristic signatures throughout the network, not just locally, it may be of interest to consider edges that are not necessarily adjacent. Results: We design a sensitive measure of the topological similarity of edges that can deal with edges that are not necessarily adjacent. We cluster edges that are similar according to our measure in different bakers yeast protein interaction networks, outperforming existing node and edge clustering approaches. We apply our approach to the human network to predict new pathogen interacting proteins. This is important, since these proteins represent drug target candidates. Availability: Software executables are freely available upon request.

introduction network research spans many domains. We focus on protein protein interaction (PPI) networks, with the goal of identifying new pathogen interacting proteins. In PPI networks, nodes are proteins and undirected edges correspond to physical binding between the proteins. We focus on PPI networks since it is the proteins, gene products, that carry out most biological processes, and they do so by interacting with other proteins. high throughput screens for interaction detection, such as yeast two hybrid (Y2H) assays or affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (AP/MS), have yielded partial PPI networks for many model organisms and human (), as well as for bacterial and viral pathogens (). Many biological network datasets are now publicly available (). Analogous to genomic sequence research, biological network research will impact our biological understanding. However, it is in its infancy, owing to computational hardness of many graph hence why favor nodes over edges, especially when clustering of edges may be preferred? Since nodes typically belong to multiple functional groups, and since clusters are expected to correspond to the groups, it may be desirable to allow for a node to belong to multiple clusters. Clustering of nodes typically can not capture the group overlap, especially if the network is partitioned into disjoint node sets, as is the case with many (although not all) node clustering approaches (). However, clustering of edges can easily capture the group overlap (). Edge clustering was proposed only recently (). Adjacent (connected) edges that share many neighbors were defined as similar and were thus clustered together (), outperforming different node clustering methods, including a method that allows for the group overlap. However, it may be of interest to consider edges that are not necessarily adjacent. For example, 97% of pairs of human proteins that both interact with the same pathogen are actually not adjacent in the PPI network. In fact, they are at the shortest path distance of up to five. So, they may be missed by approaches that focus on adjacent edges only, since the end nodes of adjacent edges are at most at the distance of two. Hence, we introduce a new measure of edge similarity that is not only capable of dealing with edges that are not necessarily adjacent, but is also a more sensitive measure of topology than the above shared neighborhood measure (). We show that grouping of edges that are similar according to our measure results in clusters of comparable or better quality than the above clustering approach by. We apply our clustering strategy to the human PPI network to identify from the clusters new pathogen interacting proteins and hence drug target candidates.
