Motivation: Large amounts of biological network data exist for many species. Analogous to sequence comparison, network comparison aims to provide biological insight. graph let based methods are proving to be useful in this respect. Recently some doubt has arisen concerning the applicability of graph let based measures to low edge density networks in particular that the methods are unstable and further that no existing network model matches the structure found in real biological networks. Results: We demonstrate that it is the model networks themselves that are unstable at low edge density and that graph let based measures correctly reflect this instability. Furthermore, while model network topology is unstable at low edge density, biological network topology is stable. In particular, one must distinguish between average density and local density. While model networks of low average edge densities also have low local edge density, that is not the case with protein– protein interaction (PPI) networks: real PPI networks have low average edge density, but high local edge densities, and hence, they (and thus graph let based measures) are stable on these networks. Finally, we use a recently devised non-parametric statistical test to demonstrate that PPI networks of many species are well fit by several models not previously tested. In addition, we model several viral PPI networks for the first time and demonstrate an exceptionally good fit between the data and theoretical models. Contact:

introduction networks are used to represent relationships in molecular biology, such as those between genes in gene regulatory networks and proteins in protein protein interaction (PPI) networks. A PPI network models the physical bindings between types of proteins in a cell, where a node represents a type of protein and an undirected edge exists between two nodes if the corresponding two proteins can physically bind to each other. The network of all such interactions in a species has been dubbed the interactome, and understanding its structure is an integral step towards understanding cellular systems. Recent advances in the experimental determination of PPI networks, such as yeast two hybrid (Y2H) screening () and mass spectrometry (MS) of purified complexes () have provided an abundance of network data. As these PPI networks are large and complex, it is necessary to develop efficient and biologically meaningful algorithms for their analysis. Because exactly solving many graph analysis problems is computationally intractable, heuristic and approximate methods must be devised. Systematic measures of structure (also called topology) of large networks based on graph lets (small induced subgraphs of large networks), have been introduced (). One is based on comparing graph let frequencies between two networks and is termed relative graph let frequency (RGF) distance (). The other is based on comparing graph let degree distributions (GDDs) between two networks and the agreement in GDDs of two networks is measured (). Both allow quantification of similarity between the topology of two data networks (e.g. between two species), or comparison of a data network with a theoretically derived model network. Fourteen PPI networks of eukaryotic organisms were compared with four different random network models and the fit between the PPI and model networks has been assessed (). The use of graph let based measures for network comparison has been questioned () owing to the measures being 'unstable' in regions of low edge density. Empirical distributions of these scores were calculated and a novel non-parametric test for assessing the statistical significance of the fit between real PPI networks and theoretical models was introduced. The study found that none of the PPI networks of yeast and human that were considered were well fit by the three theoretical models that were tested. After a discussion of methods, this article is designed to lead the reader through the following observations. First, that RGF distance and GDD agreement gdd a are not unstable measures for low edge density networks, but instead that they correctly detect the statistically high variance in network structure that is present in low density model networks. Second, that this high variability [described as 'instability' by] is present in low density model networks, but neither in real PPI networks nor in the model networks needed to correctly represent them. Third, that current PPI networks are denser than those studied by and are well outside the highly variable low density region. Fourth, that the highly variable region shrinks with increasing network size and is of negligible *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com size for real world networks. Finally, we use the non-parametric test proposed by to demonstrate that PPI networks of many species are well fit by several existing network models.
