We created a deeply extracted and annotated database of genome wide association studies g was results. GRASP v1.0 contains 46.2 million snp phenotype association from among 1390 g was studies. We re annotated g was results with 16 annotation sources including some rarely compared to g was results (e.g. rna editing sites, linc rnas PTMs). Motivation: To create a high quality resource to facilitate further use and interpretation of human g was results in order to address important scientific questions. Results: g was have grown exponentially, with increases in sample sizes and markers tested, and continuing bias toward European ancestry samples. GRASP contains 4100 000 phenotypes, roughly: e qtls (71.5%), metabolite QTLs (21.2%), methylation QTLs (4.4%) and diseases, biomarkers and other traits (2.8%). cise qtls me qtls m qtls and MHC region SNPs are highly enriched among significant results. After removing these categories, GRASP still contains a greater proportion of studies and results than comparable g was catalogs. Cardiovascular disease and related risk factors predominate remaining g was results, followed by immunological, neuro-logical and cancer traits. Significant results in g was display a highly gene centric tendency. Sex chromosome X (OR = 0.18[0.16-0.20]) and Y (OR = 0.003[0.001-0.01]) genes are depleted for g was results. Gene length is correlated with g was results at nominal significance (P 0.05) levels. We show this gene length correlation decays at increasingly more stringent p value thresholds. Potential p leo tropic genes and SNPs enriched for multi phenotype association in g was are identified. However, we note possible population stratification at some of these loci. Finally, via re annotation we identify compelling functional hypotheses at g was loci, in some cases unrealized in studies to date. Conclusion: Pooling summary level g was results and re annotating with bioinformatics predictions and molecular features provides a good platform for new insights. Availability: The GRASP database is available at http://apps.nhlbi.nih. gov grasp
introduction genome wide association studies g was revolutionized the study of human genetics for numerous traits and diseases, but have rarely been used to synthesize results across traits and diseases (; Johnson and O'). Biomolecular annotations of results from g was are not uniformly applied across studies hampering comparisons even for fundamental aspects such as overlap with genes (Johnson and O'). Scientists commonly use existing g was results databases to provide evidence for association but these databases have significant limitations in annotations applied, and studies and results included (). We collected 46.2 million available results from 1390 g was papers to create a large results database deeply annotated in a uniform manner. In analysis of collected results, we observe temporal trends across g was studies, demonstrate how deep annotation can lead to functional hypotheses often missed in original reports, and show how data mining across diverse phenotypes reveals putative pleiotropic loci and variants. The genome wide Repository of Associations between SNPs and Phenotypes (GRASP) is freely available for query and download (http://apps.nhlbi.nih.gov/grasp), and plans to accept submission of additional results for public posting and archiving in future releases.
