Motivation: In large scale genetic association studies with tens of hundreds of single nucleotide poly-morphisms (SNPs) genotyped, the traditional statistical framework of logistic regression using maximum likelihood estimator (MLE) to infer the odds ratios of SNPs may not work appropriately. This is because a large number of odds ratios need to be estimated, and the MLEs may be not stable when some of the SNPs are in high linkage disequilibrium. Under this situation, the p value combination procedures seem to provide good alternatives as they are constructed on the basis of single marker analysis. Results: The commonly used p value combination methods (such as the Fishers combined test, the truncated product method, the truncated tail strength and the adaptive rank truncated product) may lose power when the significance level varies across SNPs. To tackle this problem, a group combined p value method (GCP) is proposed, where the p values are divided into multiple groups and then are combined at the group level. With this strategy, the significance values are integrated at different levels, and the power is improved. Simulation shows that the GCP can effectively control the type I error rates and have additional power over the existing methods the power increase can be as high as over 50% under some situations. The proposed GCP method is applied to data from the Genetic Analysis Workshop 16. Among all the methods, only the GCP and art p can give the significance to identify a genomic region covering gene DSC3 being associated with rheumatoid arthritis, but the GCP provides smaller p value. Availability and implementation:

introduction in the past two decades, more than ten thousands genetic markers have been identified to be associated with many human complex diseases using genome wide association studies where single marker analysis was adopted. In the post genome era, the use of multi marker analysis where several markers are analyzed in the same model provides a powerful solution in large scale genetic association studies. To detect the association between a gene or a genomic region (which may host tens of hundreds of single nucleotide polymorphisms snps and complex human diseases in large scale genetic studies, the traditional method of logistic regression may not work appropriately. This is because it employs the likelihood function and uses the maximum likelihood approach to estimate the odds ratios, and a high dimensional problem needs to be optimized. The global solution is difficult to find, and also in some cases when the SNPs are in high linkage disequilibrium (LD), the Hessian matrix derived from the likelihood function may be singular and thus the solution is not stable. A useful alternative strategy is to analyze the SNPs one by one and then combine the p values together. For combining the p values one popular choice is the Fisher's method (), also referred to as the Fisher's combined test (FCT). If the m p values to be combined are independent, the FCT statistic follows the chi squared distribution with 2m degrees of freedom. If these m p values are correlated, the re-sample methods are recommended to obtain the empirical distribution of the FCT. Otherwise the type I error rates may be inflated (). The FCT has been widely applied in genetic association studies (). However, it may lose power when the degrees of freedom are large and most of the SNPs are not significant. To tackle this problem, combining the truncated p values have been recommended proposed to combine the k smallest p values as the test statistic. However the power of this approach is very sensitive to the value of kan inappropriate k results in combing some non-significant p values and power loss, especially when m is large ().suggested using multiple candidate truncation points and proposed an adaptive rank truncated product method art p. This method can efficiently and flexibly accumulate association evidence across SNPs and remove the subjectivity of choosing k to some extent. Instead of combining the k smallest p values zay kin proposed a truncated product method (TPM) by using the product of only those p values smaller than a specified threshold (). By choosing a proper cut-point such as 0.05, the TPM increases power. Recently, Jiang proposed a truncated tail strength statistic (TTS) (), which was proved to have higher power than the tail strength method () and the FCT under certain scenarios. Chen proposed a sequential test (), which was shown to have almost the same power with the art p. Taking a closer look at the truncated combined p value procedures, we found that the p values are divided into two groups and that the group with smaller p values is used to construct the test statistics. To develop a more powerful test for identifying genetic association, our proposal is to divide the p values into three or more groups. In each group, a test statistic is constructed. The test statistics are then combined to form an omnibus test. The proposed grouping strategy has sound basis. Biologically, SNPs in a certain genomic region can be divided into multiple blocks, with high LD within blocks and low LD between blocks. In one block, if there is a SNP associated with a disease, then it is likely that all SNPs in this block are associated with the disease because of LD. Statistically, such SNPs form the groups of interest. In fact, any p value combination procedures can be seen as different combinations using functions. The FCT uses f p 1 ;. The art p can also be regarded as hp 1 ; p 2 ;. .. ; p m   min 1 j J b qk j , where b qk j  is the estimated p value for the statistic Q kj i1 p i and k j ; j  1;. .. ; J are a set of prespecified candidates. Since there does not exist the uniformly optimal function of combining p values. As an extension of the TPM with setting J  1 in our method, where the number of group is one, we use two functions log and the cumulative distribution function of two degrees of freedom to combine the p values. When the p values are independent and each p value has the significance, the FCT is more powerful than the GCP, and if these p values are correlated and few p values show significances, the GCP is more powerful than the FCT. Extensive computer simulations show that the proposed test is more powerful than the existing combined tests while maintaining a good control of type I error rates. In the analysis of the Genetic Analysis Workshop 16 data, the proposed method can successfully detect the association between a genomic region covering gene DSC3 and rheumatoid arthritis, which might be missed by some other existing p values combination methods.

discussion in large scale genetic association studies, usually tens of hundreds of SNPs are genotyped and tested. The traditional statistical framework, such as the logistic regression, needs to solve a multidimensional optimization problem on odds ratios. It is difficult to find the global solution, and sometimes the solution is not stable, or there may be multiple solutions, when the SNPs are in high LD. To tackle this problem, we have developed a GCP method. This method is built on single marker analysis and can be easily applied to testing a large number of SNPs. Advancing from the existing alternatives, the. The empirical powers of the FCT, the TPM, the TTS, the art p and the GCP for m  200 or 500. The data were generated using gaussian copula t copula with the variance and covariance matrix K and q  0:2. L denotes the number of diseased associated snps fct TPM TTS art p GCP. The empirical powers of the FCT, the TPM, the TTS, the art p and the GCP for m  200 or 500. The data were generated using gaussian copula t copula with the variance and covariance matrix K and q  0:5. L denotes the number of diseased associated snps fct TPM TTS art p GCP. The empirical powers of the FCT, the TPM, the TTS, the art p and the GCP for m  200 or 500. The data were generated using gaussian copula t copula with the variance and covariance matrix K and q  0:8. L denotes the number of diseased associated snps group combined p values gcp integrates the information significance at different levels and improves power. The proposed GCP can have applications far beyond this article. As the first example, we consider the analysis of different complex human diseases, which can be 'correlated'. Simultaneously analyzing genetic variants associated with multiple correlated diseases or traits can help investigators understand the genetic architecture of diseases and improve the power to identify deleterious genetic variants (). In such analysis, quite often more than 100 phenotypes and a genetic variant are studied at a time (). The proposed GCP can be directly applied to this example. In addition, the proposed GCP can also be used to detect the associations between multiple genetic variants and multiple phenotypes. One can first use a multistep combined principal component method () or multivariate linear mixed model () to obtain the p value for the association between each variant and multiple phenotypes and then employ the GCP to combine them. To obtain the p value under the GCP, potentially, a two layer resampling procedure needs to be conducted. First, an inner layer of bootstrap or permutation procedure is required to obtain the distribution of test statistic at the group level. Then a second layer of bootstrap or permutation procedure is needed to obtain the distribution of the GCP. This can be computational intensive, especially, when the nominal significance level is small. One needs to conduct millions of bootstrap or permutation steps to obtain a valid p value. To overcome this obstacle, we proposed a one layer permutation procedure to obtain the p value. In this work, the simulations and data analysis have been focused on binary traits. It is noted that the GCP is flexible and can be applied to other types of phenotypes in large scale genetic studies. If the trait is quantitative, we can first use the linear regression model to obtain the p value for each SNP when the normal assumption holds, and then combine them together. When the normal distribution does not hold (even after transformation), one can use the nonparametric trend tests () to analyze one SNP at a time with or without considering the genetic models and then employ the proposed method to construct the omnibus test. If the phenotype is ordinal, the score test derived from the proportional odds model () can be first used to obtain the p value for each SNP, and then the p values can be combined using the proposed method. From the simulations, the power difference between the GCP and other methods may be attributable to the number of markers associated with the diseases. For the dependence on the data structure, the GCP can obtain more power than other methods when each group has a certain amount of p values. The distributions of p values have been shown in and in the Online Supplementary Material. While, as the increasing of the number of associated markers, the power of all the methods will increase and then the power difference between the GCP and others may reduce. The simulation results also show that the GCP performs better than the FCT, TPM and TTS consistently. Towards the art p the GCP has obtained a uniformly higher power when the data are generated using t copula. For the gaussian copula the GCP and art p have its own 'sweet' spots. But overall, the power difference between the GCP and art p is larger for t copula than that for gaussian copula please see Figures 24. Therefore, our method is more robust than the art p if the assumption of normality is not considered. However, the proposed method has some drawbacks. First, as difficulty of deriving the exact distribution of the GCP, we need to use empirical cumulative distribution to obtain its p value. In a large scale genetic association study, for example, when m is large, say a million or bigger, the computation can be very intensive. Also, the distribution function of the GCP can not be computed. Second, theoretically, the number of groups (J) does not depend on the number of SNPs. However, in practice, we don't know J, the data driven selection of J might be slightly correlated with the number of SNPs. Third, the proposed method is constructed based on the individual p values which can be obtained by single marker analysis. For the selection of the thresholds, we proposed to use 0.001 and 0.05. They are not optimal and depend on the structure of the data. To overcome it, one possible scheme is to adopt some alternative thresholds and use the maximum of the GCP on these thresholds as the final test statistics and use the bootstrap or permutation to assess its statistical significance.
