Motivation: Glycans play critical roles in many biological processes, and their structural diversity is key for specific protein glycan recognition. Comparative structural studies of biological molecules provide useful insight into their biological relationships. However, most computational tools are designed for protein structure, and despite their importance, there is no currently available tool for comparing glycan structures in a sequence order and size independent manner. Results: A novel method, gs align is developed for glycan structure alignment and similarity measurement. gs align generates possible alignments between two glycan structures through iterative maximum clique search and fragment superposition. The optimal alignment is then determined by the maximum structural similarity score, gs score which is size independent. Benchmark tests against the Protein Data Bank (PDB) n linked glycan library and PDB homologous nonhomologous n glycoprotein sets indicate that gs align is a robust computational tool to align glycan structures and quantify their structural similarity. gs align is also applied to template based glycan structure prediction and monosaccharide substitution matrix generation to illustrate its utility. Availability and implementation: http://www.glycanstructure.org/gsalign.

introduction glycans are one of the four fundamental components of cells (along with nucleic acids, proteins and lipids) and the most abundant and diverse biopolymers in nature (). They are not only conjugated to proteins (glycoproteins) or lipids (glycolipids), but also exist as diffusible ligands (). Protein glycosylation is one of the most important post-translational modifications, with more than half of all proteins expected to be glycosylated (). Protein glycosylation falls into two general categories, N-and o linked glycosylation. n glycosylation links glycans to Asn residues in the seq u on as nxt hr ser (where X can be any amino acid except Pro), of a nascent polypeptide n glycans (), whereas o linked glycosylation attaches glycans to Ser and Thr residues at sites which do not have a well defined sequence motif o glycans (). In particular, n glycosylation is needed for proper folding of a protein as well as quality control in the endoplasmic reticulum (). Based on the lipid type, glycolipids can be classified into three main groups: glyco glycero lipids glycosyl phosphatidylinositols (GPI) and glycosphingolipids (). Hyaluronic acid is one of glycan diffusible ligands, which is not linked to either proteins or lipids and is secreted into extracellular compartments (). Glycans play critical roles in many biological processes through covalent addition and or specific protein glycan recognition events. For example, they interact with diverse proteins and are involved in cell growth and development, tumor growth and metastasis, anticoagulation, inflammation, immune tolerance, intercellular adhesion, cell cell communication and microbial attachment (). Glycans come in a diversity of sequences and structures by linking individual sugar units in a multitude of ways. They can be broadly classified as linear and branched sugars in terms of their sequence, and both forms are present in glycoconjugates (). The majority of the linear sugars are glycosaminoglycans and hyaluronic acid (). Due to their flexible glycosidic linkages, glycans have an ensemble of diverse conformations (), and such a structural diversity is essential for specific binding to their receptor proteins. For example, the penta saccharide of ganglioside GM1 has different conformations upon binding to galectin 1 and cholera toxin (). In contemporary structural biology, the comparison and alignment of protein structures are widely employed in studies such as hierarchical classification of the known structural space of protein domains (), inference of protein function from structure () and protein structure modeling (). Protein structure comparison and alignment is a well established area and there are currently many publicly available tools such as DALI (), CE () and tm align (). The mammalian gly come encompasses a diverse and abundant repertoire of glycan structures, and could be larger than the proteome (). Because of their significant roles in biology, understanding glycan structure and function in the context of their 3D structure is central to understanding biology. Despite the difficulties in crystallization, the rate of deposition of glycan containing structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () has been steadily increasing (). As demonstrated in protein structural biology, fast and accurate computational tools for comparison and alignment of glycan structures are crucial to take an integrated approach to advance glycan structure function relationships. However, developing a glycan structure alignment tool is challenging, given the unique structural features of glycans through different linkages and branching, resulting in a tree like structure unlike proteins. To the best of our knowledge, there have been no such tools published to date. To make a progress in the structural glycobiology field, we introduce a novel method, gs align for glycan structure alignment and similarity measurement. In particular, gs align provides a size independent structural similarity score, gs score. Below, we first describe the alignment and scoring algorithms in details. Benchmark tests and representative examples are then presented to illustrate reliability and applicability of gs align. Finally, we discuss both the advantages and limitations of our approach.
