g searcher provides a highly interactive user experience in navigating attribute data associated with large and complex biological networks. The user may either perform a quick search using keywords, phrases or regular expressions, or build a complex query with a group of filters for efficient and flexible exploration of large datasets.

introduction cytoscape is one of the most popular open source software for the analysis and visualization of biological networks (). In a biological network, genes and proteins are modeled as nodes and interactions are modeled as edges, which are associated with various attribute data such as gene annotation or expression level. As the size of networks and amount of attribute data increase, highly flexible and scalable search solutions become a necessity. Cytoscape is bundled with Quick Find, Filters and Enhanced Search Plugin (ESP) (). These tools all use a submit wait workflow: the user types the query, hits the 'Enter' key to begin the search and then waits for the results to be shown in the default attribute browser. The submit wait process must be repeated to compare different queries, to correct errors and to progressively improve a query. This process not only creates the perception of a slow search by forcing the user to wait for complete results from unsatisfactory preliminary searches, but also interrupts any coherent thought process. A flexible and scalable toolkit for rapidly navigating biological networks is vital to speeding the search workflow, aiding researchers' thought processes and creating a more appealing experience. In many modern search engines, such as searching a song in iTunes (http://www.apple.com/iTunes/), the search result is updated instantly from the user's input without waiting for the user to hit the 'Enter' key. This interactive model enables the user to complete a query from live feedback, dramatically improving the efficiency of searches and the aesthetic appeal of interaction with the software. Current Cytoscape search tools also have some issues that undermine the efficiency and accuracy of searching. First of all, all these tools use the default attribute browser to display results. The potential for interference made it difficult to use these tools along
