Motivation: The sequences among sub genomes in a polyploid species have high similarity, making it difficult to design genome specific primers for sequence analysis. Results: We present GSP, a web based platform to design genome specific primers that distinguish sub genome sequences in a polyploid genome. GSP uses BLAST to extract home o logo us sequences of the sub genomes in existing databases, performs a multiple sequence alignment, and design primers based on sequence variants in the alignment. An interactive primers diagram, a sequence alignment viewer and a virtual electrophoresis are displayed as parts of the primer design result. GSP also designs specific primers from multiple sequences uploaded by users. Availability and implementation: GSP is a user friendly and efficient web platform freely accessible at

introduction developing genome specific primers for polyploid s not only will facilitate the study of sequence diversity and the association mapping of genes, but also the development of gene based functional markers (). However, the polyploid genome contains two or more home o logo us sub genomes with high sequence similarities, especially in the coding regions, which presents a particular problem with respect to the design genome specific primers that amplify individual genes. To our knowledge, only one pipeline named poly marker can generate genome specific primers (). However, pl oly marker was specifically developed for SNP assay with the k asp TM kom petitive Allele Specific PCR) system, a very unique system using a three primers system in PCR reactions. poly marker requires users to prepare sequence files with SNP information and the target chromosome input. Therefore, the software has limited utility in a variety of other pcr based applications. Ma et al. described a method for detecting locus specific polymorphism in hexaploid wheat (). In this method, users are required to do step-wise processes using provided multiple perl scripts for blast search, extracting home o logo us sequences, local alignment among the retrieved sequences to identify polymorphism sites. However, users still need to manually design primers based on the alignment. Currently, no good web based tool is available that allows the user to design genome specific primers by only in putting a query sequence. Here, we present a web based user friendly primer design tool named GSP, which employs a BLAST search and multiple sequence alignment (MSA) to identify sequence variant sites among the home o logo us sequences retrieved and then designs specific primers.

conclusion with the rapid increase of polyploid genome sequence data from high throughput sequencing technologies, effective primer design tools for home o logo us sequences from the sub genomes of polyploid s has become an important component of gene and genome analysis. GSP is a time-saving, user friendly and easy to use web tool for designing genome specific primers to distinguish sequences among the sub genomes of polyploid species. This web application tool can be easily extended to other polyploid s when their genome sequences become available.
