A number of technologies, including crisp rcas transcription activator like effector nucleases and zinc finger nucle-ases, allow the user to target a chosen locus for genome editing or regulatory interference. Specificity, however, is a major problem, and the targeted locus must be chosen with care to avoid inadvertently affecting other loci off targets in the genome. To address this we have created Genome Target Scan gts can a flexible web based tool that ranks all potential targets in a user selected region of a genome in terms of how many off targets they have. gts can gives the user flexibility to define the desired characteristics of targets and off targets via a simple target rule, and its interactive output allows detailed inspection of each of the most promising candidate targets. gts can can be used to identify optimal targets for crisp rcas systems , but its flexibility gives it potential to be adapted to other genome targeting technologies as well. Availability and implementation: gts can can be run via the web at: http://gt-scan.

introduction targeted genome editing and targeted transcriptional control are essential tools of modern molecular biology. Currently popular approaches include crisp rcas (), transcription activator like effector nucleases (TALENs) and zinc finger nucleases z fns (). Each of these technologies allows the user to design a system to target a specific genomic sequence. However, because of the limited or uncertain sequence specificity of technologies based on crisp rcas (), TALENs and z fns (), it is crucial that the intended genomic target be as unique as possible within the genome. Ensuring target uniqueness will reduce the number of off targets in the genome and minimize unintended genome editing or regulatory effects. The first step in the effective use of any genome targeting technology is therefore to identify the possible target(s) within the region of interest (e.g. gene, exon or promoter) that have the fewest off targets. The ideal targets are subsequences within the region of interest that have no exact copies elsewhere in the genome. Because targeting affinity is a continuum, near exact copies that differ at one or a few positions from the intended target are also undesirable (). Furthermore, the positions of the mismatches in off targets may also affect their affinity. For example, in the crisp rcas system, mismatches in 5 0 positions are generally less disruptive than those in 3 0 positions (). An exception is a single nucleotide near the 3 0 end of the target, which has little or no effect on specificity, regardless of the base pair present in that position (). In z fn targets, a central 'spacer' has little affect on affinity. Target selection should therefore consider both exact and near exact matches to the target as off targets as well as the positions of mismatches in off targets. The particular genome editing technology being used may place other constraints on the ideal targets in addition to uniqueness. For example, crisp rcas targets must contain a particular short sequence at the 3 0 end called a proto spacer adjacent motif (PAM) (). Target selection must consider such constraints as well. from the alphabet acg tnx. To illustrate, consider the 23 nt rule pair target rule xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xxx xx ngg off target filter NNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNNRG; which is appropriate for CRISPR/Cas9 systems. This target rule specifies that candidate targets must be 23 nt long and end with then gg PAM. It also encodes the information that the 10 most 5 0 positions are low specificity positions, and the following 13 are high specificity positions, except for the special character N, which denotes a no specificity position. The off target filter is composed of letters in the standard IUPAC alphabet for DNA, and the letter case has no effect. With the given off target filter, gts can ignores any potential off target not ending with either ann gg or nag PAM. An example of the interactive HTML output produced by gts can is shown in. The job details on the left show that the user provided gts can with a 50 bp region of DNA and specified scanning of the Ensembl human genome version GRCh37. gts can detected that the candidate region matches the reference strand of chromosome 21 from position 33 032 335 to 33 032 384. gts can ran for 8 s and found and evaluated 12 candidate targets within the candidate region that match the 23 bp rule chosen by the user. The best candidate target found by gts can is unique in the human genome (0 in the 'Exact Match' column), and no other loci exist that differ from it by either one or two mismatches (0 in the '1 Mismatch' and '2 Mismatches' columns) Furthermore, only six loci in the human genome differ from the candidate by as few as three mismatches (six in the '3 Mismatches' column). The second best candidate target present in the candidate region is similarly unique in the human genome allowing up to one mismatch; however, one locus differs from it by only two mismatches. Clicking on a candidate target in the upper table selects it and displays its potential off targets in the lower table. The first column of the lower table shows the chosen candidate's potential off targets with mismatches highlighted in bold. High-, low and no specificity positions are denoted using orange, blue and green, respectively. The remaining columns show the number of mismatches in the potential off target its chromosomal location, its gc content and a clickable link to its locus in a genome browser. The gts can algorithm extends the approach of Mali et al.(2013) to generalized target rules. Its first step is to convert the target rule into a regular expression by replacing X, x and N with wildcards. gts can then finds all the candidate targets in the user specified genomic region by scanning the input sequence for matches to the regular expression. Next, for each candidate target, gts can generates a list of all possible off targets by listing all possible words that match the candidate target except (possibly) at positions where the rule contains the no specificity character (N). Note that the running time of gts can therefore scales exponentially with the number of no specificity characters in the rule (time proportional to 4 n , where n is the number of no specificity characters). gts can then combines the possible off targets for all targets into a single list of words and uses the Bowtie algorithm () to identify all matches to these words anywhere in the selected genome. Genomic locations with up to three mismatches to any of the words in the list are reported by Bowtie. Finally, gts can creates its interactive output report after determining which off target locations correspond to each of the candidate targets. gt scans report, which can be downloaded as an HTML file, is retained on the server for at least 7 days. gts can fills a gap in the existing toolset for identifying optimal genomic targets. crisp r Design () is specifically engineered for target selection for the CRISPR/Cas9 system, does not allow for user defined rules and currently limits the candidate region to 250 bp (versus 4000 bp for gts can. cas of finder () is also designed specifically for crisp rcas systems, does not allow user specified rules and requires the user to specify the candidate targets. caso t () can not currently be run via the web.
