Determining genetic factors underlying various phenotypes is hindered by the involvement of multiple genes acting cooperatively. Over the past years, disease gene prioritization has been central to identify genes implicated in human disorders. Special attention has been paid on using physical interactions between the proteins encoded by the genes to link them with diseases. Such methods exploit the guilt by association principle in the protein interaction network to uncover novel disease gene associations. These methods rely on the proximity of a gene in the network to the genes associated with a phenotype and require a set of initial associations. Here, we present guild if y an easy to use web server for the phenotypic characterization of genes. guild if y offers a prioritization approach based on the protein protein interaction network where the initial phenotype gene associations are retrieved via free text search on biological databases. guild if y web server does not restrict the prioritization to any predefined phenotype, supports multiple species and accepts user specified genes. It also prioritizes drugs based on the ranking of their targets, unleashing opportunities for repurposing drugs for novel therapies. Availability and implementation: Available online at

introduction during the past decade, disease gene prioritization has been central to research efforts in the field of human genetics. The promise of suggesting novel associations for genetic disorders with implications to therapeutical improvements has yielded a broad spectrum of computational tools (). Special attention has been paid on using physical interactions between the products of these genes to associate them with diseases (). Methods using protein protein interactions pp is exploit the guilt by association principle over the network topology to uncover new disease gene associations. The guilt by association principle suggests that the genes whose products (proteins) interact with the products of known disease genes are more likely to be disease genes (). Recently, we proposed three novel algorithms for genome wide prioritization of disease genes using PPI networks and showed that a consensus method combining these algorithms improved the prioritization () when using the disease gene associations in Online men dalian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (). Combined with genomics and proteomics data, the method has been successfully used to identify a gene driving metastasis to bone in breast cancer (). Available network based prioritization tools use either disease gene annotations from OMIM database () or a set of genes provided by the user () as initial associations (seed genes). These tools typically output the prioritization for a set of candidate genes; genes lying under a given genomic interval, a set of user provided genes or top ranking genes (several hundred at most). Furthermore, some of these tools are accessible only through Cytoscape () as a plugin (). Publicly available biological data repositories can also be used for mining initial phenotype gene associations required by network based prioritization methods without restricting to any predefined phenotype or candidates. Considering the limited availability of convenient interfaces that bridge network based prioritization algorithms, we present guild if y an interactome based prioritization server for phenotype based characterization. guild if y retrieves initial phenotype gene associations (seeds) via free text search on biological databases and ranks the proteins in the interaction network for their relevance to the phenotype. When the queried species is Homo sapiens, guild if y provides a ranking of the drugs related to the phenotype based on the ranking of their targets.

conclusion phenotypic characterization of genes plays a crucial role in explaining the mechanisms behind biological processes. We have developed guild if y a free and easy to use web server for prioritization of genes using PPI networks. For a given phenotype, guild if y uses descriptive fields in several proteomics and genomics databases in combination with network based prioritization methods and provides an interactome wide ranking. The ranking represents the relevance to the phenotype of interest and can be used to short-list the set of candidate genes that need to be further validated or to repurpose drugs (e.g. through common high ranking targets).
