Motivation: Multiple sequence alignment (MSA) is important work, but bottlenecks arise in the massive MSA of homologous DNA or genome sequences. Most of the available state of the art software tools can not address large scale datasets, or they run rather slowly. The similarity of homologous DNA sequences is often ignored. Lack of parallelization is still a challenge for MSA research. Results: We developed two software tools to address the DNA MSA problem. The first employed trie trees to accelerate the centre star MSA strategy. The expected time complexity was decreased to linear time from square time. To address large scale data, parallelism was applied using the had oop platform. Experiments demonstrated the performance of our proposed methods, including their running time, sum of pairs scores and scalability. Moreover, we supplied two massive DNA/ RNA MSA datasets for further testing and research. Availability and implementation: The codes, tools and data are accessible free of charge at

introduction dna sequence alignment is considered the 'Holy Grail' problem in computational biology and is of vital importance for molecular function prediction. The widely used databases PFAM () and rf am () are constructed based on multiple sequence alignment (MSA). Molecular function prediction sometimes depends on evolutionary information (). MSA is also required for evolutionary tree reconstruction. Most of the available phylogenetic tree construction software tools require previously aligned sequences as input. When addressing the evolutionary analysis of bacterial and viral genomes, large scale similar DNA sequences often prevent these MSA tools from functioning (). The evolution of viruses is rapid, and massive viral DNA sequences often appear in phylogenetic reconstructions. Therefore, it is necessary to improve the scalable capacity of MSA tools when analyzing influenza virus DNA (). The appearance of increasing amounts of DNA and genome data benefits from the improvement of DNA sequencing technology. With the development of the 1000 Genome () and HapMap () Projects, it makes sense to align massive DNA sequences, whose size and length are both scalable. Most of the recent studies on sequence alignment have focused on mapping and de novo assembly. The MSA technique has not undergone any relevant improvements in recent years (). The available state of the art MSA software tools address DNA and protein sequences equivalently and ignore the high similarity of DNA sequences. However, we emphasize that the alignment of DNA and protein sequences is not synonymous. The key problem in protein MSA is aligning functional regions. The BLOSUM 62 and PAM250 matrices are referenced for measuring performance. A Hidden Markov Model (HMM) is often employed for detecting shared functional regions (). In contrast, the core problem in DNA MSA is to match substrings that are as long as possible. Therefore, tree memory structure is always exploited to obtain quick matches (). Several MSA software tools have been developed. In order with data handling size, these tools are t coffee (small), CLUSTAL (medium), MUSCLE (medium), maff t medium large and k align (large), as suggesting by embl ebi (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/Tools/ msa/). t coffee is a consistency based MSA tool that attempts to mitigate the pitfalls of progressive alignment methods (). It only works on protein sequences with a small size. CLUSTAL is a popular MSA tool that employs tree based progressive alignments (). It is a multiplatform program that works on both Windows and Linux systems and can address both protein and DNA sequences. The friendly graphic user interface display makes CLUSTAL a popular tool. MUSCLE is well known for its accurate alignment of proteins (). maff t uses Fast Fourier Transforms, which can run medium large alignments (). To address massive sequences, PASTA divides the set of sequences into several subsets and employs maff t for aligning every subset in parallel and has been shown to achieve performance for thousands of RNA sequences (). k align is a fast MSA tool that concentrates on local regions (). It is suitable for large alignments. However, our testing suggests that none of these tools can address massive DNA sequences, and they run rather slowly if the count of sequences is greater than 100. A trie tree is an efficient data structure for storing multiple sequences, and it facilitates the acceleration of searching multiple sequences from a long string (). Therefore, it is helpful for detecting common regions and reducing the time required for alignment. Indeed, various tree based string storage structures are widely used in DNA searching and mapping, such as BLAT () and Hobbes (). However, the storage and acceleration from smart data structure remains a gap in MSA research. Parallel computing has developed rapidly for scalable data in recent years and has appeared in many bioinformatics applications (). However, few parallel software tools have been designed for MSA. Therefore, we developed a parallel MSA software tool based on the had oop platform for scalable dna rna sequences.

conclusion msa is an important and fundamental tool in bioinformatics, especially for phylogenetic tree reconstruction. There are complex interrelationships between MSA and phylogenetic tree reconstruction, involving mutual promotion and restraint. Phylogenetic tree reconstruction algorithms always require MSA results as input data, while MSA algorithms sometimes require phylogenetic trees as guidelines. For massive unaligned DNA sequences, several MSA free phylogenetic tree reconstruction algorithms have been proposed (). The core strategy of these algorithms is to calculate string distance based on the longest common substrings or word frequency, instead of sequence alignment. This strategy is similar to our trie tree based algorithm. This method would be better suited for DNA sequences than protein sequences. In this work, we developed two MSA tools based on the centre star strategy. The first tool employed trie trees to accelerate the MSA of highly similar DNA sequences. It runs fast but can not deal with the big data. The second was designed to deal with scalable data. It works in parallel with had oop which is an open platform for parallel programming that has developed rapidly in recent years. Experiments using files 1 GB demonstrated the ability of HAlign. From the experiments, we can conclude that HAlign outperforms the available state of the art MSA software tools regarding its ability to handle large scale dna rna datasets, and it is suited for massive highly similar DNA sequences. It also runs faster for sequences of low similarity because it is a software tool that runs in parallel. Here, we simply employed dynamic programming for basic alignment. RNA structure information and a protein substitution matrix were not considered because they are time consuming. Taking such data into consideration will be future work to be performed for HAlign. Both the single thread and the parallel tools are coded with Java, which works on multiple operation systems. had oop 2.0 is required for the parallel tool. We have constructed a web site http://datamining.xmu.edu.cn/ software halign for sharing the software tools and codes.
