Motivation: post sequencing DNA analysis typically consists of read mapping followed by variant calling. Especially for whole genome sequencing, this computational step is very time consuming even when using multithreading on a multi-core machine. Results: We present halva de a framework that enables sequencing pipelines to be executed in parallel on a multi node and or multi-core compute infrastructure in a highly efficient manner. As an example, a DNA sequencing analysis pipeline for variant calling has been implemented according to the g atk Best Practices recommendations, supporting both whole genome and whole exo me sequencing. Using a 15-node computer cluster with 360 CPU cores in total, halva de processes the NA12878 dataset (human, 100 bp paired end reads, 50Â coverage) in 3 h with very high parallel efficiency. Even on a single, multi-core machine, halva de attains a significant speed up compared with running the individual tools with multithreading. Availability and implementation: halva de is written in Java and uses the had oop map reduce 2.0 API. It supports a wide range of distributions of had oop including cloud era and Amazon EMR. Its

introduction the speed of DNA sequencing has increased considerably with the introduction of next generation sequencing platforms. For example, modern Illumina systems can generate several hundreds of giga bases per run () with a high accuracy. This, in turn, gives rise to several hundreds of gigabytes of raw sequence data to be processed. post sequencing DNA analysis typically consists of two major phases: (i) alignment of reads to a reference genome and (ii) variant calling, i.e. the identification of differences between the reference genome and the genome from which the reads were sequenced. For both tasks, numerous tools have been described in literature, see eg for an overview. Especially for whole genome sequencing, applying such tools is a computational bottleneck. To illustrate this, we consider the recently proposed Best Practices pipeline for DNA sequencing analysis () that consists of the burrow wheeler Aligner (BWA) () for the alignment step, Picard (http://picard.sourceforge.net) for data preparation and the Genome Analysis Toolkit g atk () for variant calling. On a single node, the execution of this pipeline consumes more time than the sequencing step itself: a dataset consisting of 1.5 billion paired end reads (Illumina Platinum genomes, NA12878, 100 bp, 50-fold coverage, human genome)
