Motivation: Proteins often recognize their interaction partners on the basis of short linear motifs located in disordered regions on proteins surface. Experimental techniques that study such motifs use short peptides to mimic the structural properties of interacting proteins. Continued development of these methods allows for large scale screening, resulting in vast amounts of peptide sequences , potentially containing information on multiple protein protein interactions. Processing of such datasets is a complex but essential task for large scale studies investigating protein protein interactions. Results: The software tool presented in this article is able to rapidly identify multiple clusters of sequences carrying shared specificity motifs in massive datasets from various sources and generate multiple sequence alignments of identified clusters. The method was applied on a previously published smaller dataset containing distinct classes of ligands for SH3 domains, as well as on a new, an order of magnitude larger dataset containing epitopes for several monoclonal antibodies. The software successfully identified clusters of sequences mimicking epitopes of antibody targets, as well as secondary clusters revealing that the antibodies accept some deviations from original epi-tope sequences. Another test indicates that processing of even much larger datasets is computa-tionally feasible. Availability and implementation: Hammock is published under GNU GPL v. 3 license and is freely available as a standalone program (from http://www.recamo.cz/en/software/hammock-cluster-pep tides/) or as a tool for the Galaxy toolbox (from https://toolshed.g2.bx.psu.edu/view/hammock/ham mock). The source code can be downloaded from https://github.com/hammock-dev/hammock/ releases.

introduction molecular interactions between proteins occur ubiquitously in cells and play central roles in most biological processes. These interactions are often mediated by short linear motifs located in disordered regions on the surface of one of the interacting partners (). The functional and evolutionary importance of this kind of interaction is substantial (). To investigate linear motif mediated binding interactions, several experimental methods utilize short peptides to mimic structural properties of interacting proteins. Libraries containing very large numbers of such short peptide sequences can be generated easily and used to discover interaction preferences of proteins. These methods include phage display () or other display based methods, as well as technologies utilizing peptide microarrays (). Such high throughput methods are capable of generating huge amounts of data. The identification of true binding motifs within large datasets is a challenging task for several reasons. First, binding motifs are typically short and weak (), second, experimental origin of the data imposes the possibility of fair level of noise and most remarkably, multiple binding motifs are often contained within the data. The occurrence of more than one motif may be caused by true poly specificity of the target, as well as by experimental imperfections. In the case of phage display, two main issues may occur. The first problematic phenomenon is nonspecific adsorption of phages to surfaces that were used to immobilize target proteins, and the second issue is caused by differences in phages' propagation capabilities phages may be selected on the basis of their growth capacity, rather than their binding affinity to the target (). With low cost high throughput methods, such as next generation sequencing of phage display libraries, it is possible to obtain up to millions of unique peptide sequences (). It is therefore reasonable to think of even more complicated experiments, aiming to discover multiple binding specificities of protein complexes or even whole mixtures of proteins at once. Such an experimental setup would mean an even greater number of true motifs to be identified and, generally, much more data to be processed, demanding not only better sensitivity but also adequate computational efficiency of methods employed. Significant effort has already been put into the development of software methods for peptide data processing. Part of these tools aim to process problem specific data, e.g. to predict binding targets of MHC molecules. These approaches utilize various techniques, including hidden Markov models (), Gibbs sampling () and artificial neural networks (). It has been shown that domains interacting with short peptides are often poly specific which leads to correlations between residue positions of recognized motifs (). Therefore, even for a single recognition domain, it is necessary to capture these correlations, which can be done either directly, with the use of, e.g. artificial neural networks (), or indirectly, by describing one motif with correlated positions by several motifs with uncorrelated positions (). The second approach is implemented in tools using multiple position weight matrices (also known as position specific scoring matrices) to represent multiple specificity profiles obtained by various techniques, e.g. mixture model optimization () or Gibbs sampling (). These tools try to be versatile and allow for peptide data from any biological source to be processed, but may require some prior data knowledge, such as the number of clusters to identify. Although tools mentioned above perform well on smaller datasets of up to thousands of sequences, they have not been designed to process datasets orders of magnitude larger. In this article, we address this issue by introducing Hammock, a novel software tool for peptide sequence clustering. Hammock uses profile HMMs for precise computational representation of sequence motifs and is based on the idea of progressive cluster growth. The three key properties of this approach are (i) the ability to process very large datasets, (ii) the ability to identify multiple distinct motifs within one dataset and (iii) versatility, as no limits are put on the origin of the data, and no prior data knowledge is required.

discussion we presented hammock a software tool for short peptide sequence clustering. The tool is able to cluster large amounts of data containing noise and to produce multiple sequence alignments of resulting clusters. The main motivation to create Hammock was to provide the ability of processing datasets originating from large scale screening of combinatorial peptide libraries, such as phage display. Nevertheless, the tool is universal and no limits are put on the origin or format of processed data (Hammock accepts input in three formats including fast a and no prior data knowledge, such as the. A summary of the results obtained by running Hammock, MUSI and the Gibbs sampling tool on the SH3 and the antibodies datasets number of clusters to identify, is needed. Therefore, Hammock is applicable for a range of other data sources, such as variable regions of lymphocyte receptors or viral proteins. It accepts virtually any set of peptide sequences as input. We performed a pilot large scale phage display experiment which shows the way future experiments based on combinatorial peptide libraries could take. We demonstrated that Hammock is capable of processing data originating from such an experiment and provide valuable biological insights, even when the data contain noise. We also demonstrated Hammock's time requirements on datasets of various sizes. Compared with existing tools, Hammock is much faster and can process datasets orders of magnitude larger, while it achieves the best quality of clustering results. Another difference is that with default parameters, Hammock may remove many sequences from the result, if they do not fit any cluster well. This feature is beneficial in the case of large and noisy datasets and can be utilized by using Hammock as a de-noising tool. On the other hand, in the case of small and clean datasets containing subtle sequence motifs only, this behavior may not be desired. It can be changed by parameter tuning, but we estimate that for such cases, some of more computationally intensive methods, such as Gibbs sampling, may be more suitable. There are a number of parameters allowing the user to influence clustering results. In this article, Hammock was shown to perform well with default parameters, but parameter tuning will often be desirable to accommodate the diverse nature of input data and the diverse spectrum of biological questions that require answering. If a strong motif and less noise is present in the dataset, or coarse grained clustering is desired, cluster merging and extension thresholds should be lowered. If a large number of small and specialized clusters is needed, thresholds should be increased. Hammock comes as a standalone program, as well as a tool for the Galaxy toolbox. Galaxy provides a GUI, server functionalities and also an online storage called the Galaxy tool shed (), which allows any Galaxy server administrator or local instance user to install Hammock with all its dependencies just by virtually one click. The Galaxy implementation makes Hammock more user friendly and allows for broad community of non expert users to use it easily. In conclusion, Hammock satisfies the need for extremely large peptide datasets to be processed and thus allows for novel types of experiments based on data from various sources to be performed. The user friendly Galaxy implementation gives the possibility to use this tool to a broad spectrum of potential users hammock peptide clustering
