Humans are exposed to diverse hazardous chemicals daily. Although an exposure to these chemicals is suspected to have adverse effects on human health, mechanistic insights into how they interact with the human body are still limited. Therefore, acquisition of curated data and development of computational biology approaches are needed to assess the health risks of chemical exposure. Here we present h expo chem a tool based on environmental chemicals and their bio activities on human proteins with the objective of aiding the qualitative exploration of human exposure to chemicals. The chemical protein interactions have been enriched with a quality scored human protein protein interaction network, a protein protein association network and a chemical chemical interaction network, thus allowing the study of environmental chemicals through formation of protein complexes and phenotypic outcomes enrichment. Availability: h expo chem is available at http://www.cbs.dtu.dk/ services hexpochem10
introduction humans in their daily lives, are exposed to diverse hazardous chemicals through their environment, and it has been recognized as an important component in the interplay between genes, lifestyle diet natural environmental exposure and disease etiology (). Hazardous chemicals are present in everything from food to consumer products to industrial effluents. However, knowledge about their mechanisms of action within the human body is still limited. As large scale databases on chemical toxicity, i.e. ACToR () and the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD;), are being assembled, investigation of the relationship between environmental chemicals and human diseases can be investigated much more systematically, not solely at the molecular level but also at the cellular and systems level. For example, integration of chemical toxicology within systems biology using protein protein interaction (PPI) and protein protein association network pp an has been suggested to allow previously uncharacterized connections between chemical compounds and diseases to be revealed (). Here, we present h expo chem a server with the aim to explore chemicals exposure and their impact on human health. h expo chem is distinct from other tools, as (i) it provides information about the source of the chemical exposure, (ii) it identifies proteins interacting with a chemical and consequently suggests chemical chemical interactions and qualitative cumulative risk of chemical mixtures and (iii) it integrates PPI and pp an data into biological outcomes and environmental diseases using computational biology approaches.
