Motivation: Prediction of interactions between protein residues (contact map prediction) can facilitate various aspects of 3D structure modeling. However, the accuracy of ab initio contact prediction is still limited. As structural genomics initiatives move ahead, solved structures of homologous proteins can be used as multiple templates to improve contact prediction of the major conformation of an unsolved target protein. Furthermore, multiple templates may provide a wider view of the proteins conformational space. However, successful usage of multiple structural templates is not straightforward, due to their variable relevance to the target protein, and because of data redundancy issues. Results: We present here an algorithm that addresses these two limitations in the use of multiple structure templates. First, the algorithm unites contact maps extracted from templates sharing high sequence similarity with each other in a fashion that acknowledges the possibility of multiple conformations. Next, it weights the resulting united maps in inverse proportion to their evolutionary distance from the target protein. Testing this algorithm against CASP8 targets resulted in high precision contact maps. Remarkably, based solely on structural data of remote homologues, our algorithm identified residue residue interactions that account for all the known conformations of calmodulin, a multifaceted protein. Therefore, employing multiple templates, which improves prediction of contact maps, can also be used to reveal novel conformations. As multiple templates will soon be available for most proteins, our scheme suggests an effective procedure for their optimal consideration.

introduction protein structure representations vary in their level of detail from precise atomic resolution models to the coarser contact maps that provide information at the level of the interactions between amino acid residues. Despite its low resolution, contact map representation * To whom correspondence should be addressed. holds advantages for specific applications (). For example, in multiple conformation analysis, whereas structural alignment of conformations requires structural superimposition s contact map representation (which is translation and rotation invariant) allows straightforward comparison of multiple conformations. These advantages motivate the development of algorithms aimed at predicting intramolecular residue residue interactions. These algorithms often do not use any explicit structural information, but instead rely on statistical methods that quantify the correlation between columns in a multiple sequence alignment (MSA), also known as correlated mutation analysis (). Improved performance has been achieved by various machine learning methods that incorporate correlated mutation measures and other features (). Currently, the best performing 'ab initio' contact predictor is nnc on () as determined by the analysis performed during the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP8) (). However, despite the considerable progress, the performance of ab initio contact map prediction methods is still insufficient for most potential applications (). Fortunately, structural information extracted from templates can facilitate contact prediction. Some template based predictors use various approaches to construct 3D models of the target, then extract a contact map from each model, and finally produce the consensus contact map (). The rationale behind this approach is that a consensus of many inaccurate models will have a much higher reliability than predictions that are based on any single model. Other template based predictors implement machine learning techniques to incorporate contact map information extracted from several templates (, c). Whereas template based structure prediction may allow more accurate models, it has an intrinsic drawback: the template captures the protein in a single conformation. However, the existence of an ensemble of conformations is often important for the function, interact ability and evolvability of proteins (). In this study, we suggest that taking into account multiple templates offers two opportunities: (i) the ability to improve contact map

discussion in structural biology, the ability to represent a protein as a contact map is instrumental. For example, contact map representation is useful for the identification of structural motifs () and for quantification of structural alignment (). Recently, prediction of intramolecular helix helix interactions, which was based on predicted contact maps, enabled the design of biologically active peptides that hold therapeutic promise in cancer and inflammation (). In addition, several groups suggested approaches for reconstructing 3D models from contact maps (, b;). Other studies use predicted contact maps as constraints in 3D modeling to enhance convergence to the best model (), to refine the created models () or to eliminate incorrect models after the modeling process is completed (). In the current study, we suggest an approach for combining structural data from several templates to enhance contact map prediction of novel proteins. The basic idea is that tools that capture a wider view of the protein conformational space can provide useful insights on the contact map level, and serve as a better starting point for downstream analysis involving contact maps (e.g. 3D modeling). Indeed, as structural genomics initiatives move ahead (), it has become more likely to find at least one structural template for most proteins (). Furthermore, as revealed in Supplementary, many proteins already have at least two potential templates. The contact map predicted by the WMC algorithm succeeded in two different tests: WMC exhibits better performance than any other contact prediction method when evaluated against a single conformation (as done in casp8 and Supplementary Figs S5 and S7), and it also enables the prediction of a united contact map that considers the multiple conformations that a protein can adopt (as demonstrated for human calmodulin;). This study suggests that the performance of template based contact prediction methods can be improved significantly by using information extracted from multiple templates. A similar conclusion was suggested for the case of 3D modeling (). Several methods such as Modeller (;) and swiss model () utilize structural constraints derived from a template, or multiple templates, to assist 3D modeling. The dynamic nature of proteins, as exemplified by the variation of intramolecular contacts observed in different conformations () pose the challenge of predicting contacts in each of the different conformations. Our study suggests a scheme for template based contact prediction that
