The growing number of meta genomic studies in medicine and environmental sciences is creating increasing demands on the computational infrastructure designed to analyze these very large datasets. Often, the construction of ultra-fast and precise taxonomic classifiers can compromise on their sensitivity (i.e., the number of reads correctly classified). Here we introduce CLARK-S, a new software tool that can classify short reads with high precision, high sensitivity and high speed. Availability: CLARK-S is freely available at

introduction one of the primary goals of meta genomic studies is to determine the taxonomical identity of bacteria and viruses in a heterogenous microbial sample (e.g., soil, water, urban environment, human microbio me. This analysis can reveal the presence of unexpected bacteria and viruses in a newly explored microbial habitat, or in the case of the human body, elucidate relationships between diseases and imbalances in the microbio me. Arguably, the most effective and unbiased methods to study these microbial samples is via high throughput sequencing. The associated computational problem is to assign sequenced (short) reads to a taxonomic unit. Several methods and software tools are available, but faster and more accurate algorithms are needed to keep pace with the increasing throughput of modern sequencing instruments. in we introduced CLARK, a taxonomy dependent binning method whose classification speed is currently unmatched. A recent independent evaluation of fourteen taxonomic binning profiling methods (Kraken by Wood and Salzberg, 2014, MEGAN by, and many others) showed that the classification precision of CLARK is comparable (sometimes better) than the state of the art classifiers (). While CLARK's speed and precision are very high, its classification sensitivity (i.e., the fraction of reads that it correctly classifies) can be significantly improved with the methods described next. We recall that CLARK is a km er based method. Briefly, it assigns a read r to a reference genome G if r and G share more discriminative km ers (i.e., km ers that appear exclusively in one reference genome) than other genomes in the database. Here we show that the classification sensitivity can be increased by allowing mismatches between shared km ers in a limited number of (carefully predetermined) positions, while maintaining the requirement for km ers to be discriminative. The idea of allowing mismatches to improve the sensitivity of seed and extend alignment methods was pioneered in with the notion of spaced seed. While spaced seeds have been used in some meta genomic binning profiling methods (e.g., MEGAN), the use of discriminative spaced km ers is novel. Here we describe an extension of the algorithmic infrastructure of CLARK based on spaced seed, called CLARK-S.
