Motivation: The number of bacterial genomes being sequenced is increasing very rapidly and hence, it is crucial to have procedures for rapid and reliable annotation of their functional elements such as promoter regions, which control the expression of each gene or each transcription unit of the genome. The present work addresses this requirement and presents a generic method applicable across organisms. Results: Relative stability of the DNA double helical sequences has been used to discriminate promoter regions from non promoter regions. Based on the difference in stability between neighboring regions, an algorithm has been implemented to predict promoter regions on a large scale over 913 microbial genome sequences. The average free energy values for the promoter regions as well as their downstream regions are found to differ, depending on their GC content. Threshold values to identify promoter regions have been derived using sequences flanking a subset of translation start sites from all microbial genomes and then used to predict promoters over the complete genome sequences. An average recall value of 72% (which indicates the percentage of protein and RNA coding genes with predicted promoter regions assigned to them) and precision of 56% is achieved over the 913 microbial genome dataset. Availability: The binary executable for prom predict algorithm (implemented in PERL and supported on Linux and MS Windows) and the predicted promoter data for all 913 microbial genomes are available at http://nucleix.mbu.iisc.ernet.in/prombase/.

introduction understanding the mechanism that regulates gene expression and identifying the key regulatory elements that aid gene expression is a major challenge in molecular biology. Recent advances in the high throughput genome sequencing has led to an exponential growth in the number of completely sequenced microbial genomes and hence it is essential to have fast, efficient and reliable computational methods to identify, annotate and tabulate the coding regions and non-coding functional elements such as transcription factor binding sites tfbs s promoter and enhancer regions in these microbial genomes. The identification of the location and function of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. promoter regions is very challenging because the promoter regions in genomic sequences very often do not adhere to specific sequence patterns or motifs and are difficult to determine experimentally. Several motif finding algorithms have been developed based on various motif models and their performance has been assessed (). whole genome expression profiles have also led to characterization of bacterial and archaeal transcriptome s (). These data can be used to validate the various promoter and DNA binding site prediction algorithms developed based on sequence motifs () as well as those using structure based properties of DNA (). Most of the methods for the identification of promoter regions are either specific to a particular genome or only aim to compare the properties of promoter sequences with other regions in a general manner. These protocols have not been applied over the entire set of microbial genomes, nor have the predictions been validated on a genomic scale. In particular, most methods are unable to identify promoters for RNA genes. In our algorithm, we have made use of the earlier reported observation that promoter regions in genome sequences have several sequence dependent structural properties such as low stability, high curvature and less bend ability as compared with the flanking genomic sequence (). Among these, lower stability which is calculated as the sum of the free energy of constituent dinucleotide steps is found to be the most ubiquitous physicochemical property of promoter regions (). A scoring function was defined and an algorithm prom predict was developed to predict promoter regions, which used threshold values specific to some select organisms namely Escherichia coli, Bacillus subtilis and Mycobacterium tuberculosis (;). Here, we briefly summarize the modifications and improvements made on prediction methodology of prom predict in order to generalize it for predicting promoter regions in all microbial genomes and possibly even eukaryotic genomes.

conclusion afe of DNA sequence is a well defined property that can be used to distinguish promoter regions in a DNA sequence. The AFE profiles for promoter sequences show a less stable region upstream of the tls s (which are generally in close proximity of the tss s when compared with the flanking genomic sequences. The AFE values in the near vicinity of tss tls as well as in the flanking regions vary depending on the GC composition of the whole region, but the relative stability is maintained. These features have been used to derive threshold values for identifying promoter regions over whole genome sequences. Promoter prediction using tss tls based cut off values yields high %recall (an average of 72%), without significantly affecting the precision (average of 55.8%) when applied to annotation of 913 microbial genomes. The comparison of recall and precision parameters obtained when prom predict is applied to E.coli, b subtilis and m tuberculosis with those obtained using other sequence based methods nn pp and PPP) indicate that overall our method performs better. The algorithm thus appears to be robust and applicable to all prokaryotic genomes regardless of their base composition. The prom predict algorithm and tss tls based cut off values can also be applied to other organisms and preliminary studies to predict promoter regions in plants as well as other eukaryotes show very promising results. Further this method can be combined with sequence motif based methods and used along with structural properties such as curvature and bend ability to improve the identification of promoter regions in genomes.
