Motivation: Bacterial type III secreted (T3S) effectors are delivered into host cells specifically via type III secretion systems (T3SSs), which play important roles in the interaction between bacteria and their hosts. Previous computational methods for T3S protein prediction have only achieved limited accuracy, and distinct features for effective T3S protein prediction remain to be identified. Results: In this work, a distinctive n terminal position specific amino acid composition (Aac) feature was identified for T3S proteins. A large portion (∼50%) of T3S proteins exhibit distinct position specific Aac features that can tolerate position shift. A classifier, bpb aac was developed and trained using Support Vector Machine (SVM) based on the Aac feature extracted using a bi profile Bayes model. We demonstrated that the bpb aac model outperformed other implementations in classification of T3S and non-T3S proteins, giving an average sensitivity of ∼90.97% and an average selectivity of ∼97.42% in a 5-fold cross validation evaluation. The model was also robust when a small size training dataset was used. The fact that the position specific Aac feature is commonly found in T3S proteins across different bacterial species gives this model wide application. To demonstrate the models application, a genome wide prediction of T3S effector proteins was performed for Ralstonia solanacearum, an important plant pathogenic bacterium, and a number of putative candidates were identified using this model. Availability: An R package of bpb aac tool is freely downloadable from: http://biocomputer.bio.cuhk.edu.hk/softwares/BPBAac.

introduction six types of secretion systems have been identified in gram negative bacteria, two of which (type I and type II) have been studied extensively (). The type III secretion system (T3SS) has been widely adopted by different bacteria, such as animal pathogens Salmonella, Shigella and Vibrio, plant pathogens Pseudomonas, Xanthomonas, and Ralstonia, and some symbiotic bacteria such as Rhizobia (). T3SSs play important * To whom correspondence should be addressed. roles in host pathogen interactions that are often mediated by T3S effectors specifically secreted into host cells through the type III secretion conduits (). Previous studies have shown that the first 100 amino acid at the n terminal region may contain the signal peptides and chaperone binding sequences needed to guide the secretion of T3S proteins (). Most known T3S proteins have at least one chaperone, which mediates its secretion through the extremely narrow T3S conduit (). Unlike most other signal peptides, T3S signals are not cleaved after secretion. Due to low sequence similarity and lack of common features among different T3S signal sequences, the established prediction methods used for identifying signal peptides do not apply to T3S signals (). Computational prediction of T3S protein has long been considered to be a particularly difficult challenge. Computational approaches have been attempted to predict T3S proteins based on sequence similarity, consensus patterns, gene adjacent sequence features, etc. (). Different machine learning algorithms, e.g. Naive Bayes (NB), Artificial Neural Network (ANN) and Support Vector Machine (SVM) (), have also been adopted to identify the general signal features. Some important features, including G+C content of the primary DNA sequence, general enrichment and depletion of n terminal amino acid composition (Aac), composition frequency of secondary structure elements (coil, helices or strands) and water accessibility states (exposed or buried) have been identified and used for in silico prediction (). Effective T3, one of the earliest software developed for T3S protein prediction (), explores possible sequence based features exhaustively. In Effective T3, the Aac and property preference within the signal region (not position specific) was represented in two reduced alphabets (), which may lead to loss of signal information buried in individual amino acid. In addition, no position specific features were analyzed in Effective T3. An ANN model proposed by adopts a sliding window technique (with a window width of 25) and an optimal model is obtained based on the signal sequence located within the first 30 amino acids at the n terminal end (). Although this model achieved high selectivity (98%), its sensitivity was rather low (74%). Some drawbacks of the ANN model should page 778 777784
