Motivation: Effective computational methods for peptide protein binding prediction can greatly help clinical peptide vaccine search and design. However, previous computational methods fail to capture key nonlinear high order dependencies between different amino acid positions. As a result, they often produce low quality rankings of strong binding peptides. To solve this problem, we propose nonlinear high order machine learning methods including high order neural networks hon ns with possible deep extensions and high order kernel support vector machines to predict major histocompatibility complex peptide binding. Results: The proposed high order methods improve quality of binding predictions over other prediction methods. With the proposed methods, a significant gain of up to 25–40% is observed on the benchmark and reference peptide datasets and tasks. In addition, for the first time, our experiments show that pre training with high order semi restricted Boltzmann machines significantly improves the performance of feed-forward hon ns. Moreover, our experiments show that the proposed shallow hon n outperform the popular pre trained deep neural network on most tasks, which demonstrates the effectiveness of modelling high order feature interactions for predicting major histo-compatibility complex peptide binding. Availability and implementation: There is no associated distributable software.

introduction complex biological functions in living cells are often performed through different types of protein protein interactions. An important class of protein protein interactions are peptide (i.e. short chains of amino acids mediated interactions, and they regulate important biological processes such as protein localization, endocytosis, post-translational modifications, signalling pathways and immune responses, etc. Moreover, peptide mediated interactions play important roles in the development of several human diseases including cancer and viral infections. Because of the high medical value of peptide protein interactions, a lot of research has been done to identify ideal peptides for therapeutic and cosmetic purposes, which renders in silico peptide protein binding prediction by computational methods an important problem in immuno mics and bioinformatics(). In this article, we propose novel machine learning methods to study a specific type of peptide protein interaction, i.e. the interaction between peptides and major histocompatibility complex class I (MHC I) proteins, although our methods can be readily applicable to other types of peptide protein interactions. peptide mhc I protein interactions are essential in cell mediated immunity, regulation of immune responses, transplant rejection and vaccine design. Therefore, effective computational methods for peptide mhc I binding prediction will significantly reduce cost and time in clinical peptide vaccine search and design. Previous computational approaches to predicting peptide mhc interactions are mainly based on linear or bi-linear models, and they fail to capture key non-linear high order dependencies between different amino acid positions. Although previous kernel support vector machine (SVM) and Neural Network net mhc () approaches can capture nonlinear interactions between input features, they fail to model the direct strong high order interactions between features. As a result, the quality of the peptide rankings produced by previous methods is not good. Producing high quality rankings of peptide vaccine candidates is essential to the successful deployment of computational methods for vaccine design. For this purpose, we need to effectively model direct non-linear high order feature interactions to directly capture interactions between primary (anchor) and secondary amino acid residues involved in the formation of peptide mhc complexes. Deep learning models such as deep neural networks dnn s pre trained with restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) have been successfully applied to handwritten digit classification, embedding, image recognition and many other applications (). But they have never been successfully applied to peptide protein interaction problems. In this article, we propose using high order semi rb ms to pre train a feed-forward high order neural network hon n and propose high order kernel SVM for peptide mhc binding prediction, including identification of mhc binding naturally processed and presented (NPP) and immunogenic peptides t cell epitopes). Our proposed models achieved a significant gain of up to 2540% over the state of the art approach on benchmark and reference peptide datasets and tasks. Furthermore, our shallow hon ns even outperformed popular powerful pre trained dnn s that was applied to model peptide mhc binding prediction for the first time by this work.
