Motivation: Solvent exposure of amino acid residues of proteins plays an important role in understanding and predicting protein structure, function and interactions. Solvent exposure can be characterized by several measures including solvent accessible surface area as a residue depth (RD) and contact numbers (CN). More recently, an orientation dependent contact number called half sphere exposure (HSE) was introduced by separating the contacts within upper and down half spheres defined according to the ca cb hse b vector or neighboring Ca-Ca vectors h sea. h sea calculated from protein structures was found to better describe the solvent exposure over as a CN and RD in many applications. Thus, a sequence based prediction is desirable, as most proteins do not have experimentally determined structures. To our best knowledge, there is no method to predict h sea and only one method to predict hse b. Results: This study developed a novel method for predicting both h sea and hse b spider hse that achieved a consistent performance for 10-fold cross validation and two independent tests. The correlation coefficients between predicted and measured hse b (0.73 for upper sphere, 0.69 for down sphere and 0.76 for contact numbers) for the independent test set of 1199 proteins are significantly higher than existing methods. Moreover, predicted h sea has a higher correlation coefficient (0.46) to the stability change by residue mutants than predicted hse b (0.37) and as a (0.43). The results, together with its easy ca atom based calculation, highlight the potential usefulness of predicted h sea for protein structure prediction and refinement as well as function prediction. Availability and implementation: The method is available at http://sparks

introduction measuring exposure of amino acid residues of proteins to solvent is important for understanding and predicting protein structure, function and interactions (). The most common measure is solvent accessible surface area as a (with applications ranging from protein structure prediction () to protein function prediction (). The inability of as a to discriminate deeply buried residues from those buried just beneath the surface leads to development of residue depth () by averaging the distance to the nearest atom on the protein surface. Both as a and residue depth, however, require precise evaluation of the protein surface in full atomic details that is time consuming. Having a time consuming calculation and requiring an all atomic model limited the usefulness of as a and residue depth in the ab initio prediction of protein structure where protein conformation is often represented by main chain atoms () or only Ca atoms () in initial conformational sampling. Another measure of residue exposure to solvent is contact number (CN), which counts the number of residues within specific distance cut offs. The distances are based on the positions of Ca or Cb atoms. Thus, unlike as a and residue depth, only a coarse grained model is needed for evaluating CNs. Different distance cut offs have been used in earlier studies (). It was shown that CN with a distance cut off between 12 and 14 A  is the best for protein fold recognition (). All above mentioned solvent exposure measures, however, do not contain explicit information regarding the orientation of side chains that are important for functional and structural studies. hamel ry ck designed a new measure by splitting the sphere around the Ca atom into two half spheres along the vector of ca cb atoms (). The half sphere containing the Cb atom was defined as upper and the other as down half spheres. The numbers of Ca atoms enclosed in these two half spheres were named as half sphere Exposure hse up and hse down respectively. In addition, he has substituted the vector ca cb with a pseudo vector generated from the sum of vectors Ca i-1-Ca i and Ca i1-Ca i. This HSE is denoted as h sea (-up and down to distinguish from the HSE calculated based on the ca cb vector (here and hereafter, it will be annotated as hse b. h sea does not require the positions of cb atoms. One advantage of HSE is that its value is independent of amino acid type because it describes a residue's coordination environment rather than a quantity related to its size such as as a and RD. Interestingly, h sea up outperforms other solvent exposure measures including CN, as a relative as a residue depth and the other three HSE definitions hse b up hse b down and h sea down in correlation to changes in protein stability due to mutations and to conservation of amino acid residues (). More recently, HSE was found to be better than as a for prediction of B cell epitopes of proteins from their three dimensional structures (). HSE has also been found useful in many other applications (). Most of these applications obtained HSE based on known protein structures. Because the structures for most proteins are not known experimentally, a sequence based prediction is desirable. Many sequence based methods were developed for predicting as a () and CN (). However, there is no method available for prediction of h sea and only one h sep red for the prediction of hse b (). We found that the correlation coefficients between actual hse b and those predicted by h sep red (up and down, respectively) are less than 0.43 for our dataset of 1199 proteins. One possible factor is that h sep red was trained on a small dataset of 632 proteins and was not tested on independent datasets. Therefore, a more accurate method is clearly needed. Recently, we developed a method called SPIDER 2 () that utilized predicted secondary structures, backbone torsion angles and as a iteratively, in order to improve their accuracies. The method achieved 82% accuracy for secondary structure prediction, 0.76 for the correlation coefficient between predicted and actual solvent accessible surface area, 19 and 30 for mean absolute errors of backbone u and w angles, respectively, and 8 and 32 for mean absolute errors of ca based h and s angles, respectively, for an independent test dataset of 1199 proteins. Here, we expand the iterative technique to the prediction of h sea (-up and down hse b (-up and down and CN by employing a large dataset containing 4590 protein chains. The method was independently tested in a dataset of 1199 proteins and a dataset of 69 proteins from the Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction technique (CASP 11, 2014). As a result, highly accurate and robust prediction was obtained (e.g. a correlation coefficient of 0.73 for hse b up 0.69 for hse b down and 0.76 for contact number on the independent test set). Comparison to two previous methods for contact prediction and hse b confirmed the superior performance of the method obtained. The h sea and hse b predictors are incorporated as a package in SPIDER 2 available at http://sparks-lab.org or downloadable as a standalone package.
