Motivation: Microsatellites are among the most useful genetic markers in population biology. high throughput sequencing of microsatellite enriched libraries dramatically expedites the traditional process of screening recombinant libraries for microsatellite markers. However, sorting through millions of reads to distill high quality polymorphic markers requires special algorithms tailored to tolerate sequencing errors in locus reconstruction, distinguish paralogous loci, rar if y raw reads originating from the same amplicon and sort out various artificial fragments resulting from recombination or concatenation of auxiliary adapters. Existing programs warrant improvement. Results: We describe a microsatellite prediction framework named high ssr for microsatellite genotyping based on high throughput sequencing. We demonstrate the utility of high ssr in comparison to Roche gs assembler on two Roche 454 GS FLX runs. The majority of the high ssr assembled loci were reliably mapped against model organism reference genomes. high ssr de multiplexes pooled libraries, assesses locus polymorphism and implements primer 3 for the design of PCR primers flanking polymorphic microsatellite loci. As sequencing costs drop and permit the analysis of all project samples on next generation platforms, this framework can also be used for direct simple sequence repeats genotyping.

introduction microsatellites or simple sequence repeats (SSRs) are tandemly repeated DNA motifs 26 bp in length that typically harbor high levels of sequence polymorphism. This level of variability has led to widespread use of SSRs in many areas of molecular biology, including applications in forensics and paternity testing (, population genetics and conservation management of biological resources (). Until recently, the major obstacle to SSR use was slow and costly de novo isolation of SSRs for each tax on being investigated. SSR marker development has typically involved fractionation of the genome, enrichment for ssr containing fragments, construction of a clone library from the enriched fraction, Sanger sequencing of clones and informatics analysis to identify ssr containing fragments and PCR primer sites (). The procedure continues with the evaluation of amplification efficiency and polymorphism of each locus. Thus, it entails considerable time and investment to develop the large numbers of SSRs necessary to study patterns of diversification between populations () or to construct genetic maps (). next generation sequencing technologies are revolutionizing the process of SSR discovery by reducing cost and time to a fraction of what was previously needed (), but the millions of raw sequencing reads they produce necessitates in silico automation of SSR prediction and locus classification (). In this article, we present the high ssr framework for SSR discovery and locus development from 454 generated raw data. high ssr facilitates the recognition of SSR motifs, the parsing of MID tagged sequences for identification of multiplexed samples, the identification of unique SSR loci within a sample and the development of PCR primers for the recovered loci. Unlike other methods, high ssr first predicts SSRs for all input sequences and later uses the SSRs as pivots to assemble loci. In other words, it begins by grouping reads based on their SSR motif and proceeds toward locus identification through comparisons of the more complex flanking regions. The approach greatly reduces computational time by eliminating the need for all against all alignments, as implemented in q dd framework (), and therefore permits SSR locus identification and development from millions of reads simultaneously. It also takes advantage of a PostgreSQL database for efficient data management throughout the process. In this article, we evaluate high ssr using multiplexed ssr enriched sequences collected on the Roche 454 gsf lx platform. First (hereafter the 'first run'), we examine two siblings of a non model butterfly of conservation concern eu phy dry as an icia cloudcroft i because previously reported Lepidoptera SSR primers (*To whom correspondence should be addressed. failed for their genotyping. Next (hereafter the 'second run'), we evaluate the performance of high ssr in a multiplexed experiment of 60 species including mosquito, cress plant and chestnut blight fungus (Aedes aegypti, Arabidopsis thaliana and cry phone ctr i a parasitica, respectively) for which there are published genomes and also nine populations of eu phy dry as butterfly without reference genomes.

discussion programs predicting SSRs within genomic DNA can be subdivided into several categories according to their underlying approach. RepeatMasker (http://www.repeatmasker.org) and dust simple () are used to mask low complexity fragments in biological sequences to speed up genome wide pattern match searches. STAR () and TROLL () look for predefined tandem motifs in the query sequence. TRF () is a popular SSR prediction and scoring tool that is based on sound probabilistic model. tr db (), in sat db (), tr base (), vntr finder along with poly predict r (O') and UCSC genome browser () use TRF as an internal microsatellite prediction engine. We also adopted TRF for SSR prediction following the observation that raw sequencing reads frequently contain sequencing artifacts and polymorphic variations. high ssr represents an improvement over existing programs for the discovery of SSRs from next generation sequence files high ssr reconstructs more loci than Roche gs assembler new bler majority of the high ssr assembled loci map against the reference genome. All the loci mapped against the reference genomes in unique non-overlapping positions.
