Motivation: Pathogens infect their host and hijack the host machinery to produce more progeny pathogens. Obligate intracellular pathogens, in particular, require resources of the host to replicate. Therefore, infections by these pathogens lead to alterations in the metabolism of the host, shifting in favor of pathogen protein production. Some computational identification of mechanisms of host pathogen interactions have been proposed, but it seems the problem has yet to be approached from the metabolite hijacking angle. Results: We propose a novel computational framework, HiJack , for inferring pathway based interactions between a host and a pathogen that relies on the idea of metabolite hijacking. HiJack searches metabolic network data from hosts and pathogens, and identifies candidate reactions where hijacking occurs. A novel scoring function ranks candidate hijacked reactions and identifies pathways in the host that interact with pathways in the pathogen, as well as the associated frequent hijacked metabolites. We also describe host pathogen interaction principles that can be used in the future for subsequent studies. Our case study on Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb) revealed pathways in human eg. carbohydrate metabolism, lipids metabolism and pathways related to amino acids metabolism that are likely to be hijacked by the pathogen. In addition, we report interesting potential pathway interconnections between human and Mtb such as linkage of human fatty acid biosynthesis with Mtb biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids, or linkage of human pentose phosphate pathway with lipopolysaccharide biosynthesis in Mtb.

introduction metabolism is an aggregation of chemical reactions utilized by cellular processes to generate vital metabolites for survival and growth. Metabolic networks are organized in pathways where reactions are connected to each other, meaning that substrates (input molecules) catalyzed by enzymes are transformed to products (output molecules;). These networks are represented as graphs. The available information consists of metabolites, enzymes, genes and relevant annotations, usually coming from experiments in model organisms (e.g. E. coli) and archived in repositories such as KEGG (), ecocyc metacyc () and aMaze (). Data that harbours the relevant information enables the development of computational methods that identify interconnections between cellular processes, with a focus on metabolic pathway inference. One stream of methods targets synthetic biology and pathway reconstruction. Algorithms such as cmp f (), mrs d (), Metabolic PathFinding () and the FMM web server () take as input pairs of source and target metabolites, and search for routes in the metabolic network that satisfy specific constraints such as shortest distance between source and target or, minimal switching from one pathway to another. Another stream of methods targets inference of complex regulatory modules given sets of gene expression profiles (). The aforementioned methods opened new routes for investigating interactions between metabolic processes, simplifying functional mechanisms and deciphering relationships between genes, chemical reactions and metabolites using data from a single organism. However, studying the interplay between two different organisms that interact (host and pathogen) and inferring relationships between them is a more challenging problem. In addition, host pathogen interactions are important for understanding infection mechanisms and developing better prevention and treatment strategies of infectious diseases. However, up to this point, state of the art computational methods for studying host pathogen interactions have aimed primarily at identifying host pathogen protein protein interactions (), rather than at the metabolic pathway level. Pathogens have the ability to survive and populate inside a host under extremely hostile conditions by invading the host's immune response system (). It is also well established that pathogens, upon infection, hijack some of the host's functional processes to produce nutrients required for survival (). Thus, inferring pathways in the pathogen that are likely to interact with pathways in the host, based on the idea of hijacking metabolites or nutrients, is a novel and promising direction for studying host pathogen interactions. We propose Hi-Jack, a novel computational framework for inferring metabolic pathway interactions between hosts and pathogens based on the idea of metabolite hijacking. Hi-Jack searches for chemical reactions required for a pathogen's growth that satisfy certain metabolite nutrient acquisition criteria. Input to the algorithm is the metabolic network of a host organism and the metabolic network of a pathogen. Both metabolic networks are represented as directed graphs, and graph theoretic metrics as well as graph statistics are collected to rank pathways according to their significance in hijacking interactions. The same ranking schema is used to identify chemical compounds that are candidate targets of hijacking by the pathogen, as well as chemical reactions of great interest, accompanied by their corresponding pathway details. As a proof of concept, we studied Mycobacterium tuberculosis (Mtb), and we applied Hi-Jack to identify important metabolic pathway interactions with human. We focused on Mtb since it is an 'ancient' intracellular bacterium (meaning that tuberculosis is an old disease in terms of historical documentation) responsible for $2.5 million deaths per year (). Mtb is also known for its ability to manipulate phagosome to resist destruction by macrophages. It is a pathogen extremely resistant to drugs, and development of anti-tuberculosis drugs remains an important health problem worldwide. Hi-Jack analysis revealed that in human, pathways related to amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism and metabolism of lipids are more likely to be hijacked by Mtb. Strong examples are fatty acid biosynthesis, pentose phosphate pathway, purine metabolism and arginine and proline metabolism. On the Mtb side, fatty acid biosynthesis, purine metabolism and biosynthesis of unsaturated fatty acids are ranked higher in our list of pathways. Moreover, we found chemical compounds that are frequent targets of hijacked chemical reactions in human. Hijacking of carbohydrates and lipids is in agreement with evidence coming from the literature, which indicates that Mtb under very hostile conditions in the host, switches to lipids as an alternative source of energy (). The analysis also revealed that Mtb often hijacks compounds from human to produce metabolites linked to cell wall construction. The evidence for the Hi-Jack predictions mentioned above include the following principles: (i) proportion of pathways that contain computationally predicted host pathogen pp is (ii) proportion of pathways that contain genes required for bacterium optimal growth; (iii) tissue specificity of the hijacked pathways in the host and (iv) linkage of the predicted pathways with known drug targets. Our validation principles and some findings coming from literature confirmed the initial hypothesis and indicate that Hi-Jack has the potential to infer pathway based host pathogen interactions and identify metabolites likely to be hijacked by the pathogens. To our knowledge, this is the first study that utilizes metabolic pathway data from both host and pathogen metabolisms and ranks candidate interconnections at the pathway level based on their global significance in the phenomenon of hijacking vital metabolites. Also, the proposed validation principles have high potentials to be applied in future studies on host pathogen interactions.

conclusion we proposed Hi-Jack, a novel computational framework for inferring metabolic pathway associations between host and pathogen the framework defines a metabolite hijacking hypothesis and deploys a simple filtering algorithm to rank host pathogen interaction pathways based on the idea of metabolite acquisition by the pathogen. We also proposed basic principles of hijacking interactions that support our results by different levels of confidence, applicable in future studies as a case study, we focused on Mycobacterium tuberculosis, and we revealed possible mechanisms that support pathogen growth and survival. We found that amino acid metabolism, carbohydrate metabolism, and pathways related to metabolism of lipids are top ranked pathways for both human and Mtb. For Mtb, frequent pathways are also related to lipid and glycero phospholipid metabolism, as well as biosynthesis of fatty acids. In addition, our predictions are supported by computational evidence, viz. host pathogen ppi support, significant number of essential genes for optimal growth and known drug targets. Surprisingly, 91% of all ranked pathways in Mtb are supported by at least one drug target. In addition tissue specificity analysis for lung tissue revealed that the top ranked human pathways have a lot of expressed genes and thus, hosting hijacking phenomena is possible. Nonetheless, there is still space for improvements: (i) Integrating metabolic network data from both KEGG and MetaCyc may improve the quality of the results. (ii) We are planning to study more pathogens like M. leprae, M. ulcerans and H. influenzae which appear to have very different growth requirements, meaning that pathways required for optimal growth, enzymes and transportation mechanisms are different from those in Mtb. (iii) Refining the hijacking hypothesis by searching for compounds that satisfy a predefined similarity threshold as defined by a compound similarity metric like Tanimoto coefficient is very interesting extension. d/ From the software development perspective, the implementation of a more general algorithm that identifies hijacking points given an arbitrary number of steps away from the targeted reaction is an interesting idea for the future.
