Motivation: The use of DNA

introduction microbes mediate almost every conceivable biological process on the planet. It is estimated that about 10 30 bacterial and archaeal cells are involved in these tremendous metabolic potentialities (). To access to this wide metabolic diversity, environmental functional gene arrays f gas are high throughput tools which allow analyzing the presence or the expression of thousands of genes encoding key enzymes involved in many metabolic process in only one experiment. However, designing * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. DNA microarray probes to encompass the full diversity of gene family sequences encountered in nature and not yet identified is still one of the most difficult challenges. In addition, the difficulty to obtain sufficient nucleic acid materials for microarray studies from environmental samples requires the development of highly sensitive probes. Currently, the most complete FGA available to monitor bacterial metabolism in complex ecosystems is geo chip () with a latest version covering 47 000 gene variants from more than 290 gene categories (). geo chip has already demonstrated its power in assessing in situ bacterial activity, reinforcing the idea that functional microarray are an efficient approach (). However, the main problem that must be faced for functional microarray applications is the complexity of the oligonucleotide design step which hinders their development. Many parameters such as probe length, melting temperature (T m ), %GC, complexity or still potential cross hybridizations evaluation (percent similarity and identity stretch between probe and non targeted sequences) must be taken into account to ensure the selection of the oligonucleotides offering the best compromise between specificity and sensitivity (). Fortunately, numerous bioinformatics tools, which estimate most of these parameters, have been developed to perform this crucial probe design step (). Currently, the most popular software for FGA probe design are oligo wiz (), comm oligo (also named oligo star () or YODA (). However, these softwares were developed for use on whole genome data or on specific sets of genes (). So, cross hybridization research is performed only against a reduced set of sequences (;). Thus, probe specificity must be checked against databases containing a very large set of sequences while staying within a reasonable time for the design. A second critical obstacle when dealing with environmental studies is the difficulty to design probes able to cover all the gene variants encoding proteins having a same function (). Although Hierarchical Probe Design () and pro design () softwares propose clustering

discussion his pod takes into account a greater number of criteria to select more efficient probes () compared with most popular softwares used for oligonucleotide probe design for f gas (), The entire software suite is available through web services. To produce the DNA probes, users can enter their sequences of interest and set the required parameters. Furthermore, our software can be applied to both, individual nucleotide gene sequences and degenerated consensus sequences, produced by multiple alignments of gene sequences belonging to a same gene family. Therefore, the user has the possibility to identify specific probes either at the gene or at the gene family level. For this last case, design methods previously reported are based on sequence clustering () or on the use of mismatch probes (), which constrain the selection of probes in the most conserved regions. In contrast, his pod allows considering regions generating the least number of cross hybridizations even if they are more variable within the gene family. Because all sequence combinations for each degenerate probe are re-created for the DNA microarray synthesis, some of them could detect new gene sequences not yet available in international databases. Furthermore, as the number of probes per array is no longer a constraint, given the development of very high density microarrays (several million probes proposed by nimble gen designing microarray to encompass the full diversity of sequence variants encountered in the environment or in specific metabolic process is now feasible. By this aspect, the his pod method is then a pioneer explorative approach to the design of probes dedicated to f gas. Today, the only probe design software described to allow an exploratory study of environmental samples using degenerate probes is phyl array (), but it is dedicated to phylogenetic oligonucleotide microarrays po as. cross hybridizations with non-target sequences can be a significant contribution to the hybridization signal, potentially introducing substantial error. According to, they represent one of the most critical limits of DNA microarray approach when dealing with complex environmental samples of unknown composition. However, over the past two decades, new sequencing technology developments and the trend of declining sequencing costs, allowed an exponential growth of public DNA sequence data. Data analysis has revealed an extraordinary gene diversity and a huge nucleic sequence polymorphism for all investigated environmental microbial habitats especially by meta genomics approach (). This extraordinary resource can now be mined for DNA microarrays applications to assess the potential cross hybridizations. Currently, his pod is the most suitable tool to take into account this wide diversity to limit cross hybrid ations with a test of specificity conducted against env ex base a large and representative database of all prokaryotic, fungal and environmental sequences. This database includes all known potential CDSs and their putative UTRs. However, as the his pod algorithm extracts all probes by incrementing the constant defined probe size in a window along the sequence, the time required for evaluating their specificity can be quite long (several hours per gene) especially for highly degenerate oligonucleotide probes. So, his pod is greatly dependent on the performance of mpi blast program used in the specificity test step. Currently, we are focusing our efforts to increase the program performance by deploying it on a larger cluster infrastructure and on a computing grid. Given the exponential increase in the number of sequences in databases, the DNA microarrays will be upgraded regularly with novel probes allowing the targeting of either new variants of the targeted genes or genes newly discovered. In addition, env ex base component of the his pod software will be updated regularly. An Page: 647 641648 of the database structure, consisting in a split into multiple sub databases according to particular ecosystems (soil, marine, freshwater, atmosphere, etc.), is also under development. It will provide an enhanced usability of the program, with a faster speed and an elimination of unneeded cross hybridization information. Currently, no known software offers the opportunity to test for specificity on such a large database. Furthermore, no tested software (i.e. oligo wiz comm oligo and Yoda) is able to integrate this database to perform the specificity test with it. This is probably due to an inadequate performance optimization of these algorithms which systematically crashed when using a large database. In addition, the clustering of cross hybridization sequences using blast clust tool is another original approach proposed by our software to define gene sequence families that may induce potential cross hybridizations and so to facilitate selection of the most appropriate probes. Probe sensitivity is another crucial parameter, particularly for environmental studies, where biomass can be low. So, design process allowing the selection of oligonucleotide probes need to be optimized. Generally, microarray based hybridization presents a low detection limit. For example, 50mer probe FGA detection limit was estimated to be in the range of 510 ng of gDNA in the absence of background DNA and was about 10-fold lower in its presence (). In this last case, target sequences were extrapolated to represent genomic material from 5% of the total community of an environment (). For mRNA, no detection limit is currently assessed in environmental sample. It remains hard to solve the sensitivity issue despite the existence of some protocols bringing those limits down (). In this study, we demonstrated the ability of probes designed with his pod to detect mRNA retrieved from environmental samples with a high sensitivity (e.g. 55987 copies ng of RNA for pce a (). Furthermore, expression profiles obtained were comparable with those of qrt pcr assays suggesting the semi-quantitative aspect of the microarray elaborated using this software. We demonstrate that the microarray developed in this study provides a powerful tool to monitor chlorinated ethene biodegradation capabilities in complex environments. This tool will be now used for a wider study incorporating several industrial polluted sites where a more or less complete degradation of chlorinated solvents was observed. However, certain limitations still remain. Indeed, numerous authors have highlighted the problem of signal variability obtained with probes targeting different regions of the same gene (), certainly when linked with probe thermodynamic properties and or target secondary structure. The function of these parameters is still difficult to evaluate and to visualize in the microarray results. Although their calculation is time consuming, they will be taken into account in the next version of his pod. In this study, the new software was shown to be particularly accurate to design probes dedicated to microbial ecology. The experimental validation of the oligonucleotide probe set designated using his pod was performed with mRNA extracted from a pc etc e contaminated aquifer where pollutant biodegradation was observed (Site description and chemical analysis in Supplementary Material 2 and). These pollutants undergo biodegradation through two different pathways: (i) use as an electron accept or (reductive dechlorination) () and (ii) co metabolism where degradation of the chlorinated solvent is simply fortuitous and provides no benefit to the microorganism (), the first being the major process for the natural biodegradation of chlorinated solvents. In this study, the most recognized gene sequences involved in these two metabolic processes where extracted from international databases and were used for probe design. The microarray presented here is, to our knowledge the most complete high throughput molecular tool describing these pathways with 295 probes covering 54 sequence variants of 21 genes and in addition with an explorative side. By comparison, geo chip mentioned 35 probes targeting genes characteristics of pc etc e biodegradation pathways (). In the context of industrial site rehabilitation, it could be also applied as a diagnostic tool to detect microbial activities before, during and after bioremediation treatment. Moreover, this explorative high throughput tool could be used to monitor the distribution of these catabolic pathways along non contaminated ecosystems in order to better understand the origin of these fascinating microbial functions.

conclusion in summary, we present a novel probe design software called his pod dedicated to FGA developments. his pod allows probe design at both specific gene and gene family levels through an original approach based on degenerated probe determination. Moreover, specificity test was conducted against a large formatted database composed of all known CDS retrieved from the taxonomic divisions PRO, FUN and ENV of the EMBL databank in order to avoid cross hybridization events. Finally, the user friendly web interface developed simplifies greatly the user access to the program.
