Determining the functional relevance of identified sequence variants in cancer is a prerequisite to ultimately matching specific therapies with individual patients. This level of mechanistic understanding requires integration of genomic information with complementary functional analyses to identify oncogenic targets and relies on the development of computational frameworks to aid in the priori-tization and visualization of these diverse data types. In response to this, we have developed hit walker which prioritizes patient variants relative to their weighted proximity to functional assay results in a protein protein interaction network. It is highly extensible, allowing incorporation of diverse data types to refine prioritization. In addition to a ranked list of variants, we have also devised a simple shortest path based approach of visualizing the results in an intuitive manner to provide biological interpretation. Availability and implementation: The program, documentation and example data are available as an R package from www bio dev labor g hit walker html
introduction the advent of next generation sequencing technology such as that available from Illumina provides an unprecedented ability to interrogate individual genomes (). Accompanying technologies such as the ability to multiplex samples, as well as efficient sequence capture technologies () further enable targeted regions of the genome to be re sequenced at a reasonable cost per sample. In this manner, specific genes or whole exo mes can be interrogated to identify variants potentially having a deleterious impact on protein coding regions. Efficacy of this approach for clinical research has been shown through the discovery of variants underlying simple Mendelian disorders, as well as more complicated variants mutations involved in cancer and potentially complex traits (). Because many variants are produced for a given sample, mechanistic and population genetic assumptions are often used to reduce the set of variants (). For instance, limiting attention to non-synonymous single nucleotide variations, as well as using the use of variant databases, such as dbSNP () and the 1000 genomes project (The 1000 Genomes Project), enables researchers to focus on low frequency variants that are potentially damaging. However, even after these filters, it is relatively infrequent that a researcher is left with a manageable set of variants for biological validation. For cancer cells derived from a given patient, functional assays can be performed that allow researchers to determine the relevance of genes to cell viability, such as through the use of targeted siRNA screens (). These gene targets can be scored using a binary or quantitative encoding that indicates outlier status relative to other samples. Similarly, screens that measure the sensitivity of a patient's cells to a panel of small molecules can be scored relative to genes using the known gene targets of each compound (). These functional assays by themselves provide some information to researchers on the identity of the signalling pathways that are required for cancer growth and survival. However, they do not necessarily indicate the mutated gene(s) leading to dysregulation of these signalling pathways, as the true causative variant(s) could be found in any gene with capacity to regulate the pathway. To prioritize variants detected in our cohort of leukaemia patients relative to our functional assay results, we have devised the R and SQL framework hit walker using a protein protein interaction (PPI) network as a backbone. In addition to a ranked list of variants, hit walker also allows for simple visualization of the relevant subnetwork, as well as overlaying relevant meta-data.

discussion our software provides a flexible framework for prioritizing variants relative to functional assay outcomes and a PPI network or other association graph using an RWR algorithm. In addition, we include visualization of key subnetwork members to aid in biological interpretation. Prioritized variants can then be followed up using Sanger sequencing, as well as additional experiments to categorize their phenotypic effect. Software developers can easily modify queries and R functions for their in house databases and functional assays. Although MySQL is our database of choice, any other rdb i supported database would work with minor modifications to the R code.
