Motivation: Cancer cells are often characterized by epigenetic changes, which include aberrant histone modifications. In particular, local or regional epigenetic silencing is a common mechanism in cancer for silencing expression of tumor suppressor genes. Though several tools have been created to enable detection of histone marks in chips eq data from normal samples, it is unclear whether these tools can be efficiently applied to chips eq data generated from cancer samples. Indeed, cancer genomes are often characterized by frequent copy number alterations: gains and losses of large regions of chromosomal material. Copy number alterations may create a substantial statistical bias in the evaluation of histone mark signal enrichment and result in under detection of the signal in the regions of loss and over detection of the signal in the regions of gain. Results: We present hm can (Histone modifications in cancer), a tool specially designed to analyze histone modification chips eq data produced from cancer genomes. hm can corrects for the gc content and copy number bias and then applies Hidden Markov Models to detect the signal from the corrected data. On simulated data, hm can out-performed several commonly used tools developed to analyze histone modification data produced from genomes without copy number alterations. hm can also showed superior results on a chips eq data-set generated for the repressive histone mark H3K27me3 in a bladder cancer cell line. hm can predictions matched well with experimental data (qPCR validated regions) and included, for example, the previously detected H3K27me3 mark in the promoter of the DLEC1 gene, missed by other tools we tested. Availability: Source code and binaries can be downloaded at http:// wwwcbrckaustedusahm can implemented in Cþþ.

introduction chips eq is a combination of chromatin immunoprecipitation and next generation sequencing of extracted DNA fragments (). The chips eq technique is now widely used for identification of epigenetic marks such as histone variants and different covalent modifications of histone tails (). Common histone modifications include lysine acetylation, methylation, ubiquitylation and sumo y lation serine and threonine phosphorylation and arginine methylation (). Histone marks help partitioning the genome into euchromatin, which is accessible for transcription, and heterochromatin. For instance, tri methylation of lysine 9 of histone 3 (H3K9me3) and tri methylation of lysine 27 of histone 3 (H3K27me3) are marks associated with peri centromeric heterochromatin and regions of polycomb mediated repression (). Also, histone modifications and histone variants are often associated with distinct biological functions. For instance, tri methylation of lysine 36 of histone 3 (H3K36me3) is a mark of transcription elongation; tri methylation of lysine 4 of histone 3 (H3K4me3) marks active or poised promoters; mono methylation of lysine 4 of histone 3 (H3K4me1) together with acetylation of lysine 27 of histone 3 correlates with active enhancers (). Some marks are narrow and cover 110 consecutive nucleosomes (e.g. H3K4me1 or H3K4me3), whereas others (e.g. H3K27me3 and H3K36me3) can cover large genomic regions, from tens to hundreds of kilobases in length. Although genetic modifications remain the main cause of cancer development, epigenetic modifications may also play a role in cancer development and progression (). DNA methylation and or histone methylation and deacetylation can be observed either as local modifications or along large genomic regions. When regional, these modifications may cause chromatin remodeling and silence expression of most genes in these regions. This phenomenon is often called regional epigenetic silencing (RES) or long range epigenetic silencing l res. resl res has been shown to affect gene expression in many cancer types including bladder cancer (), colorectal cancer (), breast cancer () and prostate cancer (). Because of the reversible nature of epigenetic modifications, a substantial effort is being made to develop anticancer drugs able to interfere with the activity of enzymes involved in histone modification (Many tools have been developed to facilitate the analysis of histone modification data obtained with the chips eq technique. Some tools are designed to detect narrow peaks of type of H3K4me3 (). Other methods are able to identify epigenetic marks covering large genomic regions; this is mostly done through clustering (), gene by gene quantification (), Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) () and linear signal noise models (). However, there is no tool specifically developed to detect histone modifications in cancer genomes that takes into account copy number alterations. As we show later, most of the tools tend to detect more signals in the regions of gain and less signal in the regions of loss. gc content is known to influence read depth in both illumina and solid generated datasets (). A possible difference in gc content dependencies between ChIP and control datasets can result in false predictions of enrichment in histone modification marks (). Here we present a tool designed to identify histone modifications in genomes with large copy number alterations. hm can (Histone Modifications in Cancer) corrects for copy number bias and for gc content bias. It then uses HMMs to detect regions rich in histone modifications. We chose to compare hm can with three tools commonly used to detect histone modifications with chips eq data: cc at (), MACS () and sic er (). We show that hm can is able to detect signal enrichment in simulated cancer genomes better than these three tools. Only hm can and cc at did not show copy number bias. Separately, on an experimental chips eq dataset of H3K27me3 in a bladder cancer cell line, hm can provided better results than cc at
discussion we have developed hm can a tool for detection of histone modifications in cancer samples using chips eq data. On simulated data, hm can demonstrated better accuracy of prediction compared with the other tools we tested hm can was originally developed to identify broad signals such as H3K27me3 or H3K36me3. However, it can be also applied to a class of histone modifications with narrow signal (e.g. H3K4me3). The output of hm can includes information about peak maxima to facilitate functional annotation of peaks. The output also includes normalized density profiles (, top), which is convenient for inspecting predicted regions with histone marks and can be also used for producing figures for publication. The run time of hm can is significantly longer than for the majority of other tools (e.g. MACS, cc at or sic er and may require up to 1 h on a standard PC (Supplementary). Running iterative HMMs is the most time consuming step. However, we believe that the greater accuracy of hm can demonstrated in this study compensates for a longer run time. In some cases, it might be interesting to detect differential histone modifications using two chips eq datasets generated for two different conditions. hm can does not as yet contain such a function, and we advise users to apply standard tools such as de seq () to the output from hm can
conclusion hm can was specifically developed to analyze histone modification data obtained for cancer genomes. Cancer genomes are
