Motivation: In many organisms, including humans, recombination clusters within recombination hot-spots. The standard method for de novo detection of recombinants at hotspots is sperm typing. This relies on allele specific PCR at single nucleotide polymorphisms. Designing allele specific primers by hand is time consuming. We have therefore written a package to support hotspot detection and analysis. Results: hotspot consists of four programs: asp looks up SNPs and designs allele specific primers; a so constructs allele specific oligos for mapping recombinants; x ov implements a maximum likelihood method for estimating the crossover rate; six, finally, simulates typing data.

introduction understanding recombination is one of the classic problems in biology (). In the past decade, the quantitative underpinnings of the debate about the function of recombination have dramatically improved as a result of population genomics based on genome sequencing. A major result of such studies is that in many organisms, including humans, recombination is localized in recombination hotspots (). Still, direct observation by typing of the products of recombination usually sperm cells is highly desirable to check and refine the results of population genetic inference (). Sperm typing is usually carried out after determining SNPs in a genomic region (). Given a set of SNPs, linkage disequilibrium (LD) can be computed between pairs of them leading to the discovery of LD blocks punctuated by hotspot candidate regions a few kb wide. The best known method for measuring the frequency of crossover at a candidate hotspot is the full crossover assay (), where allele specific primers are designed against SNPs located upstream and downstream of the putative recombination hotspot (ASPs,). Nested sets of phased ASPs are then used in repulsion phase on pools of sperm DNA, such that only molecules affected by a crossover are amplified (). To map the crossover breakpoints, the SNPs of the amplification product are typed using allele specific oligos (ASOs). Recombination results in crossovers as well as non crossovers which are characterized by short, non reciprocal gene conversion tracts. Both types of recombinants can be simultaneously detected by modifying the full crossover assay such that one of the two sets of allele specific primers is replaced by a set of universal primers (). The resulting half crossover assay allows the selective amplification of either haplotype targeted. Recombinant molecules are isolated by sequential a so hybridization to each SNP within the hotspot interval using ASOs complementary to the haplotype not amplified. Under this protocol, hybridization products may still be due to crossovers (, O 1 ). However, any stretch of the haplotype not amplified that is detected without the exchange of flanking markers must be the result of a non crossover event (, O 2 ). SNP annotation and the design of ASPs, ASOs and universal primers are typically done by hand, which is slow and error prone especially when screening many hotspot candidates. We have written the software package hotspot to assist with this.
