Motivation: Some economically important plants including wheat and cotton have more than two copies of each chromosome. With the decreasing cost and increasing read length of next generation sequencing technologies, reconstructing the multiple haplotypes of a polyploid genome from its sequence reads becomes practical. However, the computational challenge in polyploid haplo typing is much greater than that in diploid haplo typing and there are few related methods. Results: This paper models the polyploid haplo typing problem as an optimal poly partition problem of the reads, called the Polyploid Balanced Optimal Partition p bop model. For the reads sequenced from a kpl oid genome, the model tries to divide the reads into k groups such that the difference between the reads of the same group is minimized while the difference between the reads of different groups is maximized. When the genotype information is available, the model is extended to the Polyploid Balanced Optimal Partition with Genotype constraint pbo pg problem. These models are all np hard. We propose two heuristic algorithms, h pop and hp opg based on dynamic programming and a strategy of limiting the number of intermediate solutions at each iteration, to solve the two models, respectively. Extensive experimental results on simulated and real data show that our algorithms can solve the models effectively, and are much faster and more accurate than the recent state of the art polyploid haplo typing algorithms. The experiments also show that our algorithms can deal with long reads and deep read coverage effectively and accurately. Furthermore, h pop might be applied to help determine the ploidy of an organism. Availability: https://github.com/MinzhuXie/H-PoPG Contact:

conclusion with the rapid development of sequencing technologies, reconstructing the multiple haplotypes of a polyploid from DNA sequencing reads is becoming more and more practical. In this paper, we modeled polyploid haplo typing as a combinatorial optimization problem to partition the input reads, called the Polyploid Balanced Optimal Partition p bop problem. Since the problem is np hard we developed a heuristic algorithm h pop for it. When the genotype information is available, we also proposed a genotype constrained version, called pbo pg of the problem and designed a corresponding heuristic algorithm hp opg. Note that these methods are very different from our previous methods for dealing with diploids () since they consider the distance between the consensus haplotypes of different groups while the previous methods for diploids calculates the distance between reads belonging to different groups. We compared our algorithms with three recent state of the art polyploid haplo typing algorithms sd hap hap tree and hap compass on both simulated and real data. Our extensive test results showed that hp opg was generally more accurate in reconstructing haplotypes than sd hap hap tree and hap compass and h pop was able to achieve comparable (though slightly worse) performance without the genotype information. Furthermore, hp opg and h pop ran much faster than sd hap hap tree and hap compass and could effectively handle long reads and deep read coverage. Our experiments on real data also showed that h pop could be used to infer the number of chromosomes of an organism (i.e. its ploidy), since when the parameter k is set smaller than the ploidy of the organism, the MEC rate of h pop would be much larger than the sequencing error rate.
