Heat shock protein information resource hs pir is a concerted database of six major heat shock proteins (HSPs), namely, Hsp70, Hsp40, Hsp60, Hsp90, Hsp100 and small HSP. The HSPs are essential for the survival of all living organisms, as they protect the conformations of proteins on exposure to various stress conditions. They are a highly conserved group of proteins involved in diverse physiological functions, including de novo folding, disaggrega-tion and protein trafficking. Moreover, their critical role in the control of disease progression made them a prime target of research. Presently, limited information is available on HSPs in reference to their identification and structural classification across genera. To that extent, hs pir provides manually curated information on sequence, structure, classification , ontology, domain organization, localization and possible biological functions extracted from UniProt, GenBank, Protein Data Bank and the literature. The database offers interactive search with incorporated tools, which enhances the analysis. hs pir is a reliable resource for researchers exploring structure, function and evolution of HSPs.

introduction heat shock proteins (HSPs) are a specialized group of proteins robustly synthesized in all living organisms in response to various conditions of stress, including elevated temperatures. HSPs are critical for cell survival both constitutively and in times of stress to ensure proper folding of non-native states of proteins (). Based on their nature of functions and molecular mass, HSPs are classified broadly into six major families, namely, Hsp70, Hsp40 j proteins Hsp60 chaperonin s Hsp90, Hsp100 (Clp proteins) and small HSPs. () They function cooperatively by forming an intricate molecular network, thereby maintaining the overall cellular protein homeostasis (). Their diversified nature and vast repertoire of functions have generated a significant interest to deduce an intricate cellular chaperone network and functional crosstalk among major families of HSPs. Presently, cpn db () database exists but contains data only for Hsp60 family. Heat shock protein information resource hs pir provides a comprehensive collection of information on six major HSP families across various genomes, with detailed subclassification based on their domain, structural organization and localization. hs pir also includes sequences that are not yet annotated in UniProt. Additionally, hs pir offers various tools like BLAST () for homology search, CLUSTALW () for multiple sequence alignment, Archaeopteryx () for phylogenetic tree visualization and manipulation and Jmol (http://www.jmol.org/) structural viewer. The database currently holds 10 000 hand curated entries from six kingdoms, covering all the major model organisms and 295 3D structures) to identify domain architecture and associated functional motifs of HSPs. The secondary structural assignments were done using psi pred Version 3.2 (), and subcellular localization and signal peptide regions were predicted using TargetP (), wolf psort () and Psort (). tax on information of each organism was obtained from NCBI Taxonomy database (). Gene ontologies were inferred from UniProtKB (). Experimentally determined 3D structures were retrieved from the PDB (). Available literature references were generated from PubMed; the cross references and identifiers of external databases were also imported.
