Motivation: Visualization and analysis of large numbers of biological images has generated a bottle neck in research. We present HTML5 pivot viewer a novel, open source, platform independent viewer making use of the latest web technologies that allows seamless access to images and associated metadata for each image. This provides a powerful method to allow end users to mine their data.

introduction bioimaging and associated informatics are generating unprecedented amounts of data. New sophisticated imaging techniques yield large, heterogeneous, multidimensional datasets that need to be viewed, analysed, annotated, queried and shared (). Development of automated image analysis methods has been facilitated by various tools such as image j fiji () using the built in macro functions, but when there are large amounts of data and associated images, reviewing and analysing the results is burdensome. There are no powerful and intuitive web tools available that allow filtering and sorting of images based on the derived properties of these images. omer o () provides a comprehensive database for storing and viewing large amounts of images, however, viewing and querying thousands of images using the omer o insight client or omer o web is slow. Microsoft Live Labs Pivot has been used in a neuroimaging setting () but the silver light version, although powerful, required a specific plug-in and was not accessible on all platforms and can not be easily extended. In addition, support for silver light is being phased out. Our goal was to develop an open source extensible viewer specifically designed using the standard HTML5 canvas element and JavaScript technologies. This enables informatic ians to create dynamic and interactive visualizations of the results of image analysis or large image datasets, providing a powerful but simple and intuitive front end that works in any modern web browser. It allows users to see their data, filter, sort and identify relationships based on the metadata supplied for each image. Because the technology is based on open standards, there is potential to integrate with other html5 based libraries, such as D3 (http://d3js.org/), i can plot () for statistical visualization and scrib l () for multiple region genomic visualization.
