Motivation: high throughput screens (HTS) by RNAi or small molecules are among the most promising tools in functional genomics. They enable researchers to observe detailed reactions to experimental perturbations on a genome wide scale. While there is a core set of computational approaches used in many publications to analyze these data, a specialized software combining them and making them easily accessible has so far been missing. Results: Here we describe hts analyzer a flexible software to build integrated analysis pipelines for HTS data that contains over-representation analysis, gene set enrichment analysis, comparative gene set analysis and rich sub-network identification. hts analyzer interfaces with commonly used pre-processing packages for HTS data and presents its results as HTML pages and network plots. Availability: Our software is written in the R language and freely available via the Bioconductor project at http://www.bioconductor .org. Contact:

introduction in recent years several technological advances have pushed gene perturbation screens to the forefront of functional genomics. Combining high throughput screening (HTS) techniques with rich phenotypes enables researchers to observe detailed reactions to experimental perturbations on a genome wide scale. This makes HTS one of the most promising tools in functional genomics. Although the phenotypes in HTS data mostly correspond to single genes, it becomes more and more important to analyze them in the context of cellular pathways and networks to understand how genes work together. Network analysis of HTS data depends on the dimensionality of the phenotypic readout (). While specialized analysis approaches exist for high dimensional phenotyping (e.g.), analysis approaches for low dimensional screens have so far been spread out over diverse softwares and online tools like DAVID () or gene set enrichment analysis g sea. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors here we provide a software to build integrated analysis pipelines for HTS data that contain gene set and network analysis approaches commonly used in many papers (as reviewed by). hts analyzer is implemented by S4 classes in R (R Development Core) and freely available via the Bioconductor project (). The example pipeline provided by hts analyzer interfaces directly with existing HTS pre-processing packages like cell hts2 () or rna it her (). Additionally, our software will be fully integrated in a web interface for the analysis of HTS data () and thus be easily accessible to non programmers
