Motivation: high throughput experimental techniques have produced a large amount of protein protein interaction (PPI) data. The study of PPI networks, such as comparative analysis, shall benefit the understanding of life process and diseases at the molecular level. One way of comparative analysis is to align PPI networks to identify conserved or species specific subnetwork motifs. A few methods have been developed for global PPI network alignment, but it still remains challenging in terms of both accuracy and efficiency. Results: This paper presents a novel global network alignment algorithm , denoted as hub align that makes use of both network topology and sequence homology information, based upon the observation that topologically important proteins in a PPI network usually are much more conserved and thus, more likely to be aligned. hub align uses a minimum degree heuristic algorithm to estimate the topological and functional importance of a protein from the global network topology information. Then hub align aligns topologically important proteins first and gradually extends the alignment to the whole network. Extensive tests indicate that hub align greatly outperforms several popular methods in terms of both accuracy and efficiency, especially in detecting functionally similar proteins. Availability: hub align is available freely for non-commercial purposes at

introduction high throughput experimental techniques such as yeast two hybrid () and protein co-immunoprecipitation () have produced a large amount of protein protein interaction (PPI) data for several organisms such as Homo sapiens () and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (). PPI networks contain a significant amount of information about modular organization of cells and protein functions. Comparative analysis such as alignment of PPI networks can help identify evolutionarily conserved pathways complexes that may be structurally or functionally important and species specific pathways complexes and infer protein functions. Similar to sequence alignment, we can also align PPI networks either locally or globally. Local network alignment (LNA) such as network blast (), ma wish () and align nemo () aims to find small isomorphic subnetworks corresponding to pathways and protein complexes () and thus may yield a many to many mapping between the proteins. These methods search for conserved subnetworks using an alignment graph, in which nodes correspond to groups of orthologous proteins and edges to conserved interactions. These methods mainly differ in building alignment graphs, the definition of dense clusters and search algorithms. Different from LNA, global network alignment (GNA) aims to maximize the overall match between the input networks. Such methods such as iso rank (,b), ma wish migra al (), GHOST (), pi swap () and n et al () are designed for pairwise alignment while others such as network blast grae ml in 2.0 and iso rank n for multiple alignment. In addition to network topology information, all network alignment algorithms excluding n et al and MAGNA () make use of sequence similarity to help improve alignment accuracy. iso rank aligns two PPI networks by exploiting the observation that two proteins are good match if their interacting partners can match well. iso rank n is an extension of iso rank and mainly for multiple network alignment. It applies iso rank to compute the alignment score between each pair of networks, and then employs a pagerank nibble algorithm to cluster all the proteins by their alignment score (). Graemlin2.0 integrates network topology and phylogeny information and uses a hill climbing algorithm to generate alignments (). migra al an improved version of GRAAL, integrates network topology information such as graph let signature and sequence similarity to align two nodes (). GHOST uses graph spectrum to measure the topological similarity of proteins (). Both migra al and GHOST use a seed and extend strategy to build an alignment. migra al fulfills this by solving a weighted bipartite matching, while GHOST by solving a quadratic problem. pi swap refines an alignment generated by other tools such as iso rank. It iteratively swaps the edges in an alignment until reaching an optimum (). MAGNA uses a genetic algorithm to search for the best alignment sara ph and milenko vic milenko vic 2013). n et al aligns two proteins based upon their interacting partners. Current global network alignment methods have two major issues. One is that existing algorithms run slowly, especially in aligning very large PPI networks. The other is that the alignment accuracy is still low. This motivates us to develop a new method for global network alignment to significantly improve both alignment accuracy and computational efficiency. This paper presents a novel global network alignment algorithm, denoted as hub align to align two PPI networks using both network topology and sequence homology information, based upon the observation that topologically and functionally *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com important proteins (such as hubs and bottlenecks) in a PPI network are more conserved and thus, shall be aligned. We use a minimum degree heuristic method to estimate the relative importance of one protein from the global network topology information. Such a score reflects the topological and functional importance of one protein in a PPI network. Then, we use a greedy algorithm to align two proteins based upon the combination of their importance scores and sequence similarity. That is, we align more important proteins first and then gradually less important. Such a procedure is more biologically meaningful and leads to a much faster and more accurate alignment algorithm. We have tested hub align on both prokaryotic and eukaryotic PPI networks, showing that hub align greatly outperforms several popular methods such as iso rank migra al GHOST and pi swap in terms of both alignment accuracy and running time.
