Motivation: protein protein interaction (PPI) plays an important role in understanding gene functions, and many computational PPI prediction methods have been proposed in recent years. Despite the extensive efforts, PPI prediction still has much room to improve. sequence based co-evolution methods include the substitution rate method and the mirror tree method, which compare sequence substitution rates and topological similarity of phylogenetic trees, respectively. Although they have been used to predict PPI in species with small genomes like Escherichia coli, such methods have not been tested in large scale proteome like Homo sapiens. Result: In this study, we propose a novel sequence based co-evolution method, co-evolutionary divergence (CD), for human PPI prediction. Built on the basic assumption that protein pairs with similar substitution rates are likely to interact with each other, the CD method converts the evolutionary information from 14 species of vertebrates into likelihood ratios and combined them together to infer PPI. We showed that the CD method outperformed the mirror tree method in three independent human PPI datasets by a large margin. With the arrival of more species genome information generated by next generation sequencing, the performance of the CD method can be further improved. Availability: Source code and support are available at http://mib.stat.

introduction protein protein interactions (PPI) regulate many fundamental cellular processes (). One key step in understanding the function of a protein is to identify its potential interacting partners (). PPI identification and prediction have become an important topic in recent decades (). Up to date, many experimental methods to identify physical interaction between two proteins have been proposed, including the yeast two hybrid system (), protein fragment complementation assay (), affinity purification mass spectrometry (), protein microarray and fluorescence resonance energy transfer (). The results from these experiments have been deposited in several public databases; for instance, HPRD (), DIP (), IntAct (), bio grid () and MINT (). It has been suggested that there are $300 000 PPI out of a total of $300 000 000 protein pairs in the human proteome (). This estimate does not account for the numerous variations owing to post translation modification or alternative splicing. A number of computational techniques have been proposed to provide either complementary information or supporting evidence to experimental methods (); for example, phylogenetic profile (), Rosetta stone (), conserved gene neighborhood analyses (), domain co occurrence () and orthology information (). These methods use domain, gene, functional pathway co-existence information or gene fusion event in related species to predict PPI. sequence based co-evolution is another approach, which has been proposed to predict PPI for many years. There are two types of methods in this approach: the site specific method and the full sequence method. The site specific method detects sequence mutual changes in binding interfaces of interacting partners to infer PPI (). But changes in such regions are hard to detect (). full sequence methods, such as the mirror tree method proposed by Pazos (), compare a distance matrix between two proteins and use topological similarity of phylogenetic trees to predict PPI. In addition, Fraser and his collaborates () compared substitution rates between two proteins and concluded that interacting proteins evolve at a similar rate. However, both methods have not been applied to the whole large scale PPI prediction in vertebrates. In this article, we introduce a new method to exploit sequence based co-evolution for PPI prediction in the human proteome. Our method is based on two basic assumptions. First, shared selection pressure may force two interacting proteins to co evolve together. Changes in the sequence of one protein may induce appropriate changes in the sequence of its interacting partner to retain the binding affinity and maintain biological functions. Consequently, PPI pairs may have similar substitution rates. Second, protein interaction is more likely to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. conserve across related species. Thus, to study human proteins, we shall examine their orthologous proteins in all vertebrates whose genomes are already sequenced. Based on these two assumptions, we define the co-evolutionary divergence (CD) of a pair of proteins as the absolute value of the substitution rate difference between two proteins. The CD values of interacting protein pairs are expected to be smaller than those of noninteracting protein pairs. Therefore, we may use CD as a feature to distinguish interacting protein pairs from non-interacting protein pairs. We evaluate the performance of PPI prediction by the CD method and compare it with the mirror tree method. By examining three independent PPI datasets, we show that CD is a better method for human PPI prediction.

discussion our CD method used the sequence based co-evolution approach for PPI prediction. Although this method could rank the likelihood of interaction for a given pair of proteins, it did not infer specific features of interaction such as the interacting residues in the interfaces. structure based methods such as protein or domain docking methods emphasize the molecular interface between proteins or domains (). However, the computing load of docking methods is too heavy to be applied for the large scale prediction in human genome. The CD method might provide a shorter list of candidate protein pairs for applying these methods. One class of co-evolutionary models exploiting sequence co variations were used to predict interaction between residues within a protein sequence. For example, statistical coupling analysis (SCA) and mutual information successfully infer residues interactions in PDZ protein family and basic helix loop helix transcription factor, respectively (). The assumptions of these two methods are similar to the CD method: if one protein interacts with the other protein in human, their orthologous proteins in other species are likely to have interactions too. The main difference is that methods like SCA focus on the co change between amino acids, whereas the CD method focuses on the rates of amino acid change between two sequences. Although methods like SCA provide computational methods to infer the residues interactions within protein sequence, they may be extended to infer residues interactions between protein sequences. We demonstrated that our CD method performed much better than the mirror tree method in three independent datasets of interacting proteins in human. One major difference between the two methods is that the CD method is more sensitive to the absolute size difference of protein substitution rates. Because the mirror tree uses the correlation coefficient of the sequence substitution rate profiles across the selected species, it is only the relative size difference in the substitution rates that matters. Therefore, two protein families may have considerably different substitution rates across all branches of the evolution tree, whereas their profiles may still have high correlations. In such cases, they may not form protein protein interactions, but are likely to be falsely predicted by the mirror tree method. The other difference is the alignment method used in comparing otho logs. In the mirror tree method, the conserved regions identified by multiple alignment across all related species are used to generate the evolutionary profile for correlation analysis. The size of a conserved region would automatically get smaller when more species are used for alignment. This leads to the unfortunate consequence that less information could be used in estimating the rate of substitution between species. In the CD method, the conserved regions are identified separately by the pair-wise alignment for each species pair. The region sizes are larger, and the substitution rate estimation is more informative. The negative correlation between protein substitution rate and number of interacting partner may be a potential source of false negatives in the CD method. Proteins with many interacting partners (hub protein) tend to have lower substitution rates. If a protein only interacts with one such hub protein and has no other interacting partner, its substitution rate may be higher. As a consequence, the CD of such protein pairs may have an upward bias. To investigate whether the bias is substantial, we compare the distribution of CD between PPI involving with hub proteins and not involving with hub proteins (Supplementary Figs S4 and S5). Although the CD of PPI involved with one hub protein is slightly greater than that of PPI not involving with any hub protein, the difference is not significant. Our CD method used all 91 comparisons between pairs of 14 vertebrates. For human PPI prediction, an alternative version would be to construct the likelihood ratio from only the 13 comparisons involving human and other vertebrates. However, this did not yield a better performance (Supplementary). We also investigated the effect of bin size choice in constructing the likelihood ratio table. As shown in Supplementary, the performance of our method is nearly unchanged when changing the bin size from 10% to 5%. We conclude that the CD method may be a more direct way to combine co-evolutionary information of inter-acting protein pair from many species. The co-evolutionary diver-gence method does not use multiple alignment, thus taking less time than the mirror tree method. The mirror tree method is limited to those proteins with orthologous across all species under consideration. Thus, when more and more species genomes become available, less proteins could be applied. In contrast, increasing the number of species will provide more information to improve the accuracy of the co-evolutionary divergence method. Conflict of Interest: none declared.
