Motivation: Computational modelling of the dynamics of gene regulatory networks is a central task of systems biology. For networks of small medium scale, the dominant paradigm is represented by systems of coupled non-linear ordinary differential equations (ODEs). ODEs afford great mechanistic detail and flexibility, but calibrating these models to data is often an extremely difficult statistical problem. Results: Here, we develop a general statistical inference framework for stochastic transcription translation networks. We use a coarse grained approach, which represents the system as a network of sto-chastic (binary) promoter and (continuous) protein variables. We derive an exact inference algorithm and an efficient variational approximation that allows scalable inference and learning of the model parameters. We demonstrate the power of the approach on two biological case studies, showing that the method allows a high degree of flexibility and is capable of testable novel biological predictions. Availability and implementation: http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/ g san guin software html
introduction understanding the dynamics of gene regulatory networks grn s is a fundamental area of research in systems biology. In silico predictions of the network's response to altered conditions can often give deep insights in the functionality of the biological system under consideration, as well as being crucial in biomedical and biotechnological applications. Bioinformatics data analysis methods are invaluable in extracting information in large datasets, and can be useful to predict the main changes in regulatory behaviours (). However, detailed predictions of the dynamics of small medium scale complex regulatory networks can not avoid dealing with the non-linear and continuous time nature of such systems, calling for more sophisticated mathematical modelling techniques. By some distance, the dominant paradigm to model grn s dynamics is given by systems of coupled non-linear ordinary differential equations (ODEs). ODEs provide an ideal framework for the detailed modelling of mechanistic systems, and of course can rely on refined analysis tools developed over hundreds of years of mathematical research. Nevertheless, mechanistic detail often comes at the cost of including many unknown parameters, as well as novel variables that are not observed (e.g. post-translational modifications of proteins). Although there are many parameter estimation tools available (), parameter estimation in systems of non-linear ODEs is often an intrinsically difficult statistical problem owing to the severe multimodality of the likelihood landscape. This is further compounded by the limited amount of data usually available in most biological scenarios. Here, we propose a novel statistical modelling framework to model regulatory interactions in grn s which maintains some key features of non-linear ODE models while being amenable to a principled statistical treatment. Statistical modelling has become increasingly central in systems biology (). Many different statistical models have been proposed in the context of mechanistic systems biology models, ranging from ODEs with uncertain parameters to fully stochastic models (). Naturally, the key question is to select a representation that is complex enough to capture the behaviour of the system, but simple enough to allow tractable inference. Here, we build on recently proposed statistical models for transcriptional regulation () and represent grn s using a hybrid continuous discrete stochastic process, consisting of binary promoter states occupied vacant that drive a stochastic differential equation describing protein dynamics. In this way, we bypass much of the statistical difficulties introduced by detailed modelling of transcription translation and subsequent posttranslational modifications. On the other hand, the introduction of a latent stochastic promoter state can capture much of this complexity, giving a flexible framework. Our key advance is the introduction of a model of how promoters can depend on upstream protein states, and of a modular approach to approximate inference in this model class that scales linearly with the number of genes in the network. In this way, we can handle medium sized networks of arbitrary topology. We complement our theoretical analysis with an empirical analysis of our method on simulated data, as well as on two real biological systems: the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. benchmark yeast synthetic network IRMA (), and the circadian clock of the pico alga os treo coccus tauri (). We compare with existing ODE models, and show that our approach achieves excellent fits and robust predictions. By comparing predictions on different data types, our model also provides a new testable hypothesis about the structure of the o tauri clock network.

discussion mathematical modelling of grn s is fundamental to our attempts to understand the structure and dynamics of gene networks. Non-linear ODE models provide an excellent framework to elucidate and predict complex regulatory mechanisms in small to medium scale grn s. However, they can be vulnerable to incomplete knowledge of the system, and calibrating complex models to limited data may pose an un surmountable statistical challenge. Here, we have presented a statistical approach to modelling transcription translation networks, which aims at retaining the flexibility allowed by non-linear ODE models while making possible a statistical exploration of the model's parameterization. The approach relies on a stochastic hybrid representation of the system where the transcription translation mechanism is modelled using only two variables: promoter (latent) states and protein states. By replacing complex non-linearities and additional unknown parameters of ODE models with latent variables, the model becomes simpler, more robust and more identifiable. Our empirical study demonstrates the identifiability of our approach and shows how on two real biological problems, it can yield comparable or better predictions than competing methods, as well as leading to novel testable biological hypotheses. Our prediction that a repress il at or structure underpins the o tauri clock is in line with recent discoveries on the structure. Inferred promoter states for CCA1 (left) and to c1 (right), obtained with the NFL model using translational (solid lines) and transcriptional (dashed lines) reporters of the a thaliana clock (), and indeed with the structure of known animal circadian clocks (Ukai). If validated, this finding would suggest that the repress il at or structure is an evolutionarily conserved feature of eukaryotic circadian clocks. Furthermore, our model predicts that to c1 acts as a repressor (while remaining an indirect activator of CCA1 through a double repression); again, the repressor role of to c1 was recently demonstrated in a thaliana (), leading further weight to our hypotheses. Although the repress il at or model substantially ameliorates the model misfit of the NFL model, there remains some residual unexplained discrepancy between inferences from transcriptional and translational reporters. Although this may be due to noise in the data, it can not be excluded that the complexity of the o tauri oscillator may be even greater, as is the case of other plant oscillators (). We believe that these results show the promise of this approach as an effective tool in addressing systems biology problems. Nevertheless, this work opens further avenues for development. From the biological point of view, validation of the novel structure of the o tauri clock would be an important step, which is likely to require substantial bioinformatics research. However, perhaps even more interesting would be to computationally explore the links between the transcription translation oscillator we study and the recently described non transcriptional oscillator of o tauri (O'). From the computational point of view, this study does not address the important problem of de novo reconstruction of the structure of the regulatory network, but relies on pre-existing network structures. A systematic method to combine structure learning with dynamical modelling remains a desirable goal (); we hope that this work will represent an advance in that promising direction.
