Motivation: protein protein interfaces contain important information about molecular recognition. The discovery of conserved patterns is essential for understanding how substrates and inhibitors are bound and for predicting molecular binding. When an inhibitor binds to different enzymes (e.g. dissimilar sequences, structures or mechanisms what we call cross inhibition identification of invariants is a difficult task for which traditional methods may fail. Results: To clarify how cross inhibition happens, we model the problem, propose and evaluate a methodology called hydro pace to detect conserved patterns. Interfaces are modeled as graphs of atomic a polar interactions and hydrophobic patches are computed and summarized by centroids hp centroids and their conservation is detected. Despite sequence and structure dissimilarity, our method achieves an appropriate level of abstraction to obtain invariant properties in cross inhibition. We show examples in which hp centroids successfully predicted enzymes that could be inhibited by the studied inhibitors according to BRENDA database.

introduction enzyme inhibition occurs when a molecule binds to an enzyme, thus decreasing its activity. Inhibitors may be protei c or non protei c they can decrease the enzyme's ability to bind substrates or can lower the enzyme's catalytic activity or a combination of both. Inhibition is an important biochemical mechanism that is involved in metabolism regulation. It controls many intra and extracellular pathways, inflammatory and immunological processes, virus replication and many other biological functions () Furthermore, once this natural phenomenon is understood, it might be used for biotechnological purposes including the development of drugs, insecticides, pesticides and disinfectants. A particular case is the inhibition of peptidases; on this subject, the MEROPS database is currently one of the most important peptidase * To whom correspondence should be addressed. repositories (). The MEROPS database groups both proteases and inhibitors hierarchically into families sequence related entities) and clans structure related entities). A careful MEROPS search highlighted a well known but intriguing phenomenon: some protease inhibitors lack specificity and involve different 3D structures and catalytic mechanisms. For instance, Turkey ovo mucoid and engl in C act in different serine peptidase clans such as PA(S) (all  trypsin like folds) and SB (/ subtilisin like folds) and soybean Kunitz trypsin inhibitor decays proteolytic activity as much in serine peptidases as in metallopeptidase s (which have very different enzymatic mechanisms). We call this lack of specificity cross inhibition. Our main challenge in this article is to create a methodology that helps to understand and predict this phenomenon. protease inhibitor recognition and binding are determined by a complex orchestration of interactions and entropic factors that involve the entire protease inhibitor solvent system. Fortunately, the experimental binding energetics of many protease inhibitor complexes have already been thermodynamically determined. It is known, for example, that the binding of Turkey ovo mucoid with Elastase at 25 @BULLET C is characterized by a negative Gibbs free energy in which enthalpy change is almost negligible but entropy change is largely positive (). Furthermore, we spot a clear trend of higher a polar polar accessible surface area ratio toward interface (Supplementary), which is an evidence of the importance of the hydrophobic interactions in protease inhibitor complex formation. That said, we particularly focus our attention on the search for conserved hydrophobic interaction patterns. We define these patterns as invariant hydrophobic regions (or patches) that are in contact with the same a polar complementary parts of the inhibitor (Supplementary Figs 3 and 4). We show (Supplementary) a strong linear relationship (Pearson's correlation coefficient of 0.98) between the inferred solvation entropy change and the extension of hydrophobic patches, measured in terms of the number of hydrophobic atoms inside them. Although there are many biochemical studies that analyze diversity in inhibition processes [e.g. (;, experimental characterization of inhibition is a labor intensive process. The large amount of possible inhibitors for a given enzyme can make tests costly; hence, in silico methods can contribute to predicting inhibitor enzyme recognition. Despite its evident importance, there are few models and algorithms that identify recognition and interaction patterns that
