Motivation: Network biology has emerged as a powerful tool to uncover the organizational properties of living systems through the application of graph theoretic approaches. However, due to limitations in underlying data models and visualization software, knowledge relating to large molecular assemblies and biologically active fragments is poorly represented. Results: Here, we demonstrate a novel hypergraph implementation that better captures hierarchical structures, using components of elastic fibers and chromatin modification as models. These reveal unprecedented views of the biology of these systems, demonstrating the unique capacity of hypergraphs to resolve overlaps and uncover new insights into the sub functionalization of variant complexes. Availability and implementation: hyper scape is available as a web application at http://www. comp sys bioorg hyper scape. Source code, examples and a tutorial are freely available under a GNU

introduction biological systems captured by protein protein interaction (PPI) networks are typically represented as graphs in which proteins are projected as nodes connected by edges. Other graphs such as bi-partite, compound and meta graphs have been used to visualize more complex relationships (). However, overlapping complexes have not been well supported because (i) the tracking of interaction data at the level of biological assemblages is relatively new, for example although the BioPAX pathway language supports the definition of such assemblages, only matrix db () appears to track interactions across hierarchies; and (ii) existing visualization tools, such as Cytoscape () and VisANT (), created to support simple graphs, have design considerations preventing the display of overlapping clusters. To overcome these limitations, hypergraphs have been proposed as viable alternative to more meaningfully represent biological relationships (). A hypergraph is a set V of vertices and a set of non empty subsets of V, called hyper edges. Despite their ability to better represent the complexity inherent in many biological datasets, tools enabling the practical implementation of hypergraphs on a wide scale have been lacking. Here, we provide software to translate and render biomolecule descriptions as hypergraphs and we demonstrate the usefulness of hypergraph visualization in interpreting the organization of elastic fibers, major constituents of large blood vessels and resolving overlaps in a network of chromatin modification.

conclusion with increasing interest in applying hypergraphs to study protein complexes, metabolic pathways, regulatory and signaling networks () we believe hyper scape will find wide application in systems biology.. The elastic fiber interactome and selected neighbors. Note overlapping assemblies as well as an additional hyperedge (blue oval) depicting the interaction between collagen IV (various assemblies) and the laminin 1nidogen1 complex. Simple edges represent experimentally determined, physical inter actions (Supplementary Methods). Neighbors were selected as needed to connect all elastic fiber components e fcs into a single, connected subgraph and expanded to include all additional components of multimers associated with an EFC or nearest neighbor. A complete set of neighbors are included in additional online material (Supplementary Figs s3s5 visualization for complex biological networks
