Data visualization plays an increasingly important role in NGS data analysis. With advances in both sequencing and computational technologies, it has become a new bottleneck in gen-omics studies. Indeed, evaluation of de novo genome assemblies is one of the areas that can benefit from the visualization. However, even though multiple quality assessment methods are now available , existing visualization tools are hardly suitable for this purpose. Here, we present icarus a novel genome visualizer for accurate assessment and analysis of genomic draft assemblies, which is based on the tool QUAST. Icarus can be used in studies where a related reference genome is available, as well as for non model organisms. The tool is available online and as a standalone application. Availability and Implementation

introduction dozens of assembly algorithms have been developed in recent years, unfortunately none of them is perfect. Several evaluation studies (showed that genome size, coverage depth, sequencing technology and many other aspects may dramatically affect quality of genome assembly. Thus, it is challenging to create a universal assembly approach, and an everyday tool for assembly evaluation and comparison is needed for choosing the best algorithm for a specific experiment. QUAST () is a commonly used tool for quality assessment of genome assembly. It computes a full range of assembly quality metrics such as N50, number of erroneous contigs, covered genes, etc. One of the main drawbacks of the tool is a lack of proper visualization of assemblies and their alignment to the reference genome. Genome browsers have proven to be instrumental in genomic studies (). It is not a coincidence that there are now a great variety of interactive visualization tools, which include UCSC Genome Browser (), Integrative Genome Viewer () and many others. The most successful genome browsers are adapted to specific analysis goals, and it is unlikely that a universal tool for genomics analysis is practical ().by QUAST (e.g. mis assemblies. Icarus is an open source software and it is freely available as a web tool and as a command line utility.

conclusion inspired by genomic data browsing software, we developed Icarus a browser for quality assessment and comparison of draft assemblies. Icarus engine is based on QUAST, a tool for de novo genome assembly evaluation, and complements its output with interactive visualizations of contig alignments, features and errors. As an open source project, our web based and command line tool can be easily utilized by the research community. We believe that Icarus will also help developers of assembly algorithms to improve their methods.
