Founded upon the database of 570 public signatures, ICPS is a web based application to obtain biomarker profiles among 11 common cancers by integrating genomic alterations with transcription signatures on the basis of a previously developed integrative pipeline. ICPS supports both public data and users in house data, and performs meta analysis at a cancer subtype level by combining heterogeneous datasets. Finally, ICPS returns the robust gene signature containing potential cancer biomarkers that may be useful to carcinogenesis study and clinical cancer diagnosis. Availability:

introduction dna microarrays and serial analysis of gene expression (SAGE) have been applied widely to the measurements of gene expression profiles in tumor tissues versus corresponding normal tissues over the last several years. A large amount of resources of global quantitative gene expression profiles in cancer are now publicly available, such as Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO, http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo), Stanford Microarray Database (SMD, http://genome-www5.stanford.edu) and Cancer Genome Anatomy Project (CGAP, http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/). However, any single high throughput technology experiment is merely able to capture a snapshot of gene expression profile in a specific tumor sample. Furthermore, each high throughput technique has its own limitations. For example, the results of microarray are hardly reproducible, and the SAGE and EST library techniques are subject to the sizes and reliabilities of the libraries. Therefore, it is essential and still challenging to develop computational integration analysis tools that can discover the robust gene signature (RGS) by combining all pieces into a most complete picture of cancer tissues (). It has been discovered that many genome alterations, such as loss of heterozygosity (LOH) and chromosomal gains and losses, affect mRNA expressions (). ICPS * To whom correspondence should be addressed. applies a previously developed integrative pipeline to combine genomic variations with gene expressions, aiming to discover the RGS in different types or subtypes of cancer ().

discussion our integrative method had been applied to identify RGS genes in squamous cell lung cancer (SCC). As a result, 109 RGS genes were obtained and validated by performing lab experiments with reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction rt pcr method as well as reviewing previous publications (). ICPS generates two types of human genome based visualization, i.e. a heat map view and an integrative map. The global profiling provides great convenience for comparing the elements of genomic alterations with expression signatures. The mean copy number of all selected a cgh datasets is displayed as a virtual sample named summary cgh in order to assist users to obtain the summary statistics of copy number variation and compare it with the expression profiles. The visualization can be constructed in PDF format and used as a 'database' which is convenient for searching genes of interest exemplifies the maps at chromosome 3 in SCC, in which DNA amplifications and up regulations of gene expression at 3q (red) and deletions and down regulations (blue) are indicated. As we know, on co mine (https://www.oncomine.org) is a powerful web based program processing cancer specific data. However, it performs normalization and presents the processed data for further integration without any easy means of downloading either raw or processed data. In contrast, ICPS starts from the 'log ratio value' which reflects the gene expression variations in cancer tissues versus normal tissues. This strategy avoids cross platform normalization of the signal intensity, which is a proverbial difficulty and may easily induce biases, although it is not able to fully eliminate the batch effects of such normalization. On the other hand, ICPS will no longer need login information to access the site. One of the most powerful features of ICPS is its capacity to cover not only transcriptome profiles but also genomic alterations. Next generation datasets, such as rnase q will be included in future versions of ICPS. In our opinion, a global integration of such datasets, at various levels, will be required to expand our understanding of oncology. ICPS provides a useful approach for this integration.
