Isotope tracer experiments are an invaluable technique to analyze and study the metabolism of biological systems. However, isotope labeling experiments are often affected by naturally abundant isotopes especially in cases where mass spectrometric methods make use of derivatiza-tion. The correction of these additive interferences in particular for complex isotopic systems is numerically challenging and still an emerging field of research. When positional information is generated via collision induced dissociation, even more complex calculations for isotopic interference correction are necessary. So far, no freely available tools can handle tandem mass spectrom-etry data. We present isotope correction toolbox, a program that corrects tandem mass iso to pomer data from tandem mass spectrometry experiments. Isotope correction toolbox is written in the multi-platform programming language Perl and, therefore, can be used on all commonly available computer platforms.

introduction isotope labeling experiments play a crucial role in exploring, studying and understanding metabolic pathways in biological systems. However, the obtained iso topo log and tandem mass iso to pomer signals are biased by natural abundant isotopes of the native molecules and of atoms introduced via derivatization (). Consequently, the natural abundance results in a distortion of the experimental data. The correction of mass spectrometry data is still an emerging field of research (), as it is non-trivial and numerically challenging, in particular, if a large number of isotopes are considered during the correction procedure. There exist several software tools which are able to compute the contribution of intensities from the natural abundant isotopes on the measured intensities and hence are capable to correct the measured data. py nac () (http://files.cesb.uky.edu/software/PYNAC/) is a correction software written in the programming language Python. py nac benefits from the multi-platform capabilities of Python is highly flexible by using text files for configuration and setup and can account for any number of isotopes. However, it is not able to correct data from tandem mass spectrometry experiments. Another prominent available program is isoc or () (http://metasys.insa toulouse fr software isoc or. isoc or is also implemented in Python and is a fast and excellent tool to correct mass spectrometry data. It supports the correction of the natural abundance of the tracer at unlabeled positions and allows to take into account the isotopic purity of the labeling source. Furthermore, in isoc or any isotope and not only 13 C can be used as tracer. Though isoc or is also not able to deal with tandem mass iso to pomer data. In this application note, we present a novel software tool named isotope correction toolbox (ICT), which is also able to deal with ion fragmentation and, hence, can correct mass spectra obtained by tandem mass spectrometry.
