Motivation: next generation sequencing allows us to sequence reads from a microbial environment using single cell sequencing or meta genomic sequencing technologies. However, both technologies suffer from the problem that sequencing depth of different regions of a genome or genomes from different species are highly uneven. Most existing genome assemblers usually have an assumption that sequencing depths are even. These assemblers fail to construct correct long contigs. Results: We introduce the id baud algorithm that is based on the de Bruijn graph approach for assembling reads from single cell sequencing or meta genomic sequencing technologies with uneven sequencing depths. Several non-trivial techniques have been employed to tackle the problems. Instead of using a simple threshold, we use multiple depth relative thresholds to remove erroneous km ers in both low depth and high depth regions. The technique of local assembly with paired end information is used to solve the branch problem of low depth short repeat regions. To speed up the process, an error correction step is conducted to correct reads of high depth regions that can be aligned to high confident contigs. Comparison of the performances of id baud and existing assemblers (Velvet, velvet sc soap de novo and meta i dba for different datasets, shows that id baud can reconstruct longer contigs with higher accuracy. Availability: The id baud toolkit is available at our website

introduction since over 99% of microbes can not be cultivated, single cell sequencing and meta genomic sequencing technologies are used to study these microbes (). single cell sequencing technology amplifies and sequences genome of an individual cell without cultivation (). Since the amplification bias, the sequencing depths at different regions of the genome can be extremely uneven. meta genomic sequencing studies a microbe community as a whole () and has similar problem of uneven sequencing depths of genomes because different species in a sample have different abundances. Almost all existing de novo assembly tools were designed for single genome with uniform sequencing depth and were used by some recent studies on microbes (To whom correspondence should be addressed.
