Motivation: Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled to next generation sequencing chips eq is widely used to study the in vivo binding sites of transcription factors (TFs) and their regulatory targets. Recent improvements to chips eq such as increased resolution, promise deeper insights into transcriptional regulation, yet require novel computational tools to fully leverage their advantages. Results: To this aim, we have developed peak zilla which can identify closely spaced TF binding sites at high resolution (i.e. resolves individual binding sites even if spaced closely), as we demonstrate using semisynthetic datasets, performing chips eq for the TF Twist in Drosophila embryos with different experimental fragment sizes, and analyzing chip exo datasets. We show that the increased resolution reached by peak zilla is highly relevant, as closely spaced Twist binding sites are strongly enriched in transcriptional enhancers, suggesting a

introduction gene expression is mainly regulated at the transcriptional level and achieved through the binding of transcription factors (TFs) to genomic regulatory regions called promoters and enhancers. Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing chips eq is extensively used to determine transcription factor binding sites tfbs s genome wide (). Compared with chip chip (), chips eq has dramatically improved the resolution of the identified tfbs s (from hundreds to only tens of nucleotides). A recent refinement of chips eq the chip exo method (), further increases the resolution of chips eq experiments, theoretically to single nucleotides. The specific features and strategies of TF chips eq data analysis have been well described by several reviews (e.g.) and protocols (e.g.). Briefly, as typically only one of both ends of the immunoprecipitated DNA fragments is sequenced, the sequencing reads (or tags) result in a bimodal distribution that is characteristic for true tfbs s (). This distribution is typically used to estimate the average size of the fragments, which subsequently allows the prediction of tfbs s across the genome. Many computational tools have been developed and are successfully used to predict such binding events (). However, in our experience, these tools are not optimized to take advantage of recent methodological improvements, which comprise paired end sequencing, high sequencing depth (e.g. on Illumina his eq systems) and most importantly an increase in experimental resolution, both of conventional chips eq and of chip exo. Available tools typically merge closely spaced read density peaks into large regions, which is preferable when analyzing certain chromatin features that mark extended regions (e.g. histone modifications), but means that the ability to distinguish (i.e. resolve) individual closely spaced tfbs s is lost. High resolution and precision [i.e. the correct prediction of the tfbs s exact locations as measured for example as the distance from the inferred TFBS (the reported peak summit) to the TF's sequence motif] are crucial when determining individual tfbs s (e.g.), as promoter and enhancer regions often consist of multiple tfbs s for the same TF (homotypic tfbs s clusters) () or different TFs (). Thus, to fully leverage current ChIP methodologies toward understanding the structure and function of enhancers, the ability to determine multiple closely spaced tfbs s is critical. To meet this need, we developed a new computational tool, peak zilla which fully exploits the bimodal distribution of sequence reads characteristic of true TF binding events, to identify closely adjacent tfbs s with high resolution and precision. peak zilla is not meant for the identification of broad enriched regions (e.g. histone marks) for which we recommend using MACS or similar programs. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors we evaluate peak zilla by comparing it with three widely used peak finders of the first generation such as MACS (), QuEST () and cis genome (), as well as four methods developed more recently for the detection of high resolution peaks such as spp (), sis srs (), GPS () and peak ranger (). peak zilla shows superior resolution and precision on conventional chips eq datasets from Saccharomyces cerevisiae (), Caenorhabditis elegans (), Drosophila melanogaster (), mouse () and human () and on recent chip exo datasets (). We also specifically test the resolution limits of each method using semisynthetic chips eq datasets and show experimentally that peak zilla fully reflects increased experimental resolution by performing chips eq experiments for Twist in d melanogaster at normal, medium and high resolution. These results suggest that peak zilla is best suited for the identification of tfbs s with recent ChIP methods.

discussion understanding how combinations of TFs bind to DNA to regulate gene expression is one of the most pressing questions of to days biology. Its importance is witnessed by recent community efforts that aim to determine all functional elements in the genomes of model organisms and the human [e.g. ENCODE (ENCODE Project), mod encode (), Mouse ENCODE (Mouse ENCODE. The availability of high throughput sequencing at low cost widely promoted the use of the chips eq methodology and an enormous number of datasets for different TFs from various species, developmental stages or tissues are becoming available. This enables the identification of in vivo binding sites and thus enhancers that contain multiple binding sites for a single TF or multiple different TFs. While it is widely accepted that enhancers are characterized by clusters of TF binding motifs (), it has remained less clear to what extent each of several clustered TF binding motifs is bound in vivo yanez yan yanez. Similarly, potential constraints on the relative distance or orientation of co bound TFs have remained unclear, yet might be crucial to understand the molecular mechanisms and to decipher the sequence basis of gene regulation yanez yan yanez. To experimentally address this question, it is important to resolve closely spaced binding sites and precisely predict their location from chips eq data, challenges that current improvements to the ChIP methodology have started to address [e.g. chip exo (. However, while many computational tools exist to identify enriched regions (peaks) from ChIP data ('peak calling'), many of them are not designed to fully leverage these improvements, e.g. the increased resolution or the vastly increased number of deep sequencing reads of modern deep sequencing (). To meet these challenges, especially the need for discovering tfbs s at high resolution we have developed a new computational method, peak zilla. The importance of high resolution and precision is also supported by alternative efforts to correctly position predicted tfbs s for example, by taking the location of enriched sequence motifs into account (). Although tfbs s predicted by peak zilla coincide well with the known sequence motifs of the respective TFs, it is important to note that we chose to predict the TFBS locations from the chips eq data alone, without taking sequence motifs into account: it is well established that within tfbs s motifs for different TFs can be more highly enriched in tfbs s than motifs for the precipitated TF itself. For example, the binding sites of most TFs in the early Drosophila embryo are highly enriched in motifs for the TF Zelda (), such that the Zelda motif which is sometimes more highly enriched than the motif of the TF of interest might bias the correct prediction of the tfbs s and possibly hinder the study of relative positioning and orientation of tfbs s. The combination of maximum experimental resolution and a peak caller like peak zilla thus makes full use of recent chips eq approaches and will be invaluable for testing hypotheses on how combinatorial TF binding realizes the developmental blueprint encoded in the regulatory regions of our genomes. Indeed, closely spaced Twist binding sites resolved by peak zilla coincided and were strongly enriched in known enhancers, corroborating the prevalent model that functional enhancers are characterized by clusters of tfbs s. The increasing number of ChIP studies that determine the in vivo binding sites of TFs at high resolution will prove invaluable for our understanding of enhancer function and transcriptional regulation.
