Motivation: In early drug development, it would be beneficial to be able to identify those dynamic patterns of gene response that indicate that drugs targeting a particular gene will be likely or not to elicit the desired response. One approach would be to quantitate the degree of similarity between the responses that cells show when exposed to drugs, so that consistencies in the regulation of cellular response processes that produce success or failure can be more readily identified. Results: We track drug response using fluorescent proteins as transcription activity reporters. Our basic assumption is that drugs inducing very similar alteration in transcriptional regulation will produce similar temporal trajectories on many of the reporter proteins and hence be identified as having similarities in their mechanisms of action (MOA). The main body of this work is devoted to characterizing similarity in temporal trajectories signals. To do so, we must first identify the key points that determine mechanistic similarity between two drug responses. Directly comparing points on the two signals is unrealistic, as it can not handle delays and speed variations on the time axis. Hence, to capture the similarities between reporter responses, we develop an alignment algorithm that is robust to noise, time delays and is able to find all the contiguous parts of signals centered about a core alignment (reflecting a core mechanism in drug response). Applying the proposed algorithm to a range of real drug experiments shows that the result agrees well with the prior drug MOA knowledge. Availability: The R code for the rl css algorithm is available at

introduction the ability to measure the abundance and degree of modification of many macromolecules in cells has allowed researchers to examine cells for molecular characteristics that indicate susceptibility to particular drugs (). This approach has produced a number of very useful guidelines to the use of therapeutics; however, it has failed * To whom correspondence should be addressed. in instances where the drug induces changes in the type and or abundance of proteins that either pump drugs out of the cell or allow the drug targeted activity to be provided in an alternative way that is not affected by the drug (). For these reasons, the ability to examine the molecular dynamics of cells' responses to drugs becomes of primary interest. In addition, identifying dynamic patterns will help to detect whether drugs targeting a particular gene produce the desired response. One possible way to achieve this goal would be to develop a way to quantitate the degree of similarity between the responses that cells show when exposed to drugs, so that consistencies in the regulation of cellular response processes that produce success or failure can be more readily identified.
