Motivation: The ability to reliably predict protein protein and protein ligand interactions is important for identifying drug gable binding sites and for understanding how proteins communicate. Most currently available algorithms identify cavities on the protein surface as potential ligand recognition sites. The method described here does not explicitly look for cavities but uses small surface patches consisting of triplets of adjacent surface atomic groups that can be touched simultaneously by a probe sphere representing a solvent molecule. A total of 455 different types of triplets can be identified. A training set of 309 protein ligand protein X-ray structures has been used to generate interface propensities for the triplets, which can be used to predict their involvement in ligand binding interactions. Results: The success rate for locating protein ligand binding sites on protein surfaces using this new surface triplet propensities (STP) algorithm is 88% which compares well with currently available grid based and energy based approaches. q site finders dataset (Laurie and Jackson, 2005. Bioinformatics, 21, 1908–1916) was used to show the favorable performance of STP. An analysis of the different triplet types showed that higher ligand binding propensity is related to more polarizable surfaces. The interaction statistics between triplet atoms on the protein surface and ligand atoms have been used to estimate statistical free energies of interaction. The G stat for halogen atoms interacting with hydrophobic triplets is −0.6 kcal mol and an estimate of the maximal G stat for a ligand atom interacting with a triplet in a binding pocket is −1.45 kcal mol. Availability: Freely available online at http://opus.bch.ed.ac.uk/stp. Website implemented in Php, with all major browsers supported.

introduction intermolecular interactions drive and control most biological functions including, for example, signal transduction, transcription and cell cycle events. An understanding of small molecule protein recognition is also key to more effective medicinal chemistry and design of tight binding drug like ligands (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). The recent growth of information available in structural databases and also of protein ligand binding data (NIH 1 ) provides the required experimental data for the development of a range of in silico algorithms; for example predicting ligand binding sites (), predicting absolute ligand binding free energies () and predicting protein dna binding sites (). Proteins frequently play a role in multi mer complexes and communicate with a number of different partners, and there is a growing body of structural information on such assemblies as the spliceosome (), the stress o some (), ribosome (), ubiquitination pathways (), chaperone complexes () and transcription machinery (). A picture is emerging in which even small proteins are likely to have multiple non-overlapping docking or binding sites which may be used in allosteric communication networks. The possibility of being able to identify such allosteric docking sites also opens up new opportunities in the field of drug discovery. Ligand specificity is a major problem in many drug discovery projects where an enzyme active site is highly conserved among a number of isoforms (e.g. protein kinases or phosphatases). By blocking allosteric binding pockets, it may be possible to target specific isoforms (or in the case of infection to target species specific ortholog proteins). Despite the expanding experimental structural database of protein ligand and protein protein interactions, experimental data are still insufficient to identify all potential binding sites that may be of biological relevance to a particular protein target. Reliable computational prediction methods to identify potential protein binding sites are therefore of significant current interest. Several approaches have been developed to search for protein binding surfaces. geometry based algorithms have been quite successful. For example, pocket depth () utilized the depth of pockets to predict the location of binding sites and report to successfully predict 55% of ligands as first rank predictions. SURFNET () searches for cavities on the surface of the protein and fills them in a grid like method () and then predicts the largest cavity to be the ligand binding site. Searching for pattern similarity (sequence, spatial or orientation patterns) of pocket forming residues is an alternative approach () which is generally faster since no energy calculations are required. Molecular mechanics approaches () or other energy based algorithms are also used as exemplified by the program ef site (). A third class of algorithm analyses the chemical composition of the protein assigning 'Interface Propensities' to indicate how frequently particular residues appear in binding sites (, b). We present an algorithm, surface triplet propensities (STP), which is based on a score table giving the propensities of atom types of surface atoms that appear in ligand binding sites. We have compared the performance of STP with that of q sitefinder () and the method proposed by, and have shown that STP is able to predict the known binding sites of 88.2% of the proteins under study (as one of the top three predictions).
