Motivation: Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential Enrichment (SELEX) represents a state of the art technology to isolate single stranded (ribo)nucleic acid fragments, named aptamers, which bind to a molecule (or molecules) of interest via specific structural regions induced by their sequence dependent fold. This powerful method has applications in designing protein inhibitors, molecular detection systems, therapeutic drugs and antibody replacement among others. However, full understanding and consequently optimal utilization of the process has lagged behind its wide application due to the lack of dedicated computational approaches. At the same time, the combination of SELEX with novel sequencing technologies is beginning to provide the data that will allow the examination of a variety of properties of the selection process. Results: To close this gap we developed, apta motif a computational method for the identification of sequence structure motifs in selex derived aptamers. To increase the chances of identifying functional motifs, apta motif uses an ensemble based approach. We validated the method using two published aptamer datasets containing experimentally determined motifs of increasing complexity. We were able to recreate the authors findings to a high degree, thus proving the capability of our approach to identify binding motifs in SELEX data. Additionally, using our new experimental dataset, we illustrate the application of apta motif to elucidate several properties of the selection process.

introduction aptamers are synthetic but biologically active single stranded (ribo)nucleic molecules, typically ranging between 15 and 120 nt (). These short sequences can be designed to bind, with high affinity and specificity, a vast spectrum of molecular targets apa topes spanning from small organic molecules () over macromolecules such as proteins () to entire organisms (). Their high structural stability over a wide range of pH and temperatures and their diverse functionality  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.  The study performed in part when these authors were at Department of Computational Biology and Applied Algorithmics, Max Planck Institute for Informatics, Campus E1.4, 66123 saarbr cken Germany * To whom correspondence should be addressed. make aptamers ideal candidates for a broad spectrum of in vitro assays and in vivo tools. Applications for aptamers include protein inhibition and purification (), molecular detection systems (), therapeutic drugs () and antibody replacement (); the latter being of high interest in the pharmaceutical industry due to substantially lower production costs, shelf lives of years and, in many cases, higher target specificity (). Moreover, since aptamers are chemically synthesized, they provide a more consistent source of material than antibodies that are secreted by cells. Aptamers targeting a specific apa top e are experimentally identified through the Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential Enrichment (SELEX) protocol (). The experimental design of SELEX is based on the assumption that a large enough pool of candidate sequences is likely to contain nucleotide strands capable of binding to any target molecule. The traditional SELEX procedure iterates over five basic steps defining one selection cycle: incubation, binding, partitioning and washing, target bound elution, and amplification. Starting with a single stranded (ribo)nucleic acid sequence library of, typically, 10 15 random species flanked by primer sites to aid amplification, at each cycle a sequence pool is incubated with target molecules. The species in the pool potentially bind the target with specificity, depending on their sequence and structure. At the end of each cycle, low affinity binders are removed from the solution whereas bound species are eluted and amplified, forming the input for the next round. Eventually, only molecules that bind with high affinity remain. However, detailed understanding and studies regarding precise aptamer apa top e interaction and consequently the evolutionary processes induced by this interplay lag behind the wide application of SELEX products. Aptamer binding properties are a function of both, sequence and structure; however, current analyses are predominately focused on sequence. Until now, a common practice was to sequence a sample of aptamers from the last cycle of SELEX and examine them for possible sequence motifs using ad hoc approaches or motif finding programs, such as MEME () or GLAM2 (). These motifs are then validated in expensive and time consuming wet lab experiments, frequently by introducing a series of point mutations into the identified sequence regions with the goal of inducing conformational changes in the structures. Using adequate binding affinity assays then allows for the quantification of this mutation with respect to the binding strength, considering the region as functionally active,
