Motivation: Several types of studies, including genome wide association studies and RNA interference screens, strive to link genes to diseases. Although these approaches have had some success, genetic variants are often only present in a small subset of the population, and screens are noisy with low overlap between experiments in different labs. Neither provides a mechanistic model explaining how identified genes impact the disease of interest or the dynamics of the pathways those genes regulate. Such mechanistic models could be used to accurately predict downstream effects of knocking down pathway members and allow comprehensive exploration of the effects of targeting pairs or higher order combinations of genes. Results: We developed methods to model the activation of signaling and dynamic regulatory networks involved in disease progression. Our model, sd rem integrates static and time series data to link proteins and the pathways they regulate in these networks. sd rem uses prior information about proteins likelihood of involvement in a disease (e.g. from screens) to improve the quality of the predicted signaling pathways. We used our algorithms to study the human immune response to H1N1 influenza infection. The resulting networks correctly identified many of the known pathways and transcriptional regulators of this disease. Furthermore, they accurately predict RNA interference effects and can be used to infer genetic interactions, greatly improving over other methods suggested for this task. Applying our method to the more pathogenic H5N1 influenza allowed us to identify several strain specific targets of this infection. Availability: sd rem is available from

introduction a wide variety of experimental and computational approaches have been used over the past few years to screen for genes that play important roles in human disease. These include RNA interference (RNAi) screens (), which knock down human genes to quantify the phenotypic effects in diseases such as HIV () and influenza () infection, and genome wide association studies g was a powerful approach for uncovering strong connections between genetic variations such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and disease traits (). Although these and similar sequencing based methods have been widely applied and were able to identify many relevant genes, they also suffer from important drawbacks that limit their effectiveness. RNAi screen hits are often not reproducible among different labs and experimental settings. For example, the overlap among hits in HIV screens is low. Three genome wide screens identified 842 genes that impact HIV replication, but only three genes were common to all screens (). Similar low overlap is observed for other diseases as well (). Interpretability of screen hits remains a challenge, as the screens can not explain why a gene impacts a disease. Similarly, interpretation of g was hits is not straightforward as they oftentimes lie outside of coding regions of the genome (). Even those variants lying within a coding region only explain a small fraction of affected individuals for several diseases and conditions (). These observations motivated methods that integrate g was or perturbation information with functional annotations and other types of genomic data (most notably gene expression and protein interaction data). For example, pathway based g was () maps SNP p values to proximal genes and links pathways to diseases by testing whether any predefined pathways are enriched for genes that flank significant SNPs. However, this and similar strategies are dependent on the quality of the annotated pathways preventing their use for important diseases that are poorly represented in public pathway databases (). A variety of gene prioritization algorithms, which have been extensively reviewed () and benchmarked (), use known disease genes from literature curation, g was or other sources as seeds to search for similar genes that are likely to be related to the same disease. The evidence used to define gene similarity includes text mining, pathway membership, functional annotations, protein properties, sequence, co-expression and proximity in protein protein interaction (PPI) networks. However, these methods do not attempt to mechanistically model the pathways that are activated during disease progression and response and thus do not provide a model to explain the various observations. Instead, they use a 'black box' approach; they take seed genes as input and produce a ranked list of candidate genes without explaining the predicted relationship to the disease, which may impair further analysis (). Other algorithms use perturbation and genetic data to link proteins to diseases, while at the same time using other genomic datasets and interaction networks to suggest how these proteins may be involved in disease response () However, these methods have only used static models so far. In such models, the phenotypic outcomes of the network perturbations (or genetic variants) are typically differentially expressed genes. The algorithms then *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussions d rem is unique in that it combines time series and static data to model both signaling and dynamic regulatory networks. This allows it to infer, more confidently, the TFs that are at the end points of signaling cascades and control human disease response. To manage the complexity of human interaction networks, we extended sd rem to leverage gene priors from RNAi screens in its objective function and incorporated several algorithmic improvements. As we have shown for influenza infection, by reconstructing disease response networks we can accurately identify key signaling pathways and nodes (proteins). sd rem can be applied successfully in many different settings even when the PPI data, node priors or gene expression time points are sparse (Supplementary Information, Supplementary Tables S7 and s8 note N/A indicates that the gene was not included in the sd rem H1N1 model given the predicted directed signaling pathways, we can estimate the phenotypic effects of knocking down genes by assessing how strongly the downstream TFs are affected. These techniques can be used to infer putative drug targets for hard to study conditions (such as H5N1 infection) and for combination of targets, which can lead to more robust treatments. Successfully predicting the effects of pairwise and higher order gene knockdowns can guide targeted experimental validation, a major contribution because exhaustive pairwise RNAi screening is currently infeasible and signaling pathway redundancy can limit the effectiveness of drugs that target individual genes (). Owing to this pathway redundancy and false negatives in the existing RNAi screens, the precision we calculate for sdr ems RNAi effect predictions () is conservative. Many proteins predicted by sd rem (for example STAT1, RELA, NFKB2 and several IRF TFs) are not screen hits but are known to be important to the immune response. An important advantage of sd rem over previous RNAi screen and host pathogen PPI studies is the ability to infer new pathways from general interaction data. Previous studies [for example, (and pathway based g was () often rely on known curated pathways that are incomplete and not always relevant to the disease studied. In contrast, using condition specific time series data and sources, sd rem can predict which candidate proteins are involved in the signaling pathways and which are not. Unlike the gene scores from Endeavour, Pinta and other gene prioritization algorithms that are only defined for single genes, sd rem predicts functional disease genes by modeling the impact of removing a gene from the disease specific signaling pathways. This simulated phenotype can be naturally extended to pairs of genes, allowing sd rem to predict genetic interactions analogously to experimental approaches. Existing genetic interaction prediction algorithms require a partial set of known genetic interactions (), which prevents their application in human. Furthermore, sdr ems genetic interaction predictions are condition specific. Our influenza analysis focused on data from human cell lines, but some of sdr ems most exciting future applications will involve data from individual patients. We would like to use the extensions presented in this article to enable g was data to be used as node priors. One possible approach we intend to explore is to map SNP p values to gene scores as in pathway based g was (). In addition, SNPs in non-coding regions with potential regulatory functions could be used to suggest which TFs' binding is disrupted (), providing priors for both the network orientation and the temporal expression analysis.
