Motivation: Identification of conserved motifs in biological sequences is crucial to unveil common shared functions. Many tools exist for motif identification, including some that allow degenerate positions with multiple possible nucleotides or amino acids. Most efficient methods available today search conserved motifs in a set of sequences, but do not check for their specificity regarding to a set of negative sequences. Results: We present a tool to identify degenerate motifs, based on a given classification of amino acids according to their physico-chemical properties. It returns the top K motifs that are most frequent in a positive set of sequences involved in a biological process of interest, and absent from a negative set. Thus, our method discovers discriminative motifs in biological sequences that may be used to identify new sequences involved in the same process. We used this tool to identify candidate effector proteins secreted into plant tissues by the root knot nematode Meloidogyne incognita. Our tool identified a series of motifs specifically present in a positive set of known effectors while totally absent from a negative set of evolutionarily conserved housekeeping proteins. Scanning the proteome of m incognita we detected 2579 proteins that contain these specific motifs and can be considered as new putative effectors. Availability and Implementation: The motif discovery tool and the proteins used in the experiments are available at

introduction conserved motifs in biological sequences reflect functionally important shared features. In genome sequences, conserved motifs can point to promoters or regulatory elements, regions of splice junctions between protein coding exons or regions affecting the shape of the chromatin. In protein sequences, such conserved motifs can highlight signals that are important for controlling the cellular localization (e.g. nucleus, cytoplasm, extracellular compartment), * To whom correspondence should be addressed. regions shared between proteins that interact with a same partner or regions important for the biochemical function itself. Physico-chemical properties and 3D structures of proteins are more conserved than the suite of amino acids itself. Thus, at a given position in a protein sequence, different amino acids may have similar structural or physico-chemical roles. Degenerate motifs allowing multiple possible amino acids at one position are necessary to comply with this variability. Several methods allow for discovery of degenerate motifs (), but few of them take into account similarity in terms of physicochemical properties of amino acids at a given position (). When the purpose of the obtained motifs is to scan large datasets (e.g. genomes, proteomes) in order to find new sequences potentially involved in the same biological process, another relevant point in the motif discovery is the specificity of the identified motifs regarding the biological process. Some systems make use of statistics to attach a measure of significance to each of the discovered patterns, as deduced from a model based on the input sequences or a public sequence database (). For many biological applications, however, a negative set of sequences not involved in the process of interest can be compiled, and this set can be used as a more direct way to evaluate the relevance of the motifs. While several motif discovery processes take into consideration a negative sequence set (), this set is often used to guide the search toward motifs overrepresented in the positive sequences, rather than discriminating motifs. In this article, we propose a method that identifies motifs consisting of specific amino acids and physico-chemical properties, that can be used as discriminators to identify new sequences involved in a biological process of interest. To our knowledge, no motif discovery method exists that combines these two features. Our method outputs the top K motifs that are most frequent in a positive set of proteins and are absent from a negative set of proteins. We applied this method to find motifs in root knot nematode effectors. root knot nematodes are the most damaging plant parasitic animals to the agriculture worldwide, causing billions of euro losses every year (). They have sophisticated interactions with plants that include penetration of root tissue and establishment of a feeding site. A set of effector proteins that are secreted by the nematode into plant tissue is believed to be crucial for these processes. Most known effectors to date are expressed in nematode secretory glands and delivered to plant tissue through a aliphatic a gil v Neutral stn q Sulfur containing C,M Acidic D,E Aromatic F,Y,W Basic R,H,K Cyclic P syringe like style t. With the availability of two annotated genome sequences for root knot nematodes (), identifying the whole set of candidate secreted effectors can now be envisioned. Although many effectors possess a signal peptide for secretion, others clearly present in secretory glands and or nematode secretions have no predicted signal peptide (). Similarly, many root knot nematode proteins bearing a signal peptide are not delivered to the plant but have conserved functions in different species. Hence, the presence of a signal peptide can not be used as a discriminator to identify new effectors, and no reliable motif to predict secretion of a nematode protein in plants is currently available. We constructed a positive set of proteins known to be secreted by root knot nematodes into plant tissue and a negative set of evolutionarily conserved proteins, in order to identify specific motifs in positive proteins. Using these datasets, our method identified a set of effect or specific motifs at the n terminal region of the positive proteins.

DISCUSSION

conclusion we propose an algorithm for the de novo identification of protein motifs specific to a set of proteins. The motifs are not restricted to a sequence of specific amino acids, but can involve physico-chemical amino acid properties. The algorithm combines a variety of existing and new algorithmic contributions into a practical tool, that is freely available, and is able to include user defined amino acid properties. We provide additional software to scan sequence databases for the occurrence of the identified motifs. To our knowledge, no method is currently available to identify discriminative motifs that are degenerated according to a classification scheme. Our tool was used to discover motifs specific to root knot nematode proteins that are secreted into plant tissues. We showed that by allowing properties in the motifs, we are able to find motifs with a higher frequency in a positive set of proteins, while still being absent from a negative set. Using a set of four identified motifs as discriminators, we detected a total of 2579 proteins in the proteome of m incognita that can be considered as new putative effectors. We have compared the motifs discovered by our tool to the result of four other tools that find degenerate motifs. We conclude that our tool is the only one that finds a set of motifs using predefined amino acid classes, that is completely absent from the negative set. While we have focused on finding protein motifs, the tool can be used on any kind of sequence dataset, with any kind of research question for which a positive and negative set can be defined.
