Motivation: The prioritization and identification of disease causing mutations is one of the most significant challenges in medical gen-omics. Currently available methods address this problem for non-synonymous single nucleotide variants sn vs and variation in promoters/ enhancers; however, recent research has implicated synonymous (silent) exonic mutations in a number of disorders. Results: We have curated 33 such variants from literature and developed the Silent Variant Analyzer (SilVA), a machine learning approach to separate these from among a large set of rare polymorph-isms. We evaluate SilVAs performance on in silico infection experiments , in which we implant known disease causing mutations into a human genome, and show that for 15 of 33 disorders, we rank the implanted mutation among the top five most deleterious ones. Furthermore, we apply the SilVA method to two additional datasets: synonymous variants associated with Meckel syndrome, and a collection of silent variants clinically observed and stratified by a molecular diagnostics laboratory, and show that SilVA is able to accurately predict the harmfulness of silent variants in these datasets. Availability: SilVA is open source and is freely available from the pro

introduction the realization of the medical advantages of the personal genome remains limited by our inability to identify the disease causing variation from the millions of non-functional (neutral) single nucleotide, structural and copy number variants, which are present in each individual's genome. Despite the successes of using genome sequencing to identify disease causing mutations in individuals with Mendelian disorders (), and cohorts of individuals with more common genetic disorders such as autism (O'), the prioritization of variants based on their involvement in disorders remains a significant challenge (). Methods for the identification of disease causing mutations typically use one of two complementary approaches: statistical association between a variant and a disorder, or the prioritization of all genomic variants found in a genome based on their possible functional effect. In the statistical association approach, individuals with the disorder (cases) are genotyped in parallel with matched controls, and statistical tests are then used to identify variants that are overrepresented in cases as compared with controls. Although such tests have shown promise for identifying genes involved in some common disorders, including autism () and type 2 diabetes (), these tests are not applicable to rare genetic disorders, where unrelated individuals may all be affected because of different (personal) variants within the same gene or pathway. Approaches like the Cohort Allelic Sums Test (CAST) () and Combined Multivariate and Collapsing (CMC) method () aggregate the rare variants seen within a gene or a pathway to mitigate this, but the applicability of association based methods remains extremely limited for small cohorts. The alternative approach of prioritizing disease causing single nucleotide variants sn vs based on their population frequency, conservation and the type of change (radical versus conservative amino acid change, introduction of a stop codon, etc.) has been extremely effective at identifying causal non-synonymous mutations in a number of Mendelian disorders, including Charcot marie tooth neuropathy (), hajdu cheney syndrome () and Miller syndrome (). In this approach, the variants identified in the genome are filtered to those with low allele frequencies (common variants are unlikely to cause rare disorders) and are sorted based on a 'harmfulness' score generated by tools such as poly phen SIFT or PANTHER (). Although some of these functional variants may not be harmful, functionality is typically used as a proxy for harmfulness within such tools, and we use the terms interchangeably. Most recently, the SNV prioritization and association based approaches have been combined within the va ast method (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Tools for the prioritization of harmful non-synonymous variants typically consider multiple features that may affect the functioning of the protein, including the level of conservation of the changed residue, the severity of the amino acid change (a change from a hydrophobic to a hydrophilic residue is more likely to be harmful than a change within one of these groups), the location of the variant relative to functional regions of the protein, such as active sites, and the likelihood that the mutation would affect protein secondary or tertiary structure. These features are then combined using either heuristic weights () or more rigorous machine learning frameworks () to identify sn vs likely to have functional effects. All of the features can contribute to the overall success of the prioritization; however, the conservation of the amino acid across evolution clearly has the strongest effect, and some argue it may be sufficient on its own (). Although tools have been developed for the prioritization of non-synonymous sn vs and to a lesser extent copy number variation (), currently there are no methodologies for prioritizing functional synonymous sn vs. Most pipelines for identification of disease causing mutations filter out synonymous sn vs at the earliest stages, concentrating on amino acid altering and regulatory variation. However, there is growing evidence that synonymous sn vs affect protein splicing, expression and ultimately function, and some of these sn vs contribute to disease (see reviews:). A synonymous SNV may contribute to a phenotype in several ways, including by changing the splicing pattern, the folding energy and the structure of the pre mrna and the ultimate fold of the protein by altering translation dynamics. Splice changes are perhaps the best studied effect of functional synonymous sn vs (). The creation or modification of a splice donor or accept or site, or the binding site of a splicing enhancer, silencer or regulator can lead to intron inclusion or alternative splicing of the exon, and a drastically different protein product (). Synonymous substitutions that change a common codon to a rare one, or vice versa, can also result in a different protein by affecting translational efficiency, as is the case with a mutation in the CFTR gene associated with cystic fibrosis (). Additionally, synonymous mutations have been shown to change the expression () and function () of proteins in Escherichia coli and play a role in substrate specificity () and cancer outcomes () in humans, though the later claim has been controversial (). Several previous computational approaches have looked at variation that does not alter the coding sequence, including methods that evaluate the changes in RNA folding energies and ensembles () and studies that aim to identify alternative splicing genome wide by analyzing exonic splicing enhancers and silencers (). However, to our knowledge, no current method combines multiple genomic features to identify 'silent' genetic variants with functional effects. Toward this end, we developed the Silent Variant Analyzer (SilVA), a random forest based prioritization method for synonymous variants in the human genome. Our method considers multiple features based on sequence conservation, splice factor motifs, splice donor accept or sites, RNA folding energy, codon usage and CpG content. We use a custom curated dataset of 33 rare synonymous disease causing variants to train and evaluate the overall efficacy of SilVA, as well as two additional datasets for independent validation, showing that SilVA is able to accurately predict the harmfulness of silent variants in these datasets.

discussion current technologies are able to sequence a human genome relatively cheaply and quickly, but the key bottleneck is the interpretation of the variants to identify those that are most likely to be related to an observed phenotype or a disorder. The automated prioritization of deleterious variants is an important step toward the realization of genomic medicine. Although methods for this task have been designed for non-synonymous coding variation, many other types of variants are currently not prioritized, and are typically ignored in genome analysis pipelines. The growing evidence that some of the 'silent' variation has important functional roles implies that effective prioritization is necessary to explore such variation in medical sequencing studies. In this article we present the first method for the prioritization of disease causing synonymous sn vs based on a number of features, including sequence conservation, splice sites, splice regulatory motifs, codon frequency, CpG content and RNA secondary structure energy. We have curated 33 such disease related variants, and evaluated several machine learning approaches for prioritizing these from among a set of rare putatively neutral sn vs. Our results indicate that splicing information and sequence conservation are currently the two most informative features for identifying deleterious synonymous variants, and the performance degrades without either of these features. The random forest method outperforms other statistical learning methods at prioritizing disease causing sn vs and yields variant scores that are significantly higher in known harmful variants than in control variants. When a deleterious SNV is added to a human genome, this method ranks the deleterious SNV among the top five candidates for 15 of the 33 diseases and is able to identify harmful variants in independent validation sets. Together, these findings indicate that automated methods for identification of deleterious synonymous sn vs can be useful in parallel with methods that prioritize other types of genomic variation for the analysis of full human genomes. Our method's performance is currently limited by the small number of training examples, but as more examples of pathogenic synonymous variants are found, the model predictions will only improve. Additional features can also be developed to better address the mechanisms by which synonymous mutations can effect change, such as better measures of exon strength, the effect on RNA folding ensembles and the significance of changes to exon splicing enhancer and suppressor motifs. As approaches for the stratification of different types of variants are developed, one natural extension of the current article and the work on non-synonymous variation would be to design an approach that would consider both types of variants, and attempt to classify deleterious synonymous and non-synonymous variants together.
