Gene fusions are being discovered at an increasing rate using massively parallel sequencing technologies. Prioritization of cancer fusion drivers for validation can not be performed using traditional single gene based methods because fusions involve portions of two partner genes. To address this problem, we propose a novel network analysis method called fusion centrality that is specifically tailored for prioritizing gene fusions. We first propose a domain based fusion model built on the theory of exon domain shuffling. The model leads to a hypothesis that a fusion is more likely to be an oncogenic driver if its partner genes act like hubs in a network because the fusion mutation can deregulate normal functions of many other genes and their pathways. The hypothesis is supported by the observation that for most known cancer fusion genes, at least one of the fusion partners appears to be a hub in a network, and even for many fusions both partners appear to be hubs. Based on this model, we construct fusion centrality, a multigene based network metric, and use it to score fusion drivers. We show that the fusion centrality outperforms other single gene based methods. Specifically, the method successfully predicts most of 38 newly discovered fusions that had validated onco-genic importance. To our best knowledge, this is the first network based approach for identifying fusion drivers. Availability: Matlab code implementing the fusion centrality method is available upon request from the corresponding authors. Contact:

introduction a fusion gene that results from chromosome rearrangements is a hybrid gene formed from distinct genes, either in the same chromosome or in different chromosomes. Many recurrent gene fusions, such as bcra bl in chronic myelogenous leukemia (), EWS-FIL1 in Ewing's Sarcoma () and TMPRSS2-ERG in prostate cancer (), play important roles in cancer progression. Gene fusions can lead to oncogenesis through one of several alternative mechanisms: (i) a strong promoter of one gene is fused to and hence controls the open reading frame of a second proto-oncogene, resulting in the deregulation of its oncogenic function; (ii) the fused gene encodes a fusion protein that leads to new oncogenic function; and (iii) fusion results in the truncation or loss of function of a tumor suppressor gene. In addition, fused transcripts (chimeric RNAs), generated by trans splicing or read through events () and unrelated to chromosomal rearrangement, may also lead to similar, if not identical, biological consequences for cancer progression. Chromosome banding analysis and fluorescence in situ hybridization have long been used to detect fusion genes. The advent of massively parallel sequencing greatly accelerated the rate of discovery of novel fusion genes and chimeric RNAs (). A number of bioinformatics methods have recently been developed for identifying gene fusions from sequencing data (). However, recent studies indicate that the majority of these fusions are likely to constitute passenger events in cancer progression (). Up to now, only a few identified fusions have been shown to have oncogenic effects, in part due to the labor intensive nature of required validation assays. Thus, a computational method that allows prioritization of potential fusion drivers would greatly facilitate the discovery of important fusions. One well established approach to discover driver point mutations is to determine whether its observed mutation rate is significantly higher than the background mutation rate (). However, this approach is not suitable for the discovery of fusion drivers that involve two genes. Besides, because fusions are rare, background rate for fusion mutation would be hard to be established. Alternatively, network analysis has been successfully used to identify rare cancer driver genes with point mutations without estimating mutation rate (). These network methods estimate the tendency of individual mutated genes to result in oncogenesis in molecular networks. Prioritization of fusion genes raises a new challenge for the existing single gene based approaches because fusions result in hybrid genes formed from portions of two genes. Only few attempts have so far been made to study network properties of fusion genes. One study () constructed a fusion network based on *To whom correspondence should be addressed. all partnerships of known fusion gene pairs. In this analysis, nodes were fusion partner genes and edges represented partnerships between fusion partner genes. The constructed gene fusion network showed a scale free topology. However, this analysis did not address the problem of prioritizing fusion drivers. Another study developed a computational method to nominate fusion drivers by assessing the association of their partner genes with the identified biological concepts (i.e. gene sets with specific biological functions) (). This method, similar to the aforementioned single gene based approaches, only accounted for the impact of a single gene. A recent study () proposed a multiple gene based approach to identify groups of proteins that are potential cancer drivers. However, this approach is not specifically developed for identifying fusion drivers. To address the problem, we here propose fusion centrality method for prioritizing fusion drivers in network context. We first test whether gene fusions are associated with exon domain shuffling by enrichment analysis of protein domain co occurrence and protein domain domain interactions between protein domains of known cancer fusion partner genes. We then proposed a domain based fusion model, assuming that the potential impact level of a fusion in a network would be associated with all the protein domains or biological interactions of its two partner genes. The model leads to the hypothesis that a fusion is more likely to be an oncogenic driver if its corresponding partner genes are involved in extensive biological interactions (i.e. hub genes in a network). We then test this hypothesis using a network centrality analysis on known cancer fusion partner genes, and then led to the development of fusion centrality, a multiple gene based network metric, to prioritize driver fusion genes from passengers. We evaluated the performance of the fusion centrality model by a comparison with other single gene based methods. Finally, we applied the fusion centrality approach to 38 newly discovered cancer fusions.

discussion in this work, we have proposed the concept of fusion degree centrality, which measures the local impact of a fusion gene through its direct connections in a network. The fusion degree centrality, however, is somewhat biased toward those genes that were studied more in literature. Therefore, false negatives could be an issue because some of the genes important for cancer progression may not be predicted by the method because little is known about their function, and there is little connectivity between these genes and others in the network. For example, some bottleneck hub genes () with only a few direct connections to other nodes, but that act as key connectors in the network. This problem can be addressed by developing of other kinds of fusion centrality metrics that are able to measure the global network impact of a fusion, such as fusion betweenness centrality or fusion eigenvector centrality, using the same concept we proposed here. For example, after creating a fused node of two nodes, the fusion betweenness centrality of a potential fusion generated by these two nodes in a network is represented by the betweenness centrality of the fused node, which can be calculated using several existing algorithms. However, in these algorithms, the calculations of the shortest paths between all pairs of nodes in a network are time consuming and have to occur once for each fused node when applying the algorithms to multiple fusions because a fusion between two nodes in a network may shorten paths between other node pairs. Therefore, faster algorithms are needed to efficiently calculate these fusion centrality measurements for a large number of fusions detected in next generation sequencing. The locations of the fusion or breakpoints and the assessment of the directionality to the gene components allowed us to categorize different types of fusions, such as in frame fusions and out of frame fusions. Although the proposed domain based fusion model was developed based on in frame fusions, the proposed fusion centrality method can also be applied to out of frame fusions because an out of frame fusion mutation can be considered the deletion of its two partner genes. More specifically, if the reading frame is not retained across the fusion junction, it will likely lead to the production of a premature stop codon and degradation of the transcript. An out of frame fusion can silence one allele of its two partner genes and be associated with haplo insufficiency or loss of heterozygosity. Therefore, the potential impact of an out of frame fusion in a network would also be associated with all biological interactions of its two partner genes if the other alleles of the partner genes are lost as well we also applied the centrality analysis to over 1000 cancer chimeric transcripts and fusion genes collected in chit ars database (), and conclude the same result as that of using the original 289 fusion gene pairs set (Supplementary Material Section S4). Besides, we also used thirty-two highly recurrent chimeric RNAs that were detected in 20 human prostate cancer samples and 10 matched benign prostate tissues () to validate the performance of our fusion centrality approach. Many of these chimeric s RNA also appeared in matched benign tissues owing to a 'field effect' within the histologically normal epithelium. They non-parametric kolmogorov smirnov test was used to determine which chimeric RNAs are significantly enriched in cancer tissues. We hypothesized that some of enriched chimeric RNAs would be fusion drivers and thus have high fusion centrality in our prediction. Indeed, we found most of chimeric RNAs that are significantly enriched in human prostate cancer (P50.05) tended to have higher fusion centrality than those in significantly enriched chimeric RNAs. These results are detailed in the Section S5 of the Supplementary Material. Finally, it is important to note that the fusion centrality method was constructed based on the available data of biological networks that are far from complete. Genes that have not been characterized to date but may be important in cancer progression will not be identified by our fusion centrality approach because little of their functions are known. This limitation applies to all network based approaches (), but our method will be improved over time as more data are generated and are integrated to construct a more complete gene network in the future. Nevertheless, our results suggest that the method of fusion centrality is an efficient method for identifying novel fusion drivers.

conclusion in summary, all results in this work indicate that the fusion centrality method is a systematic and effective method for prioritizing fusion drivers from hundreds or thousands of fusion candidates identified in diverse cancer types. To our best knowledge, this is the first network based approaches to nominate fusion drivers.
