Motivation: Many complex diseases are the result of abnormal pathway functions instead of single abnormalities. Disease diagnosis and intervention strategies must target these pathways while minimizing the interference with normal physiological processes. large scale identification of disease pathways and chemicals that may be used to perturb them requires the integration of information about drugs, genes, diseases and pathways. This information is currently distributed over several pharmacogenomics databases. An integrated analysis of the information in these databases can reveal disease pathways and facilitate novel biomedical analyses. Results: We demonstrate how to integrate pharmacogenomics databases through integration of the biomedical ontologies that are used as meta-data in these databases. The additional background knowledge in these ontologies can then be used to enable novel analyses. We identify disease pathways using a novel multi ontology enrichment analysis over the Human Disease Ontology, and we identify significant associations between chemicals and pathways using an enrichment analysis over a chemical ontology. The drug– pathway and disease pathway associations are a valuable resource for research in disease and drug mechanisms and can be used to improve computational drug repurposing.

introduction pharmacogenomics aims to increase our understanding of the effect of genetic variation on the response to drugs, thereby leading to better health care through a more personalized and precise approach to medical treatment of disease. To achieve this goal, pharmacogenomics must combine and integrate data from multiple domains, including information about drug actions, gene functions, gene and protein interactions, pathways, gene expression, phenotypes, disease and genetic variation. When this information is combined, novel integrative analyses become possible that can improve our understanding of drug actions and disease mechanisms. In complex diseases, it is often not possible to identify single aberrations underlying the disease. In order to provide possible * To whom correspondence should be addressed. diagnosis and treatments of such diseases, it is important that we are able to identify aberrations in the biological pathways related to such diseases in order to gain a better understanding of the synergistic molecular functions of the involved gene networks and their role in the disease. network based approaches can reveal specific aberrations in the processes that make up such biological systems. In particular, aberrant pathways can provide insights into the systemic imbalance underlying a disease and can further provide targets for disease intervention (). To identify aberrant pathways, access to information about pathway participants as well as their potential interactions with chemicals and diseases becomes important. One obstacle towards such an approach lies with the distribution of information across multiple heterogeneous resources. The rapid increase of data generated from genetic analyses and functional genomics has necessitated the development of a number of pharmacogenomics related databases that provide invaluable resources for discovering information related to the impact of gene variations to drug responses and toxicity (). One prime example of such a resource is the Pharmacogenomics Knowledge Base (PharmGKB), a database in which associations between drugs, genes and their variants, and diseases is curated against primary scientific literature for which there is indication of their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic properties (). pharmgkb s data have been used, among many things, to extract biomedical relations from text () and to make pharmaco genomic predictions such as warfarin dosing (International Warfarin). Further databases that incorporate relevant pharmaco genomic knowledge include drug bank (), a richly annotated database of drugs and drug targets, and the Comparative Toxicogenomics Database (CTD) (), which contains manually curated relations between chemicals, genes and diseases and integrates them in a chemical gene disease network to predict novel relations. With the advent of the Gene Ontology (GO) (), ontologies are now being widely used for the annotation of data in biomedical databases, including pharmacogenomics, drug and disease databases such as the pharma gkb drug bank and CTD. Ontologies aid knowledge integration by providing a rich taxonomic structure and axioms which makes some aspects of background domain knowledge explicit. Based on the generalization hierarchy available in ontologies, different resources can be integrated even when exact matches between entities in different databases can not be

discussion relavant knowledge about pharmacogenomics is distributed across several databases, each of which focuses on different aspects of this complex domain. For example, in the PharmGKB, no extensive information about drug disease or gene disease associations is provided, but this information is contained in other databases such as drug bank and CTD. Herein, we used the PharmGKB, CTD and drug bank to demonstrate how the combination of semantic web technologies and formal ontological analysis can be used to integrate different resources relevant for pharmacogenomics research. This integration does not only lead to significantly improved capabilities for knowledge retrieval but also enables statistical analyses of the data in these databases that reveal associations between pathways and diseases as well as associations between pathways and chemicals. Although our approach is currently limited by the depth and reliability of the data contained in the integrated databases, both as a consequence of a lack of complete knowledge on biological pathways and a lack of complete curation of literature, methods of knowledge integration can provide the means to generate insights that lead to more direct biological investigation. Biomedical ontologies and semantic web technology play a crucial role in such integration methods. Ontologies provide a rich taxonomic structure and axioms that can provide background knowledge based on which knowledge from different domains can be integrated. In particular, ontologies allow for a generalization of concepts that is useful when exact matches between entities in different resources are not possible and when a grouping of classes based on various features is required. For example, through the link to DO and the classification it provides, we are able to identify specific neoplasms using the additional information provided by DO's classification of diseases. In additional, relations in ontologies can be combined with information from the pharmacogenomics databases in order to compose complex associations that can not be found within either database alone. For example, the background knowledge in DO allows us to group drugs based on the anatomical site at which they are active. This information may lead to additional insights into the drugs' mechanisms of action. In order to use this background knowledge, it is necessary to automatically process biomedical ontologies and extract relevant knowledge. Semantic web technology, in particular automated reasoning software, is now capable of processing large biomedical ontologies, to process, verify and query OWL knowledge bases. Recent progress in efficient automated reasoning, in particular related to reasoning over large life science ontologies in the OWL EL profile () has enabled the potential to use automated reasoning in software application and scientific data analyses, and our performance results of automated reasoning over the integrated pharmacogenomics databases demonstrate that it is even feasible to implement real time query and analysis applications based on automated reasoning. Our approach is not limited to the domain of pharmacogenomics alone, but can serve as a model for integrative analyses in other areas, including model organism databases (), databases of protein functions, disease, phenotype databases () or databases of computational models (). In each case, it is crucial to identify relevant biomedical ontologies based on which the content of the databases can be aligned, formalize the content of the databases in such a way that it becomes possible to answer the relevant
