Motivation: Small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are produced from much longer sequences of double stranded RNA precursors through cleavage by Dicer or a dicer like protein. These small RNAs play a key role in genetic and epigenetic regulation; however, a full understanding of the mechanisms by which they operate depends on the characterization of the precursors from which they are derived. Results: high throughput sequencing of small RNA populations allows the locations of the double stranded RNA precursors to be inferred. We have developed methods to analyse small RNA sequencing data from multiple biological sources, taking into account replicate information, to identify robust sets of siRNA precursors. Our methods show good performance on both a set of small RNA sequencing data in Arabidopsis thaliana and simulated datasets. Availability: Our methods are available as the Bioconductor www bioconductor org package segment seq (version 1.5.6 and above).

introduction small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are short RNAs of 2025 nt in length cleaved from much longer double stranded RNA (dsRNA) precursors by Dicer or dicer like ribonucleases (). siRNAs are known to play a substantial role in genetic and epigenetic regulation (), but a full understanding of the mechanisms by which siRNAs themselves are regulated depends, in part, on the characterization of the dsrna s from which the siRNAs derive. It is clear that, when two siRNAs derive from the same precursor, they must share at least some upstream regulatory factors. As a result, the abundances and functions of the siRNAs derived from the same locus may be correlated, providing increased biological information for downstream analyses. dsrna s are highly transient and not easily examined. However, siRNAs that have been stabilized by association with some protein complex [e.g. the rna induced silencing complex (are relatively easy to characterize using one of the technologies developed for high throughput sequencing (). When siRNAs are derived from * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the same precursor dsRNA, we expect to see the sequenced reads align to the genome in close proximity to each other and with non independent abundances. By looking for regions of the genome which show an abundance of reads above background levels, we can establish maps of siRNA loci on a genome. These loci approximate the regions of the genome from which the dsRNA precursor is transcribed. Identification of siRNA loci from high throughput sequencing data must address a number of issues. In sequencing siRNAs, we generally expect to also sequence other classes of small RNAs srn as with alternative mechanisms of production. These other srn as can, if they have been sufficiently characterized, be filtered from the sequenced reads. Alternatively, they can be allowed to remain and be treated in the same way as the siRNA reads, as many other types of sRNA reads will also be generated from some longer precursor, and thus appear as a locus. In the worst case, these sRNA reads will form an additional source of background noise within the data. A degree of background noise is expected in any case, as a result of sequencing errors and the presence of breakdown products from longer molecules such as rRNAs, tRNAs and mRNAs, among other factors. Consequently, not every sequenced read needs be associated with an sRNA locus. The greatest difficulty in identifying siRNA loci is the problem of accumulation bias; within an siRNA locus, some of the siRNAs will be stabilized by association with some protein complex and be available for sequencing, while others will not. High variation in the coverage of bases within an siRNA locus is therefore expected, with some regions within an locus containing no sequenced reads at all. These accumulation biases within siRNA loci distinguish the data from those found in chips eq () and mrna seq experiments (). Solutions to the problems of peak calling in chips eq () and transcript discovery in mrna seq (), which in general depend on much more consistent patterns of sequenced reads aligning to the genome, are thus not directly applicable to siRNA locus discovery, and a new set of techniques for the analysis of siRNA loci is required. A further difficulty is the problem of multi reads (), sequenced reads that match to multiple places in the genome. The siRNA loci show strong association with repetitive elements such as transposons, and so many siRNA loci match multiple times in the genome. Moreover, whole loci may be replicated exactly (or nearly so) throughout the genome and should all be identified. Previous attempts to identify siRNA locus maps () have taken a relatively naive approach to defining the loci. These methods look for genomic regions in which the number of sequenced reads exceeds some minimum value and there exists no large gap without an aligned sequenced read. The nib ls algorithm of () develops this approach by examining the density of sequenced sRNA reads upon the genome via a graph theoretic approach whereby sRNA reads are connected if the genomic distance between them lies below some threshold and a region is considered a locus if it is sufficiently connected. Apart from the somewhat arbitrary nature of the thresholds used, a substantial weakness of these approaches is that they allow the analysis of at most two samples, neglecting replicate data. Existing methods are thus unsuitable for robustly defining siRNA loci from large sequencing experiments. We develop a novel set of methods for constructing siRNA locus maps based on high throughput sequencing of srn as from replicated samples coming from diverse biological conditions. The aim of these methods is to split the genome into non-overlapping segments, of which some will be siRNA loci; regions from which in at least some biological condition a dsRNA is expressed and produces siRNAs, and some will be nulls; regions in which there is no siRNA locus present in any observed biological condition. The methods are shown to perform well on both simulated and true biological data, and represent a significant step forward in the generation of stable sets of siRNA loci from sequencing data derived from diverse experimental conditions.
