Motivation: Mass spectrometry based protein profiling has become a key technology in biomedical research and biomarker discovery. Sample preparation strategies that reduce the complexity of tryptic digests by immunoaffinity substantially increase throughput and sensitivity in proteomic mass spectrometry. The scarce availability of peptide specific capture antibodies limits these approaches. Recently antibodies directed against short terminal motifs were found to enrich subsets of peptides with identical terminal sequences. This approach holds the promise of a significant gain in efficiency. TXP (Triple X Proteomics) and context independent motif specific global proteome survey binders are variants of this concept. Principally the binding motifs of such antibodies have to be elucidated after generating these antibodies. This entails a substantial effort in the lab, as it requires synthetic peptide libraries and numerous mass spectrometry experiments. Results: We present an algorithm for predicting the antibody binding motif in a mass spectrum obtained from a tryptic digest of a common cell line after immunoprecipitation. The epitope prediction, based on peptide mass fingerprinting, reveals the most enriched terminal epitopes. The tool provides a p value for each potential epitope, estimated by sampling random spectra from a peptide database. The second algorithm combines the predicted sequences to more complex binding motifs. A comparison with library screenings shows that the predictions made by the novel methods are reliable and reproducible indicators of the binding properties of an antibody. Availability: Mass spectrum data, predictions, sampling tables, consensus peptide databases and the applied protocols are available as Supplementary Material. txp terminus Enrichment Analysis (TEA) and mater ics mass spectrometric Analysis of Terminal Epitope Enrichment in Complex Samples) are available as web services at

introduction immunoaffinity enrichment, combined with mass spectrometry, increases sample throughput and sensitivity in proteomic research (). However, the generation and detailed characterization of appropriate capture reagents act as a bottleneck and involve substantial lab resources. This has led various groups to develop techniques enabling the enrichment of multiple targets using generic binders showed that an antibody directed against phosphotyrosine can enrich tyros in phosphorylated proteins. The Triple X Proteomics (TXP) technique () and the Global Proteome Survey (GPS) methodology have extended this concept and are rational approaches aimed to achieving motif specific peptide enrichment. In the TXP approach, antibodies bind to short linear epitopes present in multiple peptides of complex samples after protein fragmentation by trypsin (see). In silico selection of antigens reduces to minimum the set of TXP antibodies required to cover a pre-defined protein target list (). Search space restriction gained from the revealed binding epitope could improve protein identification from MS and MSMS data. However the enrichment of proteo typic peptides with TXP antibodies leads to new challenges in the analysis of mass spectrometric datasets. Results from immunoaffinity experiments using txp antibodies revealed the enrichment of peptides containing the targeted epitope. Some identified peptides also matched sequence variants (). In that study it came clear that the terms 'specific' and 'unspecific' must be considered inappropriate in charcter izing these binders. 'Specificity' generally refers to binding of one protein or peptide to an antibody. Other binding events are deemed to be unspecific, off target or cross reactive. In the TXP strategy, the binding of the antibody towards multiple peptides is inherent. Therefore, novel concepts for epitope identification are needed, which would enable properties of the antibody binding domain to be distinguished from interactions occurring elsewhere. There are three main reasons why unexpected peptides can be detected in the immunoprecipitates. First, this could be due to epitope variations in the polyclonal antibody. Second, off target binding can occur due to sequence similarity, and unlike the immunized antigen, this involves the apparent epitope or binding motif of the antibody mixture. Third, carry-over peptides may remain detectable in the sample, solely due to their persisting massive presence, despite multiple washing steps and meticulous *To whom correspondence should be addressed. care on the part of the lab operator. While carry-over is merely noise, it is worth quantifying the variation caused by polyclonal ity and the apparent epitope. Using recombinant motif specific antibodies gps context independent motif specific binders which also enrich classes of peptides () observed that these binders were markedly promiscuous. They compared sequence data obtained from tandem mass spectrometry lce silt q orbit rap with structural information. Their findings showed that the antibodies not only captured peptides containing the targeted epitope but also variations of it. Thus, the enriched peptides revealed binding motifs. Different amino acid side chains are known to interact with the antibody binding site at individual positions. However such in depth characterizations of epitope motifs analysis call for extensive experiments. A common approach to elucidate a detailed linear epitope is to conduct an interaction analysis between an antibody and peptide libraries. These libraries comprise synthetic peptides which have at least one modified position (). For instance, if an antibody is raised against the c terminal sequence lg yr the peptide library for an epitope would consist of x gyr lx yr lg xr and lg yx peptides with the X representing all 20 amino acids. Instead of adding a single amino acid at step n, all 20 are added in equal amounts. This leads to a library of 80 different peptides for a four amino acid epitope. The synthesis and subsequent measurement of these peptides are significant cost drivers in this phase of antibody development. Moreover, the quality control for such a binder would be more expensive than its generation. Our study aimed at devising a simpler, cost effective method entailing less effort than that required in the labour intensive peptide library approach. We present an algorithm for calculating the detailed epitope using MS data from an immunoaffinity ms experiment. Peptide mass fingerprinting is a well established method in proteomics (), on which we based the txp tea (Terminal sequence Enrichment Analysis) algorithm. The original technique involves identifying an isolated and subsequently digested protein by the characteristic pattern in the peptide mass spectrum. txp tea performs searches for patterns related to sets of peptides sharing a specific terminal amino acid sequence, instead of spectral patterns associated with a specific protein. The method compares the masses observed in the measurement with a theoretical spectrum from a database. The mater ics algorithm we describe here merges the results of txp tea to the antibody binding motif.

discussion the predictions by mater ics closely reproduced the binding motifs identified by the positional peptide library experiments in different cell lines for the three antibodies. However the comparison also revealed some discrepancies between the control experiment and the mater ics results. The motif for the anti am tr antibody found by the library experiment is more complex than the motifs predicted by mater ics. This could be a consequence of complexity restrictions by the algorithm. The complexity scoring function penalizes an additional amino acid at the first position (?TR instead of at r in terms of the degree of variability at the second position. The motif exceeds the complexity bound and is therefore not considered. The binding property of the anti eier antibody was the most difficult to predict. mater ics did not detect a significant enrichment in the pre-selection step for most spectra. Instead of predicting a wrong motif, it did not make any prediction at all and, instead, reported that no significant enrichment was detectable. If the input data passed the pre-selection step, the predicted motifs were observable close to the results of the peptide libraries. On only one occasion did mater ics (see Supplementary Material, anti am tr A357, biological replicate 2, technical replicate 2) make a wrong prediction: a comparison to the other technical replicates of the same immunoprecipitation ruled out this result. As shown in, experiments for the anti eier antibody resulted in bad quality spectra for the he k cell lysate, whereas immuno preci tip ations from hela and a357 digests enabled motif prediction in many technical replicates. On the whole, the HELA digest appears to be the most stable 'standard' sample for motif prediction pertaining to the three observed binders. Although the results are obviously dependent on the observed epitope, it must be noted that using HELA cell lysate does not always produce the best prediction results. Some terminal epitopes are more abundant in some cell lines than others. Reports concluded that each cell line leads to the best MCC score for a given binder (results marked bold in). There was adequate reproducibility within different immunoprecipitates and the technical replicates, at least for the stronger binders. The results obtained from different cell lines show a reasonable level of agreement. Apart from the minor variation described, this novel approach appears to work independently of the chosen line. This strengthens flexibility as cell lines in stock at the lab can be used to perform mater ics experiments. Benchmark experiments using artificial data showed, that mater ics can make reliable predictions even if only a minor fraction of the signals found in a peak list is related to the enriched epitope (see Supplementary Material).

conclusion our experimental study shows that txp tea and mater ics are able to identify terminal binding motifs in immunoaffinity MS experiments. The motifs obtained closely resemble patterns found by using a peptide library approach. The described methods for motif elucidation lead to a substantial reduction in costs. In addition the novel method enables the weighting of isobaric variations in the binding motifs. These techniques might well lead to improved peptide identification algorithms, which exploit the existing data on potentially enriched sequences during the search process. Our findings are relevant to other fields of biomedical research, such as in the identification of the binding properties of MHC molecules. Future versions of the algorithms will include options to identify internal epitopes and binding motifs as well as new ways to deal with post-translational modifications.
