Motivation: Unlike traditional diagnosis of an existing disease state, detecting the pre disease state just before the serious deterioration of a disease is a challenging task, because the state of the system may show little apparent change or symptoms before this critical transition during disease progression. By exploring the rich interaction information provided by high throughput data, the dynamical network bio-marker (DNB) can identify the pre disease state, but this requires multiple samples to reach a correct diagnosis for one individual, thereby restricting its clinical application. Results: In this article, we have developed a novel computational approach based on the DNB theory and differential distributions between the expressions of DNB and non dnb molecules, which can detect the pre disease state reliably even from a single sample taken from one individual, by compensating insufficient samples with existing datasets from population studies. Our approach has been validated by the successful identification of pre disease samples from subjects or individuals before the emergence of disease symptoms for acute lung injury, influenza and breast cancer.

introduction based on only one single sample from an individual, traditional biomarkers can indicate whether the sample is in a given disease state or not; however, they can not generally diagnose the pre disease state, which can be viewed as a special normal state just before major deterioration or critical transition to a disease (). In other words, it is a highly challenging problem to distinguish the pre disease state from the normal state because there may be little apparent difference between these two states, in contrast to the generally significant difference between the normal state and the disease state (or the early disease state). One way to detect early signals of an abrupt change in a system, is to directly construct a mathematical model for the system and predict the progression details (). However, in most realistic cases, such a model for a specific system or a disease is not available due to the complicated and uncertain nature of most such systems. The critical slowing down theory () provides a useful way to detect the early warning signals of critical transitions for a general system (), and has been applied to ecosystems (), climate systems (), economics and global finance (). However, there are two main limitations to this method: (i) it requires a series of time course data for each individual, i.e. a large number of samples for each subject; (ii) the measurements are required to cover those variables that show the critical slowing down dynamics, i.e. extensive knowledge on the system is required. Clearly, for many complex systems, in particular, biomedical systems, it is generally difficult to obtain data (or a model) of an individual satisfying both these conditions. In fact, typical data currently available for molecular biology and medicine are high throughput OMICS data with a small number of samples (for each individual) but high dimensions. Although these data usually lack dynamic information due to the small number of time course samples, they are still valuable because of the rich information regarding correlations or interactions among many variables of the high throughput measurements. With rapid advancements in high throughput technologies, OMICS data have been measured and made available for complex diseases such as asthma attacks (), epileptic seizures () and many others (). To overcome the two problems of the critical slowing down method, a new model free approach, the dynamical network biomarker (DNB), was developed to detect early warning signals of complex diseases even with a small number of samples (). By exploring fluctuation and correlation information among molecules, the DNB can identify the pre disease state () and thus predict the critical transition before a serious deterioration, in contrast to diagnosing the disease state by traditional *To whom correspondence should be addressed. biomarkers. Moreover, it has been shown that those molecules in DNB are not necessarily the result of the disease but make the first move from the normal state toward the disease state in a collective manner through a critical transition (). One significant feature of DNB members (or molecules) is that in the pre disease state, they fluctuate dynamically and are strongly correlated. Therefore, this group of molecules, or the DNB can characterize the dynamic features of the underlying system, and provide early warning signals for detecting the imminent critical transition (). The DNB has been successfully applied to many complex diseases, such as liver cancer, to detect sudden deterioration and study the underlying mechanisms (). Although the DNB can identify the pre disease state, it still requires multiple samples for an individual, thereby restricting its clinic application. Clearly, identifying the pre disease state with only a single sample in a reliable manner is challenging but of great importance, since it provides not only a feasible and cost effective method for clinic diagnosis but also significantly relieves the burden of sample collections for individuals. In this article, by exploring the differential distributions of DNB members and non dnb members, we developed a novel computational method for efficiently and accurately identifying the pre disease state before the critical transition in a complex disease with just a single sample (). Specifically, DNB molecules typically have a double peak distribution in the pre disease state owing to their strongly fluctuating and correlated nature in the pre disease stage, but have a single peak distribution in the normal state due to their dynamically stable behavior in the normal stage (see Supplementary Material A for details). On the other hand, non dnb molecules are observed to show a single peak distribution even in the pre disease state due to their stable behavior (). Thus, differential distributions between those groups of molecules can be identified from a single sample provided there are multiple control samples, which are generally available in practice. In this article, we use kullback leibler divergence (KL divergence), which measures the difference between two data distributions to formulate the DNB single sample score (the dnb s score) by three factors. Each factor in the dnb s score reflects an aspect of the dynamic features when the system is near a transition point (). Based on this scheme, a new scoring criterion, i.e. the dnb s score, was proposed as a quantitative measurement of each sample (). Note that too few genes in the DNB may give a biased result due to incomplete information on the distribution. Moreover, we have theoretically and numerically shown that the dnb s score is relatively high when the system is in a pre disease state, and relatively low when the system is in a normal or disease state. Hence, the dnb s score provides a reliable signal to identify the pre disease state. Both theoretical and computational results show that high dimensional information of data can be utilized to compensate insufficient samples (), which is the main reason why DNB can detect the pre disease state by a single sample with high throughput measurements. In addition, our previous study indicates that the dnb s score is a model free approach that can be theoretically applied to any disease or biological system with clear transition events. Furthermore, the dnb s score in this work is not used for identifying the critical transition point or early disease state but for detecting the state just before the critical transition point (i.e. the pre disease state), and therefore, in comparison with existing methods, it is of great importance for the early diagnosis of complex diseases. To demonstrate the effectiveness and efficiency of the theoretical work, we applied our method to detect the pre disease state for three diseases by single samples, i.e. lung injury induced by carbonyl chloride inhalation exposure (GSE2565), MCF-7 human breast cancer resulting from here gulin (HRG) (GSE13009) and human influenza infection caused by H3N2 virus (GSE30550), all of which successfully validated our predictions.

discussion in this article, we developed a novel computational method, i.e. the dnb s scoring method, to identify the pre disease state of a disease on the basis of a single sample, which facilitates early diagnosis before the disease state or its serious deterioration. From the viewpoints of both theoretical analysis and numerical computation, we have demonstrated that the dnb s score is sensitive to any sample near the pre disease state. All the results show that we identified the pre disease state, i.e. the state just before a critical transition to the disease state, rather than the disease state targeted by traditional biomarkers. By developing this method, we also found that a single case sample with high throughput measurements actually has enriched information sufficient for early diagnosis even if there is no reliable disease model (i.e. the underlying mechanism of disease deterioration is unclear). In other words, the dnb s score is a model free approach, which is capable of exploiting high dimensional information (or interaction information on high dimensional data) and thus distinguishing pre disease samples from normal ones. Our study makes two main contributions. First, the dnb s score can identify the pre disease state before moving into the deteriorated disease state by a critical transition, rather than diagnosing the disease state. Therefore, it has profound potential to achieve 'real' early diagnosis for complex diseases. Second, the dnb s score can detect the pre disease state with only a single sample for each individual, which is of great importance for clinic applications in realistic cases such as clinic testing and personalized healthcare. All the results show that high dimensional information of data can be used to compensate for insufficient samples, which is the major reason why the dnb s score can detect the pre disease state from a single high throughput sample. It is also worth noting that this method is based on the DNB theory and thus the molecules in the DNB can be related to the leading network of the disease. Those molecules may make the first move from the normal state toward the disease state through a critical transition, and thus, be causally related to disease driving genes or networks. Therefore, the dnb s score can be a reflection of the leading factors (the driving network or disease driving genes) to the serious deterioration of complex diseases. In addition to the diagnosis of diseases, our method can be applied to the analysis of other complex processes or phenomena in biology, physics, ecology or even economics in a similar manner provided that drastic state transitions are involved in these processes, e.g. cell differentiation and cell cycle processes.
