Motivation: Describing domain architecture is a critical step in the functional characterization of proteins. However, some orphan domains do not match any profile stored in dedicated domain databases and are thereby difficult to analyze. Results: We present here an original novel approach, called tremolo hca for the analysis of orphan domain sequences and inspired from our experience in the use of Hydrophobic Cluster Analysis (HCA). Hidden relationships between protein sequences can be more easily identified from the PSI-BLAST results, using information on domain architecture, HCA plots and the conservation degree of amino acids that may participate in the protein core. This can lead to reveal remote relationships with known families of domains , as illustrated here with the identification of a hidden Tudor tandem in the human BAHCC1 protein and a hidden ET domain in the Saccharomyces cerevisiae Taf14p and human AF9 proteins. The results obtained in such a way are consistent with those provided by hhp red based on pairwise comparisons of hh ms. Our approach can, however, be applied even in absence of domain profiles or known 3D structures for the identification of novel families of domains. It can also be used in a reverse way for refining domain profiles, by starting from known protein domain families and identifying highly divergent members, hitherto considered as orphan. Availability: We provide a possible integration of this approach in an open tremolo hca package, which is fully implemented in python v2.7 and is available on request. Instructions are available at

introduction orphan domains are segments of proteins forming autonomous folding units that can not be assigned to a known domain family, as stored in dedicated domain databases (). They may be included in large unassigned regions, which make up at least 10% of the residues in a typical proteome (). These orphan domains have either evolved too far from the nearest neighbors to be assigned to a domain, or they have been created by some de novo mechanisms. Most of the solved 3D structures of orphan domains, however, show structural similarity to already known protein domains, suggesting that the fraction of orphan domains that have distant homologs is high (). This is consistent with earlier theoretical studies, which have suggested that protein domains fall into a limited number of protein folds and families (). The distant homolog theory is also supported by the identification of remote homologs to orphan domains through sequences from environmental sequencing projects, although these meta genomics studies also revealed many novel orphans (). A lot of specific analyses led to link orphan domains to already known families or to identify new families of domains (). Among these studies are those we performed using the fold signatures defined through the Hydrophobic Cluster Analysis (HCA) approach [e.g. () for some examples]. HCA is based on a bidimensional representation of the sequence, in which hydrophobic amino acids congregate into clusters (), which are statistically centered on regular secondary structures (). Hydrophobic clusters associated with core secondary structures are stable relative to evolution, offering a way to efficiently compare sequences at very low levels of sequence identity (see Supplementary Data S1 for a detailed description of the method and its practical use). Here, we wished to develop a methodology inspired from our experience in deciphering orphan domains, which facilitates the detection of distant relationships with already known families of domains by automatic inference from the PSI-BLAST results. This methodology, called tremolo hca (after Travel into REmote HOmoLOgy with HCA), allows an easier exploitation of results from sequence similarity search programs (e.g. PSIBLAST), by providing contextual (domain architecture) and structural (conserved hydrophobic core) information. It furnishes for each sequence aligned with the query the domain architecture of the whole protein, as well as indicates the conservation degree of amino acids that may participate in the protein fold. The interest of the methodology is illustrated with two examples of conserved domain database cdd orphan domains, which were first delineated from the whole protein sequence by using our experience in HCA coupled with a home-made program called seg hca (our unpublished data), developed for *To whom correspondence should be addressed. the automatic hca based delineation of globular domains from the analysis of single sequences.

conclusion the methodology developed here for easier domain inference from the PSI-BLAST results provides contextual (domain architecture) and structural (conserved hydrophobic core) information. Protein domain architectures can indeed give useful information about the functional context in which the query sequence can be present. The remote relationships of orphan sequences to already known families of domains revealed here were also highlighted by the sensitive hhp red program, based on pairwise comparisons of hh ms. Our approach can, however, be applied even in absence of CDD profiles or known 3D structures for identifying novel families of domains. It can also be used in a reverse way for refining CDD profiles, by starting from known protein domain families and identifying highly divergent members, hitherto considered as orphan. Hence, starting with the TUDOR profile or with the sequence of the BDRD4 ET domain, for which the experimental 3D structure is known, we were able to identify the remote relationships to human BAHCC1 and yeast Taf14p. Revisiting systematically the CDD profiles using such an approach could thus lead to significant enhancement of their sensitivity for detecting remote relationships. Information about positions of the alignment for which hydrophobicity is conserved in homologous sequences is especially useful to get insight into the likelihood of structural relationships for alignments that are reported with non-significant e values in the PSI-BLAST results, which have generally to be further supported by other information. The conservation of core secondary structures over the whole domain (and not limited to one or a few ones), as assessed by considering these positions and comparing the corresponding hydrophobic clusters, are thus an important factor for assessing the relevance of marginal similarities. In this context, HCA can be rewarding for detecting similarities outside the first limits detected by PSI-BLAST, independently of the presence of variable indels that are generally difficult to handle by alignment procedures (see Supplementary Data S1 and S2 for application examples). Of course, the methodology described here and applied to the analysis of PSI-BLAST results may also be adapted to process results coming from other methods for remote homology detection, such as hhp red (), hh blits () or HMMER ().
