Motivation: Modern experimental techniques for time course measurement of gene expression enable the identification of dynamical models of genetic regulatory networks. In general, identification involves fitting appropriate network structures and parameters to the data. For a given set of genes, exploring all possible network structures is clearly prohibitive. Modelling and identification methods for the a priori selection of network structures compatible with biological knowledge and experimental data are necessary to make the identification problem tractable. Results: We propose a differential equation modelling framework where the regulatory interactions among genes are expressed in terms of u nate functions, a class of gene activation rules commonly encountered in Boolean network modelling. We establish analytical properties of the models in the class and exploit them to devise a two step procedure for gene network reconstruction from product concentration and synthesis rate time series. The first step isolates a family of model structures compatible with the data from a set of most relevant biological hypotheses. The second step explores this family and returns a pool of best fitting models along with estimates of their parameters. The method is tested on a simulated network and compared with state of the art network inference methods on the benchmark synthetic network IRMA.

introduction identification of genetic regulatory networks aims at inferring the regulatory mechanisms of gene expression from experimental data. Various modelling approaches have been employed with success for the reconstruction of the network of interactions among genes (see e.g., for recent reviews). In particular, Boolean activation rules () have been proposed as a natural framework for the description and reconstruction of gene activation rules, whereas Bayesian networks () have been utilized to capture statistical relationships in the expression of a network of genes. * To whom correspondence should be addressed the development of experimental techniques for the quantitative monitoring of gene expression over time is paving the way for the learning of gene expression dynamics. Kinetic modelling, where the interactions among genes are encoded into the structure of a set of gene expression rates (see de Jong, 2002, and references therein), provides an accurate description of the time evolution of gene expression. Unfortunately, an overwhelming variety of gene activation functions must be explored in order to reconstruct the network structure and dynamics from the data. A way around this complexity is to quantify genetic interactions by universal approxima tors. In, the activation level of each gene is quantified by a saturated linear combination of the concentrations of the network proteins. This enables the reconstruction of direction and sign (inhibition versus activation) of the interactions among genes. Unlike in Boolean networks, the interplay among controlling genes in the regulation of the controlled gene (the 'logics' of the network) is not modelled explicitly. Similar insight into regulatory interactions near equilibria is provided by the linearization methods (). Glass and suggested to model switch like regulatory interactions by step functions. This results into a very simple piecewise linear model of gene product concentration kinetics (constant synthesis rate plus degradation) that can be fitted to experimental data () quite efficiently. For many activation functions, however, the approximation by step functions is rather coarse and may prevent the use of this framework for identification. In this work, we address the identification of kinetic models of gene regulatory networks from time course gene expression data. Our primary interest is the reconstruction of the network of interactions and logics behind gene expression control. We propose a modelling framework where the synthesis rate equations reflect the structure of a class of gene activation rules known as u nate functions (). In the context of Boolean modelling, u nate functions capture all interactions where each gene acts exclusively as an inducer or as an inhibitor for the expression of another gene. Based on biochemical analysis argue that u nate functions provide a comprehensive modelling framework for genetic regulatory networks. u nate functions include hierarchically (or nested) c analizing functions (), a class of Boolean functions describing the majority of the known gene activation rules ()
