Motivation: Identification of microRNA (miRNA) transcriptional start sites tss s is crucial to understand the transcriptional regulation of miRNA. As miRNA expression is highly cell specific, an automatic and systematic method that could identify miRNA tss s accurately and cell specifically is in urgent requirement. Results: A workflow to identify the tss s of miRNAs was built by integrating the data of H3K4me3 and DNase I hypersensitive sites as well as combining the conservation level and sequence feature. By applying the workflow to the data for 54 cell lines from the ENCODE project, we successfully identified tss s for 663 intragenic miRNAs and 620 intergenic miRNAs, which cover 84.2% (1283/1523) of all miRNAs recorded in mir base 18. For these cell lines, we found 4042 alternative tss s for intragenic miRNAs and 3186 alternative tss s for intergenic miRNAs. Our method achieved a better performance than the previous non cell specific methods on miRNA tss s. The cell specific method developed by georg akil as et al. gives 158 tss s of higher accuracy in two cell lines, benefitting from the employment of deep sequencing technique. In contrast, our method provided a much higher number of miRNA tss s (7228) for a broader range of cell lines without the limitation of costly deep sequencing data, thus being more applicable for various experimental cases. Analysis showed that upstream promoters at À 2 kb to À 200 bp of TSS are more conserved for independently transcribed miRNAs, while for miRNAs transcribed with host genes, their core promoters (À200 bp to 200 bp of TSS) are significantly conserved. Availability and implementation: Predicted miRNA tss s and promoters can be downloaded from supplementary files.

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) are small ($22 nt), non-coding RNAs that negatively regulates gene expression by binding to the 3 untranslated region of mRNAs. Studies so far have revealed that miRNAs are involved in almost all the key biological processes, such as development, differentiation, apoptosis, cell proliferation and carcinogenesis (). To understand the underlying mechanism of the mirna mediated regulatory pathways, it is important to know where the miRNAs are produced from in the genome and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com which genes they are targeting. While the latter aspect has been intensely studied for both animals and plants system in the recent years (), the picture of transcription of miRNAs is far from complete, especially for the transcriptional start sites tss s of miRNAs. In general, miRNA genes are firstly transcribed into primary miRNAs pri mirnas by RNA polymerase (Pol) II or III in nucleus (). Then, the RNase dr osha processes pri mirnas into precursor miRNAs pre mirnas (), which later are exported into the cytosol and turn to mature miRNAs with the help of Dicer (). The process of miRNA transcription is basically the same as that of protein coding genes; however, both 5 and 3'-ends of primi rna are subject to quick degradation. The full length transcript of a miRNA gene is very difficult to be retained (). Therefore, it is hard to accurately locate the TSS of miRNA. The database miRT collected predicted miRNA tss s from different sources () and proved helpful for experimental validation (). The methods of the identification of miRNA tss s available so far are mainly based on the cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE), RNA polymerase II (Pol II) data or histone modification data. For example, CAGE tags () were used to identify miRNA tss s by considering its possibility to capture the 5' cap (). However, the rapid processing of the primary miRNA transcript by dr osha produces uncapped pre mirnas that can not be captured by CAGE technology predicted miRNA tss s by modeling the RNA Pol II binding patterns developed a method to predict the core promoters of miRNAs with Support Vector Machine models based on RNA Pol II data. More methods were developed by integrating the histone modification data identified miRNA tss s by combining the information of RNA Pol II, H3K4me3 and H3K9/14A data. However, these studies were limited to small amount of miRNAs due to the insufficiency of Pol II data and ignored the case of Poly III transcription in one aspect. In further aspect, they discarded the cell specific information of miRNA tss s by pooling the Pol II data from experiments. Annotating the cell specific information of miRNA tss s is important because it has been proved that miRNA is of higher tissue specificity than protein coding genes (). Most recently, Georgios et al. developed an algorithm micro tss for integrating rna sequencing data with H3K4me3, Pol II and dnase seq data to identify the tissue specific tss s of intergenic miRNAs in high resolution (). To overcome the effect of dr osha processing and capture the pri mirnas of low abundance, micro tss required high deep sequencing data which seems not easy to obtain for the large number of cell lines and various cellular environmental conditions. So far, miRNA tss s of very few cell lines have been predicted in a cell specific way. An automatic and systematic method that could identify miRNA tss s accurately and cell specifically in a broad range of cell lines is still in urgent requirement. Here, we developed a workflow to identify miRNA tss s in 54 cell lines based on H3K4me3 and DNase i hypersensitive sites (DHSs), which combined the features of species conservation and sequences. The proximal H3K4me3 region to each pre mirna in each cell line is considered as the potential region containing the TSS of the miRNA. DHSs are potential transcription factor binding sites, and their existence of them in the promoter region can assure the function of the identified tss s. The accuracy of our predicted miRNA tss s is verified in several ways, including comparing the results with the miRNA tss s that are identified by previous studies, showing expressed sequence tag (EST) evidence for them and analyzing their global conservation. Known CAGE tags () showed a higher signal at the tss s that were identified using our approach; however, the signal levels were not comparable with those of protein coding genes, which indicates the effect of the rapid degradation of the 5 0 cap of miRNA transcript and proves the previous viewpoint that CAGE data is inadequate for the prediction of miRNA tss s. Current models of miRNA biogenesis were also confirmed by our finding that the CAGE signal detected in nucleus at the identified miRNA tss s was much higher than that detected in cytosol, whereas the nuclear and cytosolic CAGE signals for protein coding genes are comparable. In addition, the analysis on the predicted tss s showed the promoters upstream the independent tss s of either intragenic or intergenic miRNAs are more conserved than that of the host gene tss s by which some intragenic miRNAs are transcribed. In cases that miRNAs were broadly activated in various cell lines, alternative tss s and promoters were used in different cell lines. Then they could be regulated in a promoter specific manner.

discussion in this study, we developed a method for miRNA TSS prediction by integrating the information of experimental data of H3K4me3 and DHS, the species conservation and sequence features. Compared with other methods that are based on histone modification (), we used DHSs data to assure the function of promoters upstream of the predicted tss s. In addition, instead of pooling data of different cell lines (), the information from 54 cell lines was processed separately in our workflow. This proves useful for conducting experiments and analyzing the cell specificity of miRNA tss s. To evaluate the performance of our method, a set of experimentally verified miRNA tss s were collected from literature as benchmark data and our method performs best comparing with other predictions. To evaluate the performance of our method in a cell specific way, a set of cell specific validated miRNA tss s in hESC cells were used to make an independent comparison. Our method performed better than those non cell specific methods but worse than micro tss. However, the input data for our method were more easily acquir able than micro tss which enabled us to make predictions in a broader range of 54 cell lines with an acceptable precision (77.1%). In our method, we set a distance threshold to discriminate a candidate TSS from its nearby annotated host TSS. Only the candidate TSS that is more than this threshold distance away from its nearby host TSS was considered as independent TSS. We set this distance threshold to 150 bp based on the length of an H3K4me3 peak, assuming that there is only one TSS in one H3K4me3 peak region the influence of this threshold on the prediction was checked. The number of intergenic and intragenic miRNAs stays at about 620 and 663, respectively, as the variation of threshold supplementary in Supplementary File S2). For the number of tss s on average, every intergenic intragenic miRNA loses about 0.0014/0.0026 tss s as the threshold increases by 1 bp supplementary in Supplementary File S2). The accuracy evaluated by experimentally validated tss s is not influenced by the change. Therefore, the influence of changing the threshold to TSS prediction is limited. It has always been a dispute whether CAGE data are able to efficiently capture the miRNA TSS because of the transient nature of miRNA primary transcripts. To clarify this issue, we analyzed the CAGE signal at predicted miRNA TSS and found the nuclear CAGE signal was much higher than the cytosolic CAGE signal at TSS location. It is evident that the CAGE signal at miRNA TSS would be reduced if the nuclear and cytosolic CAGE signals were pooled together. To deal with this problem, a deep sequencing approach was employed to increase the CAGE signal at miRNA TSS by increasing the total count of reads (). However, the deep sequencing data may also increase the 'noise' signal in the background region and promoter region of protein coding gene. To properly and efficiently use CAGE data, maintaining the full miRNA primary transcript is necessary. Such as in Caenorhabditis elegans (), full transcripts could be maintained when RNAs were isolated from nucleolus. Alternatively, inhibition of dr osha could help to maintain full transcripts for deep sequencing (). However, this kind of data are very limited at present time. In our result, we noticed that some of the miRNAs had quite long primary transcripts. For example, hsa-mir-548as is embedded in its host gene, GPC5, and its host transcript is over 1000 kb. The long primi rna transcript might provide the possibility of more alternative tss s. On the basis of the analysis of species conservation of miRNA promoter, we found that for the upstream promoters of TSS which were regions of [2000 bp, 200 bp], the mean conservation in the case that miRNAs are independently transcribed was significantly higher than that in the case that miRNAs are co transcribed with the host genes. However, at the core promoter region which is, the conservation behaves in opposite. This observation showed a different pattern of conservation between the promoters of host gene dependently and independently transcribed miRNA genes found the promoters of intergenic miRNAs were even more conserved than those of the intragenic miRNAs that are co transcribed with the host genes in opossum found only 27 conserved host intragenic miRNA pairs from 849 intragenic miRNAs in humans, indicating the poor conservation for the promoters of host genes dependent miRNAs. Our result is consistent with these reports and draws a better explanation for these observations. The different pattern of conservation on the core promoters and upstream promoters may indicate a different evolution process for host gene dependently and independently transcribed miRNA genes. MiRNAs are mainly expressed in a cell specific manner (), which could originate from the use of selectively activated tss s and specific promoters. However, it should be noticed that there is no unambiguous correspondence between expression of a gene and its active TSS, neither for protein coding nor for miRNA genes. As reported for protein coding genes, many genes do not produce full length transcripts, nonetheless experience transcript initiation (). As reported from micro tss for 118 predicted tss s 57 miRNAs were expressed in me sc. Similarly in our result, for 653 predicted tss s 146 miRNAs were expressed in A549 (GSE24565). So current methods could predict the possibly active tss s but there still needs more efforts to fill in the gap between the transcription and expression of miRNAs. Anyway, to know the active transcription start site is the first step. In conclusion, we predicted the miRNA tss s for 54 cell lines and several observations were made about the cell line specificity of different types of tss s the conservation of miRNA promoters and the long non-coding RNAs related to pri mirnas. These results from this research could benefit the understanding of the specific expression of miRNAs and their exact regulation network in different cells.
