Motivation: Post-translational modifications to histones have several well known associations with regulation of gene expression. While some modifications appear concentrated narrowly, covering promoters or enhancers, others are dispersed as epi genomic domains. These domains mark contiguous regions sharing an epi genomic property, such as actively transcribed or poised genes, or heterochromatic ally silenced regions. While high throughput methods like chips eq have led to a flood of high quality data about these epi genomic domains, there remain important analysis problems that are not adequately solved by current analysis tools. Results: We present the rs eg method for identifying epi genomic domains from chips eq data for histone modifications. In contrast with other methods emphasizing the locations of peaks in read density profiles, our method identifies the boundaries of domains. rs eg is also able to incorporate a control sample and find genomic regions with differential histone modifications between two samples. Availability: rs eg including source code and documentation, is freely available at

introduction posttranslational modifications to histone tails, including methylation and acetyl ay tion have been associated with important regulatory roles in cell differentiation and disease development (). The application of chips eq to histone modification study has proved very useful for understanding the genomic landscape of histone modifications (). Certain histone modifications are tightly concentrated, covering a few hundred base pairs. For example, H3K4me3 is usually associated with active promoters, and occurs only at nucleosomes close to transcription start sites tss s. On the other hand, many histone modifications are diffuse and occupy large regions, ranging from thousands to several millions of base pairs. A well known example H3K36me3 is associated with active gene expression and often spans the whole gene body (). Reflected in chips eq data, the signals of these histone modifications are enriched over large regions, but lack well defined peaks. It is worth pointing out that the property of being 'diffuse' is matter of degrees. Besides the modification frequency, the modification profile over a region is also affected by nucleosome * To whom correspondence should be addressed. densities and the strength of nucleosome positioning. By visual inspection of read density profiles, we found that H2BK5me1, H3K79me1, H3K79me2, H3K79me3, H3K9me1, H3K9me3 and H3R2me1 show similar diffuse profiles. There are several general questions about dispersed epi genomic domains that remain unanswered. Many of these questions center around how these domains are established and maintained. One critical step in answering these questions is to accurately locate the boundaries of these domains. However, most of existing methods for chips eq data analysis were originally designed for identifying transcription factor binding sites. These focus on locating highly concentrated 'peaks', and are inappropriate for identifying domains of dispersed histone modification marks (). Moreover, the quality of 'peak' analysis is measured in terms of sensitivity and specificity of peak calling (accuracy), along with how narrow the peaks are (precision; often determined by the underlying platform). But for diffuse histone modifications, significant 'peaks' are usually lacking and often the utility of identifying domains depends on how clearly the boundaries are located.
