Motivation: Targeted kinase inhibitors have dramatically improved cancer treatment, but kinase dependency for an individual patient or cancer cell can be challenging to predict. Kinase dependency does not always correspond with gene expression and mutation status. high throughput drug screens are powerful tools for determining kinase dependency, but drug poly pharmacology can make results difficult to interpret. Results: We developed Kinase Addiction Ranker (KAR), an algorithm that integrates high throughput drug screening data, comprehensive kinase inhibition data and gene expression profiles to identify kinase dependency in cancer cells. We applied KAR to predict kinase dependency of 21 lung cancer cell lines and 151 leukemia patient samples using published datasets. We experimentally validated KAR predictions of FGFR and mt or dependence in lung cancer cell line H1581, showing synergistic reduction in proliferation after combining p on ati nib and AZD8055. Availability and implementation: KAR can be downloaded as a Python function or a MATLAB script along with example inputs and outputs at: http://tanlab.ucdenver.edu/KAR/.

introduction kinases play essential roles in cell survival, growth and proliferation and are currently the largest protein class in clinical trials (). Kinases are frequently mutated in cancer and acquire oncogenic properties to drive tumor genesis. These cancer cells are often 'addicted' to the mutated oncogenes (e.g. kinases). Targeted cancer therapies have exploited this 'oncogene addiction' concept, and deployed small molecules that could inhibit these oncogenic kinases (). While kinases are predominantly targeted for cancer therapy, they are also implicated in immunological, neurological, metabolic and infectious diseases (). Induction of cell death through inhibition of a specific essential kinase creates selective pressure for cancer cells to develop resistance mechanisms. Cancer cells often acquire resistance through mutations that interfere with drug binding (). Other resistance mechanisms include target amplification, upregulation of alternative kinase pathways, and intrinsic resistance of a subset of cells in the larger population (). Combination of kinase inhibitors could limit development of these resistance pathways and dramatically improve V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com cancer therapy (). In order for combination therapy to be more widely adopted, new systems approaches are needed to prioritize target combinations for experimental validation (). Before targeted kinase inhibitor therapies can be applied, kinase dependency within a cancer cell needs to be established. high throughput pharmacological screening is a powerful method for determining kinase dependency, (). However, due to unexpected drug kinase interactions poly pharmacology target deconvolution for drug screening data remains a challenge in chemical systems biology. Moreover, highly expressed kinases are not always effective molecular targets in cancer (). Unfortunately, the large number off target interactions of most kinase inhibitors can lead to misinterpretation of drug screening results. For example, the commonly reported targets of fda approved drug bos uti nib are SRC and ABL; however, bos uti nib also inhibits another 40 kinases by more than 85% inhibition at 500 nM (). While this poses a challenge for target deconvolution, it also provides a unique opportunity to study the effects of a more comprehensive set of kinases as well as combinations of kinases in a given screen. As quantitative kinase inhibition data is becoming increasingly available (), it can be used to better identify critical kinases following drug screens. Here, we developed Kinase Addiction Ranker (KAR), an algorithm that integrates high throughput drug screening data, comprehensive kinase inhibition data and gene expression profiles to determine kinase dependency in cancer cells. This algorithm was inspired by previous work using kinase inhibition profiles and drug sensitivity data to predict kinase targets for leukemia patients (). Using publicly available data, we demonstrated the utility of KAR in ranking kinase targets for 21 lung cancer cell lines and used statistical clustering to group cell lines by kinase dependency. We experimentally validated KAR predictions for non small cell lung cancer cell line H1581. We also applied this approach to previously published data from 151 leukemia patient samples.

discussion we developed and validated KAR, a novel algorithm to improve interpretation of high throughput drug screens by incorporating comprehensive drug kinase binding profiles and transcript omics data. KAR takes advantage of drug poly pharmacology to study a larger variety of kinases as well as combinations of kinases. Two major factors that could influence KAR data analysis are the (i) number of effective drugs and (ii) diversity of drug targets. Influential kinases can not be rapidly identified without multiple inhibitors in your drug set that target a given kinase. The KAR percent effective scores from a preliminary screen can be used to identify kinases with potential associations with drug sensitivity for further analysis with other drugs. Moreover, many kinase pairs are uncommonly inhibited together (e.g. FGFR1 and mt or and must be hypothesized based on the single kinase scores. While our algorithm most directly applies to studying kinase dependence, it could be easily modified to study other targets if inhibition data for these targets is available. Other approaches have been developed that use overlap in drug kinase profiles to identify key targets. Gujral et al. used principal component analysis to identify an optimal set of 32 kinase inhibitors for profiling and then used elastic net regularization to identify key kinases influencing cell migration(). Similar to KAR, they also used gene expression data to filter kinases from analysis. Tran et al. also applied elastic net regression to identify important kinases for cancer cell lines following an in vitro screen (). Another algorithm based on set theory uses drug screen data and kinase inhibitor profiles to predict the most influential kinases and produce circuit diagrams illustrating if the kinase is effective inhibited alone or if it needs to be inhibited with other kinases (). Compared to these approaches, KAR benefits from producing straightforward scores and p values that could be readily interpreted by scientists without computational backgrounds. Moreover, the drug lists do not need preliminary optimization, as chi-square and fisher's exact test p values take differences in the number of inhibitors that target each kinases and the total number of sensitive drugs into account. We applied KAR to leukemia patient samples profiled with 66 kinase inhibitors (), demonstrating the applicability of the tool for predicting patient therapy. Given resource limitations when working with patient samples, it may not be possible to screen patient biopsies with large numbers of compounds. Therefore, future studies could benefit greatly from prior optimization of the set of drugs used for profiling. One recent example of this is Gujral et al.'s (2014) use of principal component analysis to reduce the number of kinase inhibitors profiled to an optimal set of 32 from 178. Moreover, instead of using IC 50 measurements of drug sensitivity, which requires measurements at multiple concentrations,. Experimental validation of KAR prediction of FGFR1 and mt or dependence for lung cancer cell line H1581. (A) 10 nm p on ati nib (FGFR inhibitor) and AZD8055 mt or inhibitor) were applied to H1581 cells and cell proliferation was measured with the cy quant assay kit. The combination of p on ati nib and AZD8055 was synergistic by Bliss Independence (Additive prediction  19.4%, Actual  6.7%). Bar graphs display mean percent of control (POC) / SEM (B) Western blots showing changes in signaling with p on ati nib AZD8055, and the combo. p on ati nib decreases ERK1/2 activation and AZD8055 decreases signaling downstream of mt or. (C) Signaling network diagram for pathways targeted by p on ati nib and AZD8055 in H1581 cell viability measurements at single concentrations can be considered. KAR was inspired by a previous algorithm implemented using Excel Visual Basic and macro code (). Compared to the Tyner algorithm, we introduced tiering score values based on drug sensitivity instead of target inhibition strength, percent effective scores, optional incorporation of gene expression data, stronger penalties for insensitive drugs, and calculation of p values. We also made the algorithm more accessible by providing MATLAB and python functions. Calculation of p values helps decrease potential for false positives, as kinases targeted by more drugs have the potential for higher raw scores. Incorporation of gene expression data helps ensure that highly ranked kinases are translationally meaningful. Moreover, we found that tiering kinase scores based on target inhibition strength instead of drug sensitivity resulted in much lower percent effective scores, indicating that weaker targets of the inhibitors may not be accurate indicators of kinase dependency in the samples. Moreover, a single threshold for kinase inhibition allows for easier incorporation of kinase inhibition data from multiple platforms with different inhibition measurement types (e.g. percent inhibition compared to control, K d , and IC 50 ), allowing for more drugs to be included in analysis. We believe that integrating high throughput drug screening data and in vitro kino me inhibition data as demonstrated in this study could be a useful systems approach to identify novel targets and kinase dependency in cancer cells.
