Motivation: Phosphorylation modifications of specific protein residues are involved in a wide range of biological processes such as modulation of intracellular signal networks. Here, we present the development and application of a bioinformatics procedure for systematic identification of human specific phosphorylation sites in proteins that may have occurred after the human chimpanzee divergence. Results: We collected annotated human phosphorylation sites and compared each site to orthologous mammalian proteins across tax a including chimpanzee, orangutan, rhesus macaque, marmoset, mouse, dog, cow, elephant, opossum and platypus. We identified 37 human specific gains of annotated phosphorylation sites in 35 proteins: 22 serines, 12 threonine s and 3 tyrosines. The novel phosphorylation sites are situated in highly conserved segments of the protein. Proteins with novel phosphorylation sites are involved in crucial biological processes such as cell division aur kb CASC5, MKI67 and PDCD4) and chromatin remodeling (HIRA, HIRIP3, HIST1H1T, NAP1L4 and LRWD1). Modified phosphoryl a table residues produce novel target sites for protein kinases such as cyclin dependent kinases and case in kinases, possibly resulting in rewiring and fine tuning of phosphorylation regulatory networks. The potential human specific phosphorylation sites identified in this study are useful as candidates for functional analysis to identify novel phenotypes in humans.

introduction humans have many distinct phenotypic traits compared with the other great apes, such as loss of body hair, upright posture, accelerated brain expansion and more complex cognitive abilities (). These traits must have originated as genetic modifications and undergone subsequent natural selection in the human lineage after humans diverged from their closest living relatives, the chimpanzees. The accelerated sequence substitution * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of proteins may be associated with the evolution of certain human specific traits: for example, genes implicated in nervous system development were found to display significantly higher rates of protein evolution in the human lineage (). The FOXP2 protein, which is known to be associated with speech and language in humans, acquired two amino acid substitutions specific to humans after the human chimpanzee divergence (). The human FOXP2 protein has been reported to differentially regulate genes involved in central nervous system development compared with the chimpanzee ortholog (). Interestingly, loss of proteins has also been implicated in the development of human specific traits (). For example, inactivation of the MYH16 gene in humans may be related to the reduction of the masticatory muscle and expansion of the brain (). Other proteins that became inactive only in humans include BASE, SERPINA13 and MOXD2 (). Phosphorylation is a fundamental post-translational modification (PTM) of proteins that acts in many important biological processes, such as cellular signaling pathways through the modulation of protein function, stability, interaction and localization (). Several tens of thousands of phosphorylation modification sites have been characterized in human proteins using high throughput proteomic analyses (). Data regarding phosphorylation modification sites in human proteins are available via databases, such as uniprotkb swissprot (), phos ida () and dbp tm (). It is likely that biologically important phosphorylation sites are evolutionarily conserved ().identified 479 phosphorylation sites in 344 human proteins that appear to be positionally conserved between human and at least one species of fly, worm or yeast and proposed that these sites are involved in fundamental cellular processes. Nevertheless, the gain and loss of protein phosphorylation sites may rewire biological networks and be regarded as a motive force for adaptive evolution (). The gain or loss of phosphorylation sites in Cdk1 substrates in yeasts may have facilitated the evolution of kinase signaling circuits ().reported that tyrosine residues have been selectively lost through metazoan evolution to remove deleterious tyrosine phosphorylation s as tyrosine kinases have been expanded. It is argued that evolution page 2495 24942501

discussion we identified 37 cases of novel phosphorylation site gains in 35 human proteins that likely arose after the human chimpanzee divergence. Human proteins with novel phosphorylation modification sites are involved in various biological processes: for example, aur kb CASC5, MKI67, PDCD4 in the cell cycle; HIRA, HIRIP3, HIST1H1T, NAP1L4 and LRWD1 are involved in chromatin remodeling; snr pa and TARBP1 are involved in RNA biology; and USP7 and USP36 are involved in protein de ubiquitination. The number of novel phosphorylation sites in human proteins and the number of lost sites in chimpanzee proteins are very similar, 37 versus 31, indicating that gain and loss events occurred at comparable rates in both tax a. The distributions of changed residues are also similar. The amino acid residues of the 37 novel human phosphorylation sites include 22 serines, 12 threonine s and 3 tyrosines. In chimpanzee proteins, 20 serines, 10 threonine s and 1 tyrosine have been mutated to non phosphoryl a table residues. The conversion to or from serine is more frequent than other conversions. This difference may be explained in terms of the numbers of codons in the genetic code. There are six codons for serine, four for threonine and two for tyrosine. If a mutation is completely random, it is likely that the serine codon will appear more often than will threonine or tyrosine. The distribution of the lost phosphoryl a table residues may simply be due to the frequencies of the phosphorylated residues in the proteome. The human protein dataset analyzed in this study contains 23 977 phosphoserine s 5610 phospho threonine s and 3163 phosphotyrosine s. Because phosphoserine is more common than phospho threonine or phosphotyrosine, it is expected that phosphoserine is lost more often at similar mutation rates. However, we can not rule out the possibility that there could be evolutionary constraints regarding the gain or loss of phosphorylation sites. It is possible that the relatively small number of gain or loss of phosphotyrosine sites reflects the fact that phosphotyrosine sites are involved in more biologically important processes than are phospho threonine or phosphoserine sites. It has been proposed that, as tyrosine kinases have been expanded during metazoan evolution, tyrosine residues have been selectively removed to minimize possibly deleterious tyrosine phosphorylation s (). The case in kinase 1 (CK1) family of protein kinases functions as signal transduction pathway regulators in eukaryotic cells and recognizes the motif sxx st (). The three novel phosphorylation sites of ABCF1, MKI67 (serine 1256) and TARBP1 match the CK1 motif. CK2 has been implicated in several cellular processes including cell cycle control and DNA repair, and it recognizes the motif st xxe where E is aspartic acid (). There are six human specific phosphorylation sites (ABCF1, a dnp PDXDC1 serine 737 and serine 779, RUSC2 and USP7) that match the CK2 motif. We assume that the advent of new target sites for the various kinases in these proteins may result in evolution of protein regulatory networks. There are four CK1 sites
