Motivation: Gene regulatory networks, in which edges between nodes describe interactions between transcriptional regulators and their target genes, determine the coordinated spatiotemporal expression of genes. Especially in higher organisms, context specific combinatorial regulation by transcription factors (TFs) is believed to determine cellular states and fates. tf target gene interactions can be studied using high throughput techniques such as chip chip or chips eq. These experiments are time and cost intensive, and further limited by, for instance, availability of high affinity TF antibodies. Hence, there is a practical need for methods that can predict tft f and tf target gene interactions in silico, i.e. from gene expression and DNA sequence data alone. We propose ge mula a novel approach based on linear models to predict tf gene expression associations and tft f interactions from experimental data. ge mula is based on linear models, fast and considers a wide range of biologically plausible models that describe gene expression data as a function of predicted TF binding to gene promoters. Results: We show that models inferred with ge mula are able to explain roughly 70% of the observed variation in gene expression in the yeast heat shock response. The functional relevance of the inferred tft f interactions in these models are validated by different sources of independent experimental evidence. We also have applied ge mula to an in vitro model of neuronal outgrowth. Our findings confirm existing knowledge on gene regulatory interactions underlying neuronal outgrowth, but importantly also generate new insights into the temporal dynamics of this gene regulatory network that can now be addressed experimentally. Availability: The ge mula r package is available from http://www.few.vu.nl/~degunst/gemula_1.0.tar.gz.

introduction cell type and condition specific interactions between transcriptional regulators and their target genes are a primary mechanism * To whom correspondence should be addressed for cells to accomplish spatiotemporal changes in gene expression. Identification of such interactions is an important step in modeling transcriptional regulatory networks. Regression methods are valuable tools that can be used to address three important issues in gene regulatory network building. First, they allow identification of transcription factors (TFs) and synergistic interactions between TFs that determine observed variation in gene expression. When two TFs commonly regulate a set of target genes, the synergistic effect of the TFs on target gene expression may not be just simply the sum of the individual effects. By fitting regression models that contain interaction terms that represent synergy between TFs, and comparing these to simpler models without such interactions, regulatory interactions between TFs can be inferred. Second, regression models provide answers to the question of how much of the observed variation in a single gene expression condition of interest can be predicted or explained based on regulatory motifs occurring in gene promoters. Since transcriptional gene regulation is time dependent, it is of interest to get some quantitative measure of how much of the observed variation in a specific biological context can be attributed to TF activity. Finally, regression models can provide insight into spatially and temporally dynamic interactions between TFs and target genes by comparing models inferred from the sets of genes regulated at successive time points and or under different experimental conditions. Pioneering work on constructing linear regression models for gene expression analysis was performed by subsequently suggested a non-parametric regression approach that uses Multivariate Adaptive Regression Splines. They demonstrated the importance of generating and selecting among competing candidate models in a systematic way in order to model interactions between synergistic TFs. Model selection, however, is a major challenge in gene expression analysis given the large number of potential model terms. When interactions between predictors are considered, the number of possible candidate predictor terms p is relatively large compared with the sample size n (typically p  n or even p  n). To select and fit models that appropriately trade-off bias and variance and that do not suffer from substantial over fit is not easy in this context. If we assume that only a small subset of the candidate predictors s  p is really associated to the response of interest, we can restrict ourselves to sparse models by considering penalized regression methods such as the lasso. Statistical methods that generate sparse models have already successfully been applied page 215 214221

discussion the success of a regression based approach to modeling gene expression and DNA sequence data depends on appropriate choices for the type of model and the predictors used as input. This was first demonstrated by who proposed a strategy that uses the non-parametric MARS method as core regression routine ().claim that their mars motif algorithm, which allows modeling of synergistic interactions between predictors, is approximately 1.5 to 3.5 times more accurate than the method of, which is based on a linear model. The comparison is based on an R 2 like  2 statistic and no cross validation was performed. A comprehensive comparison is lacking. The results we present in this article show that similar synergistic interactions as in) can be modeled using linear models. In fact, ge mula produces biologically plausible models with superior fit compared with MARS when applied to the same data. Typically, models contain a rather large number of predictors, whereas not all of these are equally relevant for the underlying biological processes. We demonstrate that ge mula identifies synergistic pairs of TFs that are likely to be functionally relevant, i.e. on average the overlap in target genes of such identified tft f pairs is significantly higher than expected by chance. In order to build models that are biologically useful and interpretable, the availability of relevant biological predictors used as input are crucial. The TRAP predictors we consider in this article represent in silico predicted binding affinities of TFs. Using yeast data, we showed that ge mula in combination with TRAP predictors successfully identifies interactions between known heat shock regulating TFs such as MSN2, MSN4, HSF1, CST6 and ROX1 that underlie the observed variation in expression of yeast genes in response to hypothermic shock. The TRAP predictors are real valued and have an interpretation that is closer to experimentally measured tf dna binding profiles as obtained, for instance, with chip chip assays than other motif representations, which use exact words. Models that use TRAP predictors have a clear Page: 220 214221 columns 310 correspond to models fitted for the early responsive genes and columns 1118 to models for the late responsive genes the column 'N.P' lists the number of predictors in the fitted ge mula models and 'N.T' denotes the number of model terms.  R 2 cv is the goodness of fit criterion of the selected model (Section 2.2), together with a 95% bootstrap confidence interval interpretation which facilitates the step toward biological validation. Our analysis of yeast stress response gene expression data shows that ge mula can identify context specific tft f interactions that underly observed variation in gene expression under different physiological conditions. We demonstrate that our method can also be used to analyze mammalian gene expression data. We applied ge mula to identify TFs associated to observed variations in early and late gene expression changes in F11 cells in response to Forskolin stimulation. The observed fit in terms of  R 2 cv of the resulting models is considerably less than for ge mula models inferred from yeast heat shock data where additional predictors are available. However, we show that ge mula identifies several crucial TFs with a well established role in the regulation of neuronal outgrowth associated gene expression and additionally provides new insights into the temporal dynamics of the regulatory network underlying axon growth. The strength of our approach is the combination of l 1 penalization and re-sampling methods to fit and select appropriately regularized models. A current limitation is that the linear models we discuss in this article are not capable of quantifying contributions of TFs to variation in gene expression across experiments. To extend the penalized regression framework to the multivariate case of multiple experiments would require fitting a model that includes parameters representing TF activity in each condition separately [see e.g.], resulting in a computationally more complex problem. How to induce the right amount of sparsity and solve the corresponding optimization problem would be an interesting direction for further research.

conclusion linear models are valuable tools for inference of transcriptional gene regulatory interactions and synergistic pairwise interactions between predictors that underlie observed changes in gene expression under
