Motivation: Although genome wide association studies g was have identified many disease susceptibility single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), these findings can only explain a small portion of genetic contributions to complex diseases, which is known as the missing heritability. A possible explanation is that genetic variants with small effects have not been detected. The chance is 8% that a causal SNP will be directly genotyped. The effects of its neighboring SNPs may be too weak to be detected due to the effect decay caused by imperfect linkage disequilibrium. Moreover, it is still challenging to detect a causal SNP with a small effect even if it has been directly genotyped. Results: In order to increase the statistical power when detecting disease associated SNPs with relatively small effects, we propose a method using neighborhood information. Since the disease associated SNPs account for only a small fraction of the entire SNP set, we formulate this problem as Contiguous Outlier DEtection (CODE), which is a discrete optimization problem. In our formulation, we cast the disease associated SNPs as outliers and further impose a spatial continuity constraint for outlier detection. We show that this optimization can be solved exactly using graph cuts. We also employ the stability selection strategy to control the false positive results caused by imperfect parameter tuning. We demonstrate its advantage in simulations and real experiments. In particular, the newly identified SNP clusters are replicable in two independent datasets.

introduction for the purpose of understanding complex diseases, genome wide association studies g was use high throughput technologies to assay hundreds of thousands of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). By October 2010, about 700 g was covering 150 diseases * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and traits have been published and nearly 3000 SNPs have been reported as significantly associated with diseases or traits (). Despite of the success of g was most of the findings only explain a small portion of genetic contributions to complex diseases. For example, 18 SNPs identified from type 2 diabetes (T2D) only account for 6% of the inherited genetic risk. This phenomenon is referred to as the missing heritability (). To find the missing heritability, some possible methods have been suggested from biological views (), such as detecting genetic variants with small or moderate effects, identifying rare genetic variants and structural variants that contribute to the disease risk and detecting gene gene interactions underlying the human diseases (). To speed up the search of genetic variants that underly human diseases, more powerful computational and statistical tools are needed. It is typical to test about 500K SNPs simultaneously in g was. For large scale inference, controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) turns out to be a powerful strategy (). The most commonly used FDR procedure is called BH procedure (), which is based on thresholding the ranked p values. It has been observed that BH procedure is able to control the FDR at nominal level for case control studies, but its power decreases as the dependency among SNPs increases (). A better FDR control can be achieved in SNP analysis by exploring the dependency structure (e.g. linkage disequilibrium). A direct simulation approach (DSA) based on multivariate normal distribution (MVN) was proposed in;. Although these studies primarily focused on datasets used in candidate gene studies, their work suggested that the block wise strategy might be a possible approach for genome wide studies. By extending the framework of MVN, a sliding window approach was further proposed to account for the dependency among locally inter correlated markers (). To be more adaptive to the dependency structure of the human genome, a hidden Markov chain Model (HMM), which is a more flexible structure compared with the block wise and sliding window structures, was proposed to account for the dependence (). However, applying these methods to analyze real SNP datasets in g was is very time consuming. Moreover, some methods report many false positive results in real applications. Thus, finding the missing heritability is still a challenging issue page 2579 25782585

conclusion in order to detect disease associated SNP clusters, our formulation makes use of information among adjacent SNPs. It turns out that our formulation is an 0 regularization problem and it can be exactly solved by graph cuts. We have shown that this method is particularly powerful when the effective size is small or moderate, which may be of great help in finding the missing heritability. Using two independent CD datasets, we demonstrate that CODE is able to reliably detect weak signals. CODE begins with z values assumed to be normally distributed. When applying CODE to statistics with other distributions, they need to be transformed to be normally distributed as what has been done for the loc fdr method ().
