Motivation: Identifying functional relation of copy number variation regions cn vrs and gene is an essential process in understanding the impact of genotypic variations on phenotype. There have been many related works, but only a few attempts were made to normal populations. Results: To analyze the functions of genome wide cn vrs we applied a novel correlation measure called Correlation based on Sample Set (CSS) to paired Whole Genome tile path array and messenger RNA (mRNA) microarray data from 210 HapMap individuals with normal phenotypes and calculated the confident c nvr gene relationships. Two c nvr nodes form an edge if they regulate a common set of genes, allowing the construction of a global c nvr network. We performed functional enrichment on the common genes that were trans regulated from cn vrs clustered together in our c nvr network. As a result, we observed that most of c nvr clusters in our c nvr network were reported to be involved in some biological processes or cellular functions, while most c nvr clusters from randomly constructed c nvr networks showed no evidence of functional enrichment. Those results imply that CSS is capable of finding related c nvr gene pairs and c nvr networks that have functional significance.

introduction copy number variation (CNV) is one type of human genomic structural variation and is recognized as a major source of human genetic variability, occupying a larger proportion of the genome than single nucleotide polymorphisms (). Specially, there have been several studies to find the impact of CNV on gene expression phenotypes. Much of the variation in messenger RNA (mRNA) transcript levels may be compensated for by regulatory networks, but understanding how genetic variants affect gene expression has provided an essential framework and model for elucidating the causes of various types of phenotypic variation including diseases. Research investigations on the impact of CNV on phenotypes are generally association studies using various types of gene expression and genotyped data from specific disease samples versus samples with normal phenotypes proposed an approach to detect variation patterns by integrating gene expression and copy number data from breast cancer samples found that copy number of c nvr that harbors salivary amylase gene (AMY1) is correlated positively with salivary amylase protein level found cnv gene relationships through analysis on CNV and a set of genes which have similar patterns in breast cancer samples analyzed the role of CNV in the development of breast cancer in conjunction with genes in the whole genomic area profiled gastric cancer cell lines and found that 256 differentially expressed genes are located in the recurrent region of gains and losses. These results imply that those genes are important gastric cancer genes. Generally, these studies focus on the abnormal copy number variation regions cn vrs in specific disease samples. Also, many of these focus on cn vs that harbor genes (). The global impact of DNA copy numbers on the transcriptome has not been studied, especially for people with normal phenotypes (). A representative investigation of the impact of cn vs on the phenotypes of normal people in terms of gene expression was made by, who inferred relationships between DNA copy numbers and gene expression levels of normal phenotype d 210 HapMap samples, using a linear regression model. However, they focused on the genes that lie in or close to cn vrs (distance to a c nvr  2 Mbp). Considering that there are many more cn vrs that do not harbor genes detected only a small portion of the relationships between genotype and phenotype. Recent work by aimed to identify the collaborating cn vs that are responsible for hematopoietic tumorigenesis. They first found gains and losses that are commonly detected in the majority of hematopoietic tumor samples. Then, they constructed gain or loss networks by functional analysis of the genes that were harbored in gain or loss pairs. cn vrs in the central part of the gain or loss networks harbored the well studied cancer related genes. like and many other studies, they also focused on cn vrs that harbor genes or gene regulatory regions. However, it is notable that they observed several cn vrs that contributed to the same phenotypic traits by using the concept of a c nvr network.
