Motivation: DNA methylation is a key epigenetic modification that can modulate gene expression. Over the past decade, a lot of studies have focused on profiling DNA methylation and investigating its alterations in complex diseases such as cancer. While early studies were mostly restricted to CpG islands or promoter regions, recent findings indicate that many of important DNA methylation changes can occur in other regions and DNA methylation needs to be examined on a genome wide scale. In this article, we apply the wavelet based functional mixed model methodology to analyze the high throughput methylation data for identifying differentially methylated loci across the genome. Contrary to many commonly used methods that model probes independently, this framework accommodates spatial correlations across the genome through basis function model-ing as well as correlations between samples through functional random effects, which allows it to be applied to many different settings and potentially leads to more power in detection of differential methylation.

introduction dna methylation is an important epigenetic mechanism that is involved in the regulation of gene expression and plays a central role in normal biology and diseases. There has been much attention in profiling DNA methylation and discovering its alterations over the past decade to improve our understanding of complex diseases such as cancer. Much early methylation research focused on CpG islands introduced by. CpG islands are genomic regions containing high frequency of CpG sites, which contain cytosine and guanine connected by a phosphodiester bond. They frequently occur in the promoter region of genes, and thus have been thought to be most relevant methylation sites in suppressing RNA expression. However, recent evidence required us to rethink this belief. For example showed that most methylation alterations in colon cancer occur not in CpG islands, but in sequences up to 2 kb distant from CpG islands, which they term CpG island shores. This was discovered by examining DNA methylation on a comprehensive genome wide scale via high throughput V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com microarray based methylation data rather than just focusing on CpG islands. This suggests that traditional approaches focused on a certain regions of the genome such as CpG islands or promoter regions are likely to miss important findings and genome wide studies on DNA methylation are preferred. Recent advancements in high throughput assessment of DNA methylation using microarray based or sequencing based approaches make genome wide methylation studies possible. For example developed comprehensive high throughput arrays for relative methylation (CHARM) which measure methylation level at more than 2 million probes for each sample and developed whole genome bisulfite sequencing w gbs for measuring methylation level at every CpG site in the genome. Reviews and comparisons on several high throughput methylation technologies can be found in, Laird (2010) and Wilhelm. However, these data are high dimensional and complex, and so there is a need to develop new methods to analyze these genome level methylation data that are flexible enough to capture their complex structure, computationally efficient enough to scale up to their enormous size, and yielding rigorous statistical inference allowing one to identify differentially methylated loci in the genome while adjusting for multiple testing, e.g. by controlling the false discovery rate (FDR) or experiment wise error rate (EER). In differential methylation analysis, the most commonly used approaches examine the relationship between the phenotype of interest and methylation of a given individual locus independently across the genome (; zack ay and Steinhoff, 2010 and many more). However, methylation in nearby CpG loci tends to be highly correlated (). Therefore, statistical analyses based on independence assumptions across loci are likely to be inefficient to deal with this dependence issue, some methods have been developed that use the idea of bump hunting to account for correlation of nearby loci (). In particular first estimate the differential methylation individually at each genomic location. Then the estimates are smoothed using loess () and candidate regions of differential methylation are generated as contiguous regions where the absolute values of smoothed estimates are greater than a predetermined threshold. Finally, permutation techniques are applied to assess statistical significance of these regions. This approach has great advantages over approaches modeling loci as independent in that they borrow strength across genome by grouping neighboring probes into a region and focusing on region based detection of differential methylation, and can account for multiple testing. They have successfully applied their approach and identified differentially methylated regions (DMRs). However, these methods also have disadvantages. As pointed out in, they can have trouble in finding small differentially methylated regions involving a small number of loci. This is problematic since such small regions may correspond to suppressed gene expression and thus be functionally important. Also, care must be taken in specification of the predetermined threshold for defining a region or grouping probes, as these tuning parameters can strongly affect the results. The loess smoothing approach is not spatially adaptive when used with global bandwidths, so can result in the attenuation of local features that can reduce power to detect them. Additionally, the current software is limited to paired or independent group level analyses and simple linear regression, which may not be sufficient to answer some research questions of interest in methylation studies or handle certain experimental designs inducing correlation between arrays introduced a method, called wavelet based functional mixed models wf mm that can model complex, irregular functional data within a functional mixed model framework, which generalizes linear mixed models to the setting of functional responses. This framework allows general design matrices that can accommodate group effects, linear regression and various types of interactions, plus random effect levels to model correlation between functions induced by experimental design, e.g. multiple functions from the same subject or cluster. Multiple factors can be simultaneously modeled, e.g. allowing us to adjust for batch effects. They used wavelet basis functions to represent functions, which allows the method to capture local within function correlations and thus adaptively borrow strength within the function. They have standalone executable software to run the general model. In this paper, we will apply this method to the analysis of genome wide probe level methylation data and explore its properties. Modeling is done using a fully Bayesian approach that has significant inferential advantages, yielding statistical inference to flag genomic loci as differentially methylated while accounting for multiple testing using experiment wise error rate and or false discovery rate criteria. By modeling methylation profiles as functions and considering both spatial correlation given a function and correlation among samples, this approach can borrow strength across neighboring probes as well as across samples. The implementation of the method is relatively straightforward by using automated software called wf mm freely available at https://biostatistics.mdanderson.org/ software download. Although this article focuses on genome wide methylation studies, the framework is more general and can be used for analyzing other high throughput genomic data sets observed for many locations spaced through the genome, including copy number and tiling transcriptome arrays. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 introduces three methylation data sets we analyze and the preprocessing procedures we employ. Section 3 describes the wavelet based functional mixed model and Bayesian approaches for identifying differentially methylated loci. We present numerical results in Section 4 and conclude with a discussion of general usefulness of the framework and its potential for many other data sets.

application in this section, we briefly describe three different methylation data sets we analyze and describe how they were preprocessed examined DNA methylation of 13 colorectal cancers and 13 matched normal mucosa on a genome wide scale using the CHARM microarrays described into investigate methylation differences between normal and colon tumor samples. This study showed that most DNA methylation alterations in colon cancer occur in sequences up to 2 kb distant from CpG islands or promoter regions, which they term 'CpG island shores', rather than in the promoter or CpG island regions themselves. They standardized log ratios from the CHARM microarrays using suitable control probes from unmethylated regions so that the average log ratio in the control probes was zero. subsequently developed an improved preprocessing procedure, which can be implemented using the R package charm (version 2.8.0). In our analysis, the CHARM microarray data were normalized and pre-processed using the charm package. The methylation log ratios were first normalized using the control probes. Then the normalized log ratios were Identification of differentially methylated loci transformed into percentage methylation estimates, which range between zero and one. As a result, percentage methylation values were given for a total of 2 162 406 probes for each sample. For our modeling, we applied the log it transform to the percentage methylation values, which made them symmetric and approximately normal tailed. We will use the log it transformed data to compare methylation differences between the normal and tumor samples.
