Motivation: Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is widely used for high throughput characterization of metabolites in complex biological mixtures. However, accurate interpretation of the spectra in terms of identities and abundances of metabolites can be challenging, in particular in crowded regions with heavy peak overlap. Although a number of computational approaches for this task have recently been proposed, they are not entirely satisfactory in either accuracy or extent of automation. Results: We introduce a probabilistic approach Bayesian Quantification b quant for fully automated database based identification and quantification of metabolites in local regions of 1 H NMR spectra. The approach represents the spectra as mixtures of reference profiles from a database, and infers the identities and the abundances of metabolites by Bayesian model selection. We show using a simulated dataset, a spike in experiment and a meta bolo mic investigation of plasma samples that b quant outperforms the available automated alternatives in accuracy for both identification and quantification.

introduction the field of metabolomics studies small molecules such as amino acids, nucleic acids, lipids and carbohydrates, called metabolites, which are present in cells and extracellular fluids of biological organisms (). Metabolites are the end products of a variety of cellular processes and their high throughput characterization and quantification can provide important insights into the functioning of living organisms. As a result, metabolomics is increasingly applied to the areas of system biology, drug discovery, pharmaceutical research, early disease detection, toxicology and food science (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Developments in high throughput metabolomics are driven by advances in analytical methods (), such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy and in mass spectrometry. In particular, 1 H NMR spectroscopy is non-destructive and highly reproducible, and is widely used for the identification and quantification of metabolites in bio fluids such as plasma and urine (). The 1 H NMR signal is generated by the motion of magnetic moments of protons or other nuclei in a magnetic field after their excitement with a high frequency pulse (). Fourier transformation of this time dependent signal yields a chemical shift, a measure that expresses the dependence of nuclear magnetic energy on the electronic and chemical environment in the molecule. An 1 H NMR spectrum displays chemical shifts in parts per million (p.p.m., i.e. the difference in hertz between a resonance frequency and that of a reference substance, over frequency of magnet field in megahertz), versus intensities of the signals (). Typically, a metabolite detectable by 1 H NMR contains one or more protons, and each of the protons produces one or more peaks. The number of peaks generated by a metabolite, as well as their location and ratio of heights, are reproducible and uniquely determined by the chemical structure of the molecule illustrates two 1 H NMR spectra with a dominant signal from metabolite taurine from the spike in experiment in Section 4. All three predominant peaks in the spectra correspond to one proton in the taurine chemical structure. The expected ratio of heights of the three peaks is known and fixed to 1:2:1. Extensive information regarding nmr specific characteristics of a variety of metabolites is currently available. Several public databases, such as human metabo lome database hm db () and biomag res bank (BMRB) (), as well as commercial databases such as the one in the chen omx NMR suite (), store reference NMR spectra of metabolites. The reference spectra can contain observed peak locations and ratios of heights of spectra from pure chemical compounds, or their simulated counterparts. Therefore, in principle, researchers can identify metabolites by matching the observed spectra to the reference spectra in the database. The area of the peaks from a metabolite is directly related to its abundance. As the abundance changes, the heights of peaks belonging to the same metabolite vary, as shown in the case of taurine in. This enables relative quantification of metabolites across samples of region from two 1 H NMR spectra from the spike in experiment in Section 4. Solid line: spectral region from a sample containing the spiked metabolite taurine in the concentration of 3200 mol sl. Dashed line: spectral region from a sample containing taurine in the concentration of 1600 mol sl. The decrease in metabolite abundance results in a proportional decrease of all three peaks. various types, e.g. across samples from patients with various status of a disease in biomarker discovery investigations. However, inference of identity and abundance of metabolites from 1 H NMR spectra is fraught with difficulties. First, complex biological mixtures contain hundreds of metabolites, which vary in abundance substantially, and can produce highly overlapped peaks. Second, the number of candidate metabolites in a database typically exceeds the number of major sources of signals in the spectra, and one has to explore a combinatorially large space of candidate metabolites. Finally, due to numerous factors such as potential of pH and ionic interactions, peaks generated by a metabolite can deviate from their expected p.p.m. (), introducing 'positional uncertainty'. The combination of these factors makes the deconvolution and the interpretation of individual metabolite specific signals very challenging in practice. Automated inferential approaches are needed in order to account for the noise and ambiguity of spectral interpretations, and to derive objective, accurate and reproducible identifications and quantifications of metabolites. This article develops a fully automated inferential approach, that we call b quant for identification and quantification of metabolites in regions of complex 1 H NMR spectra. It takes as input a set of NMR spectra, a range of p.p.m. of interest and a database of reference spectra for candidate compounds. It is based on a family of Bayesian hierarchical models for the spectra, where the models with the highest posterior probabilities are selected using a stochastic sampling technique. b quant outputs a list of identified metabolites associated with their inclusion probability, and their measures of abundances in each spectrum on a continuous scale.

CONCLUSION
