Motivation: pathway based drug discovery considers the therapeutic effects of compounds in the global physiological environment. This approach has been gaining popularity in recent years because the target pathways and mechanism of action for many compounds are still unknown, and there are also some unexpected off target effects. Therefore, the inference of drug pathway associations is a crucial step to fully realize the potential of system based pharmacological research. Transcriptome data offer valuable information on drug pathway targets because the pathway activities may be reflected through gene expression levels. Hence, it is of great interest to jointly analyze the drug sensitivity and gene expression data from the same set of samples to investigate the gene pathway drug pathway associations. Results: We have developed iFad, a Bayesian sparse factor analysis model to jointly analyze the paired gene expression and drug sensitivity datasets measured across the same panel of samples. The model enables direct incorporation of prior knowledge regarding gene pathway and or drug pathway associations to aid the discovery of new association relationships. We use a collapsed Gibbs sampling algorithm for inference. Satisfactory performance of the proposed model was found for both simulated datasets and real data collected on the NCI-60 cell lines. Our results suggest that iFad is a promising approach for the identification of drug targets. This model also provides a general statistical framework for pathway based integrative analysis of other types of omics data. Availability: The R package iFad and real NCI-60 dataset used are available at

introduction identification of drug targets, the gene products that bind to specific therapeutic molecules, is essential for understanding drugs' action mechanism and possible side effects, and for maximizing treatment efficacy and minimizing drug toxicity. Traditional pharmaceutical research and development process is deeply rooted in the 'one target one drug' mindset, which tries to interfere the pathological process through blocking an important molecular player (e.g. a specific enzyme) using a compound. Unfortunately, most drug candidates identified through high throughput screening based on this philosophy have failed due to either poor efficacy or serious side effects (). High hope has been placed on using systems biology for drug discovery through the application of novel computational methods to high throughput genomics and proteomics data. In contrast to the traditional 'one target one drug' perspective that ignores the intricate interaction among genes proteins systems biology approaches consider the drug effects in the global physiological environment. They may be more effective in drug discoveries because it has become apparent that most common diseases result from system level malfunctions rather than problems with individual genes (). In practice, drug combination or polypharmacy is more commonly used in recent years to modulate multiple drug targets. Existing computational methods for drug target identification can be generally categorized into three classes. The first class of methods uses the classical gene expression profiling strategies to infer drug targets. For example, drug targets can be identified by comparing the mRNA responses in human cell lines induced by drugs with unknown mechanisms with a set of well understood drugs. The connectivity map project () used a non-parametric rank based pattern matching strategy based on the kolmogorov smirnov statistic, which requires extensive data mining procedures. Another study () proposed a bi clustering method, named iterative signature algorithm is a to search for co modules representing gene drug associations. The second class of methods aims to integrate various types of biological data, including knowledge about bioactive molecules and their protein targets (e.g. sequences, structures and molecular mechanisms) along with the phenotypic effects of drug treatment, to deduce the probability of two proteins being bound by the same ligand (). Drug docking studies have also been incorporated to measure the binding probabilities based on 3D structural complementarities (). One disadvantage of these methods is that they only evaluate the likelihood of presumed drug target pairs and make no inference of unknown drug targets proposed a probabilistic network to calculate the probability of two drugs sharing the same target by comparing their clinical side effects. However, this method provides limited information on the drug action mechanisms.

discussion drug target identification is one important problem in translational bioinformatics, as well as a crucial step in the early stage of drug discovery and development. Although there exist many different high throughput technologies for molecular phenotype profiling, how to perform knowledge based informative data integration
