Motivation: phospho proteomics measurements are widely applied in cellular biology to detect changes in signalling dynamics. However, due to the inherent complexity of phosphorylation patterns and the lack of knowledge on how phosphorylation s are related to functions, it is often not possible to directly deduce protein activities from those measurements. Here, we present a heuris-tic machine learning algorithm that infers the activities of kinases from phospho proteomics data using kinase target information from the phospho site plus database. By comparing the estimated kinase activity profiles to the measured phospho site profiles, it is furthermore possible to derive the kinases that are most likely to phosphorylate the respective phospho site. Results: We apply our approach to published datasets of the human cell cycle generated from HeLaS3 cells, and insulin signalling dynamics in mouse hepatocytes. In the first case, we estimate the activities of 118 at six cell cycle stages and derive 94 new kinase phospho site links that can be validated through either database or motif information. In the second case, the activities of 143 kin-ases at eight time points are estimated and 49 new kinase target links are derived. Availability and implementation: The algorithm is implemented in Matlab and be downloaded from git hub. It makes use of the Optimization and Statistics toolboxes. https://

introduction phospho proteomics is a branch of proteomics that identifies, catalogues and characterizes proteins containing a phosphate group as a post-translational modification. Since intracellular signal transduction is primarily mediated by the reversible phosphorylation of various signalling molecules, data generated by phospho proteomics approaches is commonly used to study the dynamics of signalling networks (). A major challenge in the analysis of such data lies in the high combinatorial complexity of the observed signalling networks. The human genome encodes roughly 540 kinases that phosphorylate 20 000 proteins at probably more than 350 000 phospho sites (). Hence, the number of possible targets per kinase tends to be high, and the majority of proteins acting as kinase targets can be phosphorylated at multiple sites, where each site can potentially be targeted by several kinases, resulting in an intricate network of kinases, target proteins and phosphatases, which remove the attached phosphorylation s again. Both kinases and phosphatases can thereby themselves be phosphorylated. The situation gets further complicated by the fact that most known phospho sites can so far not be related to a distinct protein function. Thus, most research up to the present focuses on individual phosphoproteins and kinases or is restricted to clustering and enrichment methods which group the detected sites according to their behaviour and relate the proteins they are localized on to cellular processes like canonical pathways, transcriptional networks or disease mechanisms via statistical testing against databases (). Modelling of phospho proteomics networks is usually limited to few components (50) and rather includes single phospho sites than whole proteins due to the lack of functional information (). To address these challenges, we developed the machine algorithm i kap (Inference of kinase activities from phospho proteomics that estimates the activities of all kinases that are known to phosphorylate at least one phospho site in a phospho proteomics dataset. i kap takes information from the phospho site plus (PSP) database as input and uses a non-linear optimization routine to minimize a cost function that relates kinase activities and affinities to phospho site measurements. The predicted activities directly display the engagement of signal transduction pathways such as camp pka Ca 2/ PKC, mt or or Akt kinase pathways. If data for multiple time points or conditions are available, each kinase receives a unique activity profile which depicts the change of cellular function over all conditions. Furthermore, these profiles can be used as an input for mathematical modelling which enables the usage of protein nodes instead of phospho site nodes, making the model more meaningful and predictive. Another application lies in the inference of possible new kinase target links. By correlating the calculated kinase activity profiles to the measured phospho site profiles the kinases that are most likely to phosphorylate a respective phospho site can be derived. To demonstrate the capabilities of i kap we applied it to two previously published phospho proteomics datasets. The first comprises a study of the human cell cycle in HeLaS3 cells (). Eukaryotic cells replicate by a complex series of evolutionarily conserved events that tightly regulate defined stages of the cell division cycle. Progression through this cycle involves a large number of dedicated protein complexes and signalling pathways, and deregulation of this process is implicated in tumour i genesis. Global analyses of transcriptome dynamics during the cell cycle have been performed in microarray studies. However, in addition to changes in messenger RNA (mRNA) abundance, protein phosphorylation and targeted protein degradation are also important regulators of cell cycle progression. To examine the influence of protein phosphorylation s on the progression of the cell cycle, the phospho proteome was measured through a combination of immobilized metal affinity chromatography () and stable isotope labelling of amino acids () at the six phases G1, G1-S, early s late-S, G2 and M. Further details can be found in. The second dataset is a study of insulin signalling dynamics in the mouse liver (). Here, the phospho proteome was measured after 0, 0.5, 1, 2, 3, 4, 6 and 10 min after stimulation with insulin.

discussion phosphorylation of serine, threonine and tyrosine plays significant roles in cellular signal transduction and in modifying multiple protein functions. Phosphoproteins are coordinated and regulated by a network of kinases, phosphatases and phospho binding proteins, which modify the phosphorylation states, recognize unique phosphopeptides or target proteins for degradation. Detailed and complete information on the structure and dynamics of these networks is required to better understand fundamental mechanisms of cellular processes and diseases. high throughput technologies have been developed to investigate phospho proteomes in model organisms and human diseases. Among them, mass spectrometry based technologies are the major platforms and have been widely applied, which has led to explosive growth of phospho proteomic data in recent years. New bioinformatics tools are needed to analyse and make sense of these data. Moreover, most research has focused on individual phosphoproteins and kinases. To gain a more complete knowledge of cellular processes, systems biology approaches, including pathways and networks modelling, have to be applied to integrate all components of the phosphorylation machinery, including kinases, phosphatases, their substrates and phospho binding proteins. We developed here a machine learning algorithm that estimates the activities of all kinases which are known to phosphorylate sequences occurring in a phospho proteomics dataset. The algorithm thus reduces the dimensions of the parameter space to the number of kinases, and renders the data easier to display and analyse. The estimated activities can then be used for modelling or inference of new kinase target links. Previous approaches to infer kinase activities from phospho proteomic data only rely on the number of targets in the sample, without taking the detected amounts of phosphorylation into account (), or solely deliver relative activities from one condition to another () and do not include affinity parameters for kinase target interactions. i kap however calculates the absolute activities for each condition separately and thus provides a more precise picture of pathway engagement in biological samples. Furthermore, in opposition to previous approaches, an arbitrary number of kinases can be assigned to each phospho site which makes the approach more realistic compared with sorting phospho sites into distinct kinase groups and considers uncertainties in kinase specificities for certain targets. Especially in the case of time resolved data the computed kinase activities are directly applicable as an input to subsequent dynamical modelling. The calculated affinities can thereby be used as starting points for parameter calibration, and through the use of identifiability analysis it is possible to determine how reliable the computed activities are. The derivation of novel kinase target pairs as it is described in () is an in vitro method that has to be performed for each kinase individually. Thus, it is much more time consuming. Furthermore, i kap provides a ready to use framework, whereas previous approaches need to be implemented by the user from scratch. Although the approach does not include phosphatases, both the estimated kinase activities and the newly derived links proved to be reliable in literature and motif based validation. Our conclusion is that, at least in HeLaS3 cells and murine hepatocytes, phosphatase activity could rather be considered as a factor which removes phosphorylation s at a constant rate than a mechanism which is under sophisticated regulation. Since this can be different in other cell types, the findings that are generated through the application of our method should always be critically appraised and validated. The algorithm represents a step towards a system-wide understanding of signal transduction processes within a cell. In the near future, we will further test it on other phospho proteomics datasets and implement versions in other programming languages like Python and R to make it available to a larger community of scientists.
