protein protein interactions play a critical role in many biological processes. Despite that, the number of servers that provide an easy and comprehensive method to predict them is still limited. Here, we present i loops a web server that predicts whether a pair of proteins can interact using local structural features. The inputs of the server are as follows: (i) the sequences of the query proteins and (ii) the pairs to be tested. Structural features are assigned to the query proteins by sequence similarity. Pairs of structural features (formed by loops or domains) are classified according to their likelihood to favor or disfavor a protein protein interaction, depending on their observation in known interacting and non-interacting pairs. The server evaluates the putative interaction using a random forest classifier. Availability: i loops is available at

introduction protein protein interactions pp is mediate almost all processes in living cells. Thus, the discovery of new pp is is the key to understanding the complexity of biological systems. Several experimental methods have been developed to identify new pp is among them, yeast two hybrid and tandem affinity purification are the most used high throughput methods (). However, these methods are still economically and time costly and are hindered by the high amount of false negative interactions (). Mirroring the experimental techniques, computational methods have also been developed to identify new pp is. These computational methods can be divided into three main approaches, depending on the contextual properties they exploit: structural, genomic or biological (). Structural context methods, such as InterPreTS (), PIPE () or struct 2net (), extrapolate structural information of a protein directly from its sequence and predict or score pp is based on the molecular composition and structural conformation of the partners. Otherwise, genomic context methods like STRING () or predict ome () provide predictions of pp is based on gene fusion, gene co-localization and phylogenetic profiles. Finally, biological context methods [e.g. gene census (use Bayesian networks to produce reliable predictions. To properly assess the success of any PPI prediction method, a reference set of non-interacting protein pairs (NIPs) is required (Ben). The nega to me database () is a set of protein pairs that are unlikely to engage in physical direct interactions compiled through manually curated literature and crystallographic data. Here, we present the i loops web server, a web implementation of our recently published structural context method () that exploits arch db classification of loops () to predict pp is. Our method explores the balance of structural features (SFs) observed in pp is and or NIPs. The server provides PPI predictions with an associated precision using a random forest (RF) classifier () and considering different ratios between pp is and NIPs.
