Motivation: With the rapid increase of infection resistance to antibiotics, it is urgent to find novel infection therapeutics. In recent years, antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been utilized as potential alternatives for infection therapeutics. AMPs are key components of the innate immune system and can protect the host from various pathogenic bacteria. Identifying AMPs and their functional types has led to many studies, and various predictors using machine learning have been developed. However, there is room for improvement; in particular, no predictor takes into account the lack of balance among different functional AMPs. Results: In this paper, a new synthetic minority over-sampling technique on imbalanced and multi label data sets, referred to as ml smote was designed for processing and identifying AMPs functional families. A novel multi label classifier, m lamp was also developed using ml smote and grey pseudo amino acid composition. The classifier obtained 0.4846 subset accuracy and 0.16 hamming loss. Availability: A user friendly web server for m lamp was established at http://www.jci-bioinfo.cn/MLAMP.

introduction with rapid increase in the infection resistance of antibiotics, it is urgent to find novel infection therapeutics. Over the past decade antimicrobial peptides (AMPs) have been utilized as potential alternatives for fighting infectious diseases. AMPs are key components of the innate immune system and can protect the host from various pathogenic bacteria. In invertebrates and vertebrates, AMPs have dual roles: rapid microbial killing and subsequent immune modulation (). These effects result from AMP inducing multiple damages in bacteria by disrupting bacteria membranes (), by inhibiting proteins, DNA and RNA synthesis, or by interacting with certain intracellular targets (). Therefore, AMPs were developed increasingly for new drugs. Some examples of using AMPs in therapeutics have been reported. Popovic et al. found that peptides with antimicrobial and antiinflammatory activities had therapeutic potential for treatment of acne vulgaris (). yan chev a et al. synthesized a novel did eps i peptide with antimicrobial activity against four of five tested bacterial strains of Escherichia coli (). Conlon et al. demonstrated that peptides with antimicrobial activity from frog skin could stimulate insulin release, and hence had potential as an in cretin based therapy for Type 2 diabetes mellitus (). In addition, AMPs have been used as anticancer peptides in cancer therapy (). A surge in research on AMPs has promoted the development of various databases and prediction tools. APD2 () is a system dedicated to establishing a glossary, nomenclature, classification, information search, prediction, design, and statistics of AMPs. It gathered 2,544 AMPs from the literature. CAMP () holds 6,756 antimicrobial sequences and 682 3D structures of AMPs, together with prediction and sequence analysis tools.) tested all subsequences ranging from 5 to 100 amino acids of the plant proteins in Associate Editor: Dr. John Hancock unipro kb swissprot and constructed an AMP database for plant species, named cp amp. Zhao et al. developed LAMP, a database used to aid the discovery and design of AMPs as new antimicrobial agents. The database contains 3,904 natural AMPs and 1,643 synthetic peptides (). dba asp was a manually curated database built by gogol adze et al., and it collected those peptides for which antimicrobial activities against particular targets have been evaluated experimentally (). Generally, AMPs are short peptides with 1050 amino acids () and have very low sequence homology to one another. So it is challenging to identify AMPs and its activities by automatic tools. Researchers made considerable efforts in this regard. In these studies, the support vector machine (SVM) was usually used as prediction engine (). Besides, nearest neighbor () or k nearest neighbor algorithm (), random forests (RFs) (), decision tree model (), and hidden Markov models (HMMs) () were also applied as classifiers. Some predictors were only used to identify whether novel peptides are AMPs (). In addition to these simple binary classifiers, there were some multi-class classifiers.) created a decision tree model to classify the antimicrobial activities of synthetic peptides into four classes: none, low, medium, and high. Joseph developed class amp to predict the propensity of a peptide sequence to have antibacterial, antifungal, or antiviral activity (). Khamis et al., studied 14 AMP families and sub-families. They selected a specific description of AMP amino acid sequence, and identified compositional and physicochemical properties of amino acids to distinguish each AMP family (). Furthermore, Xiao et al. proposed a two level multi label classifier, iAMP-2L, which identifies not only whether a peptide is an AMP, but also its functional activities (). Although these methods have their own advantages and did play an important role in the research, they have following problems. Firstly, most models only identified whether a new sequence is AMP, but not its type. Secondly, it is hard to search short peptides in the database because AMPs usually have only 550 amino acids. Methods based on Blast search and gene ontology () are often ineffective. Last but not least, classifying AMPs' functions is a multi label classification (MLC), especially when the number of AMPs with different activities does not distribute evenly. From APD2 (), it is seen that antibacterial peptides occupy more than 90% of all AMPs, which is a highly unbalanced MLC. None of aforementioned automatic models considered the unbalanced amounts among various activities. In the past two decades, the topic of learning from multi label data sets m lds has drawn significant attention from researchers. Moreover, MLC methods are increasingly applied in various fields, such as semantic annotation of images (), categorization (), and bioinformatics (). The existing MLC methods can be grouped into two categories: (1) problem transformation methods, which transform MLC either into one or more single label classification or regression problem, and (2) algorithm adaptation methods, which extend specific learning algorithms in order to handle m lds directly (). Numerous MLC algorithms were proposed, such as adaboost mh and adaboost mr (), mlk nn (), Classifier chains (), and multi label Nave Bayes (). MLC often has serious issues of unbalanced data sets, in which the numbers of samples from minority classes are substantially fewer than from majority classes. For example, in subcellular localization prediction (), the number of the cytoplasm proteins is 44 times the number of the mela no some proteins. A similar situation occurs in many studies (). Standard machine learning algorithms often can not achieve ideal performance when trained on unbalanced data set. One approach to address this issue is to adapt existing classifier learning algorithms to strengthen learning with regard to the minority class(). Another approach is to artificially sample the class distribution (). Combining both approaches can also achieve strong classifiers (). Unquestionably, the sampling approach continues to be popular (). Various over and under sampling methods have been proposed (). Among them, SMOTE (Synthetic Minority Oversampling tech in que () is a state of art over-sampling methods. Chawla () argued that SMOTE creates effective regions for learning the minority class rather than being subsumed by the majority class samples around them. In bioinformatics, some studies have applied SMOTE to balance the skewing benchmark datasets (). In addition, similar approaches have been recently introduced to handle the unbalanced datasets, such as Monte Carlo sampling () and fusion ensemble approach (). Although the aforementioned methods have some success in addressing unbalanced data sets, they have not achieved a satisfactory result in processing multi labeled and imbalanced datasets simultaneously. Few works address the imbalance problem in MLC.) took into account the imbalance in predicting subcellular localization of human proteins.) built an under sampling and oversampling algorithm on m lds. Those studies improved the multi label classification performance; however, they have some drawbacks in how to address the multi label character of the new synthetic instance. In this paper, we tackle the imbalanced problem by a novel oversampling model referred to as ml smote which is a synthetic minority oversampling on m lds. We developed a new tool as a two level AMP predictor based on ml smote. For a peptides sequence, we first identify whether it is an AMP. If yes, we then predict what potential activities it has. The first level is a binary predictor, and the second level predictor is an unbalanced and multi labeled multi classes predictor. The result shows ml smote can adjust the label set distribution to improve the performance of the predictor.

conclusion due to increasing antibiotic resistance, AMPs, which are key components of innate immune system, are becoming more and more important in drug development. Efficiently and effectively identifying AMPs and their functional types has become an urgent research topic. The results reported in this study indicate that the novel predictor, m lamp provides an accurate and useful tool for researchers to find new infection therapeutics. m lamp obtained a better prediction performance than that of a previous method. The primary reason for our good performance is our formulation model's peptide extraction features. Since AMPs usually have 550 amino acids, our model (Eq.13) is good for formulating short peptides. It includes the internal relationship of amino acids sequence in various physical chemical properties. The second reason is the ml smote model, which does a good job of handling the lack of balance problem in multi label data sets. Compared with other methods, the sample syn the tized by using ml smote retains the multi label distributions. It not only accumulates minority samples but also keeps the label density of MLD. In the future, the ml smote model can be extended to assist with imbalance and multi label data sets for other problems. For practical applications, a user friendly web server for m lamp has been established at http://www.jci-bioinfo.cn/MLAMP, which allows users to easily obtain their desired results without the need to follow the complicated mathematical equations involved in developing the predictor. Users can submit a peptide sequence to the web server and subsequently the web server will return the predicted result in real time. Alternatively, users can choose the batch prediction by entering their e-mail address and their batch input file of many peptide sequences. They will quickly receive an email showing the predicted results from seconds to hours depending on the number of sequences.
