The composition of immune cell subsets is key to the understanding of major diseases and pathologies. Computational deconvolution methods enable researchers to investigate immune cell quantities in complex tissues based on transcriptome data. Here we present imm quant a software tool allowing immunologists to upload transcription profiles of multiple tissue samples, apply deconvolution methodology to predict differences in cell type quantities between the samples, and then inspect the inferred cell type alterations using convenient visualization tools. imm quant builds on the dc q deconvolution algorithm and allows a user friendly utilization of this method by non bioinformatic ian researchers. Specifically, it enables investigation of hundreds of immune cell subsets in mouse tissues, as well as a few dozen cell types in human samples.

introduction the repertoire of changes in immune cell types between different physiological states and the accurate determination of these changes can facilitate biomedical research, diagnosis and treatment. Despite this important attribute, experimental quantification of cell types has remained relatively low throughput. One attractive approach is to apply deconvolution techniques to infer the composition of cell types based on gene expression data, thus avoiding the need for experimental cell sorting (Shen). Using immune deconvolution methods, the quantities of cell subsets within a given heterogeneous tissue can be inferred based on (i) transcription profiling of a tissue sample, (ii) prior knowledge about the signatures of immune cell subsets (referred to as 'reference data'), and (iii) a group of effective gene markers for each of the cell subsets in the reference data. Most deconvolution methods were proven useful in human applications, where the reference datasets are of intermediate sizes (22 and 38 cell types in the IRIS and d map reference datasets, respectively (). However, these methods are typically not scalable to the substantially larger number of reference signatures that are available in mouse (207 cell types in the imm gen dataset ()). To address this, we recently introduced the dc q deconvolution algorithm, which can robustly infer differences between murine samples at a scale of a few hundreds of cell types (). dc q is focused on fold changes in cell type quantities between samples while assuming sparse changes in cell type composition (that is, assuming that only a subset of the cell types differs between the compared samples). Using this assumption, dc q can be effectively applied on mouse tissues utilizing the cell types contained in the imm gen dataset. Indeed, the accuracy of dc q on mouse samples was validated using several simulations and experimental approaches (e.g.,). Since dc q was so far applied only on mouse data, we decided to test the performance of dc q in the case of human data as well. To facilitate the use of dc q by immunologists, we developed imm quant a freely available multiplatform software (running on both Windows and Mac) that enables users to apply dc q on transcription profiling in heterogene-ous samples, both human and mouse, and observe the inferred alterations in composition of immune cell populations using convenient visualizations. Our simulations show that imm quant can withstand the large number of predicted cell subsets in mouse data while maintaining a good accuracy in human data. We show that dc q can be usefully applied, for example, to examine immune cell type alterations in murine lung infection and in human sj grens syndrome pathogenesis.
