Motivation: Ontologies are used in the annotation and analysis of biological data. As knowledge accumulates, ontologies and annotation undergo constant modifications to reflect this new knowledge. These modifications may influence the results of statistical applications such as functional enrichment analyses that describe experimental data in terms of ontological groupings. Here, we investigate to what degree modifications of the Gene Ontology (GO) impact these statistical analyses for both experimental and simulated data. The analysis is based on new measures for the stability of result sets and considers different ontology and annotation changes. Results: Our results show that past changes in the GO are non uniformly distributed over different branches of the ontology. Considering the semantic relatedness of significant categories in analysis results allows a more realistic stability assessment for functional enrichment studies. We observe that the results of term enrichment analyses tend to be surprisingly stable despite changes in ontology and annotation. Contact:

introduction ontologies are increasingly used in the life sciences (). They provide a uniform vocabulary to describe and structure a domain of interest. As a prime example, the Gene Ontology go contains knowledge about biological processes (BPs), molecular functions (MFs) and cellular components (CCs). The categories of GO are presented as a directed acyclic graph (DAG), with the edges representing relationships between the categories. higher level categories represent more abstract descriptions and encompass all child categories. These categories are used to semantically describe genes and gene products (). Genes are therefore described by the particular category to which they are annotated and, by extension, by all parent categories that give a more abstract description. Applications that perform functional enrichment analysis of gene sets take advantage of this property to identify more general categories that contain significantly more signal than expected at random (). Ongoing scientific research provides new domain knowledge that needs to be incorporated into ontologies and annotations. In the case of GO, these changes are incorporated on a regular basis with regular public releases (). This ontology evolution has been previously analyzed () and yielded insights into the differences between ontology versions (). Typical ontology changes include the addition of new categories and relationships as well as the revision of the existing structure (). These ontological modifications can trigger changes in the annotation (), e.g. when a category is removed, the annotations need to be moved or deleted. Further, annotations may be edited to reflect new knowledge or to eliminate inconsistencies (). The GO has evolved substantially since its inception in 2000. Its three sub ontologies evolved at different rates and in different ways. Between 2007 and 2010, BP increased by about 70%, compared with CC (%40%) and MF (%20%) (see Supplementary). Applying the method described in, we can identify how much different parts of GO have evolved by aggregating the change intensity in subtrees illustrates that different subsections of the go mf evolve differently. The non-uniform distribution of changes may have an effect on functional enrichment analyses. The aforementioned studies only considered changes in the ontology while neglecting the potential effects on downstream analyses; for example, how these changes may lead to different results in functional enrichment analyses. While it is rather obvious that the high degree of occurred changes in GO and its annotations will impact analysis results, it is still unknown whether earlier findings are significantly affected or even invalidated. The impact of ontology changes on functional enrichment analyses may depend on where the changes are located in the ontology and what kind of changes dominate. For example, additions of categories at the leaf level might be less critical than structural revisions within the ontology. We provide a method to test to what degree changes of GO and GO annotations go as may affect functional enrichment analyses. We demonstrate the applicability and usefulness of our approach by analyzing two real world experimental datasets as well as 50 random datasets. For the experimental datasets, we provide an in depth study of the underlying changes and their impact on the analysis results. The presented analysis is informative for both ontology curators and users of functional enrichment methods. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
