Motivation: bi clustering gene expression data is the problem of extracting submatrices of genes and conditions exhibiting significant correlation across both the rows and the columns of a data matrix of expression values. Even the simplest versions of the problem are computationally hard. Most of the proposed solutions therefore employ greedy iterative heuristics that locally optimize a suitably assigned scoring function. Methods: We provide a fast and simple pre-processing algorithm called localization that reorders the rows and columns of the input data matrix in such a way as to group correlated entries in small local neighborhoods within the matrix. The proposed localization algorithm takes its roots from effective use of graph theoretical methods applied to problems exhibiting a similar structure to that of bi clustering. In order to evaluate the effectiveness s of the localization pre-processing algorithm, we focus on three representative greedy iterative heuristic methods. We show how the localization pre-processing can be incorporated into each representative algorithm to improve bi clustering performance. Furthermore, we propose a simple bi clustering algorithm, Random Extraction After Localization (REAL) that randomly extracts submatrices from the localization pre-processed data matrix, eliminates those with low similarity scores, and provides the rest as correlated structures representing bi clusters. Results: We compare the proposed localization pre-processing with another pre-processing alternative, non-negative matrix factorization. We show that our fast and simple localization procedure provides similar or even better results than the computationally heavy matrix factorization pre-processing with regards to h value tests. We next demonstrate that the performances of the three representative greedy iterative heuristic methods improve with localization pre-processing when biological correlations in the form of functional enrichment and PPI verification constitute the main performance criteria. The fact that the random extraction method based on localization REAL performs better than the representative greedy heuristic methods under same criteria also confirms the effectiveness of the suggested pre-processing method. Availability: Supplementary material including code implementations in led a C++ library, experimental data, and the results are available at

introduction clustering refers to the process of organizing a set of input vectors into clusters based on similarity specified according to some predefined distance measure. In many cases, it is more desirable to simultaneously cluster the dimensions as well as the vectors themselves. This special instance of clustering, referred to as bi clustering was introduced by Hartigan (). Although traditional one way clustering provides valuable information with regards to a global perspective, extracting local substructures via bi clustering may help build intuition on both dimensions of the data. In addition to the areas such as data mining and pattern recognition, bi clustering has found many applications in bioinformatics, specifically in microarray analysis, drug activity analysis and motif detection (). In gene expression analysis, data are assumed to be arranged in a matrix, where each gene corresponds to a row and each condition to a column. After reordering rows and columns of the matrix, a bi cluster can then be defined as a submatrix with significant correlation among its data values. Such a submatrix is likely to group together genes that exhibit similar behavior over a subset of experimental conditions. One of the early approaches for bi clustering expression data is that of Cheng and Church (). A mean squared residue score is defined and the algorithm greedily inserts removes rows and columns to arrive at a certain number of bi clusters achieving some predefined residue score. Order preserving submatrix () is another greedy, iterative algorithm that finds a statistically significant bi cluster at each iteration. Maximum similarity bi clusters (MSB;) starts by constructing a similarity matrix based on a reference gene. A greedy strategy of removing rows columns iteratively is employed to provide the maximum similarity bi cluster in polynomial time. Large average submatrices (LAS;) is a recently proposed algorithm which tries to extract large average submatrices according to a bonferroni based significance score. Several graph theoretical approaches have also been suggested provided a divide and conquer algorithm, bi max p relic that runs on discretized binary data. In SAMBA (), the data matrix is viewed as a bipartite graph where the genes conditions constitute the layers of the bipartite graph and edges in the graph correspond to the page 2595 25942600
