Motivation: side chain modeling has seen wide applications in computational structure biology. Most of the popular side chain modeling programs explore the conformation space using discrete rigid rotamer s for speed and efficiency. However, in the tightly packed environments of protein interiors, these methods will inherently lead to atomic clashes and hinder the prediction accuracy. Results: We present a side chain modeling method cis rr which couples a novel clash detection guided iterative search (CIS) algorithm with continuous torsion space optimization of rotamer s (RR). Benchmark testing shows that compared with the existing popular side chain modeling methods, cis rr removes atomic clashes much more effectively and achieves comparable or even better prediction accuracy while having comparable computational cost. We believe that cis rr could be a useful method for accurate side chain modeling. Availability: cis rr is available to non-commercial users at our website

introduction side chain modeling is the prediction of a protein's side chain conformation for a given backbone structure. Due to its importance in protein design (), point mutation analysis (), protein protein docking (), homology modeling () and other aspects of structural modeling, side chain modeling has been intensively studied for many years. A thorough search through the continuous side chain conformations is inefficient and not feasible given the existing search algorithms and current computational power. Luckily, side chain dihedral angles are not evenly distributed, which occur in tight clusters around certain values (). Based on these clusters, the side chain conformational space can be discretized into rotamer s which represent the conformations of these clusters, and an ensemble of rotamer s for all side chain types is thus called a rotamer library (). Based on rotamer definition, side chain modeling can be efficiently transformed into a combinatorial search problem which is to find the best rotamer combination from all possible combinations of side chain rotamer s. For this methodology, many efforts have attempted including development of powerful scoring functions (), well sampled rotamer libraries () and effective search strategies (). So far, rotamer based side chain modeling methods have become the most popular ones. However, because the side chain conformations are approximated by discrete rotamer s these methods could inherently cause atomic clashes in the modeled structures, preventing them from accurate modeling of protein side chains. Furthermore, atomic clashes can lead to high energy and instability of structures, and thus the elimination of atomic clashes is beneficial for the subsequent analysis such as protein protein docking (). Atomic clashes can be alleviated to some extent by utilizing a very large rotamer library () or expanding a rotamer into finely sampled sub rotamer s (). Other more sophisticated approaches could include an additional step of rotamer refinement by off rotamer space sampling (). In our study, to achieve a more effective side chain modeling, we attempt to integrate the advances from side chain modeling in both rotamer based search and rotamer optimization. Our method, called cis rr performs clash detection guided iterative search (CIS) of side chain rotamer s while continuously optimizes side chain conformations using a conjugate gradients method. Careful implementation of cis rr shows obvious improvements of prediction accuracy and elimination of atomic clashes, in contrast with the traditional iterative search method. Further benchmark testing shows, compared with the existing popular side chain modeling programs, cis rr removes atomic clashes much more effectively and achieves comparable or even better prediction page 786 785790
