Motivation: New application areas of survival analysis as for example based on micro-array expression data call for novel tools able to handle high dimensional data. While classical (semi-) parametric techniques as based on likelihood or partial likelihood functions are omnipresent in clinical studies, they are often inadequate for modelling in case when there are less observations than features in the data. Support vector machines (SVMs) and extensions are in general found particularly useful for such cases, both conceptually (non-parametric approach), computationally (boiling down to a convex program which can be solved efficiently), theoretically (for its intrinsic relation with learning theory) as well as empirically. This article discusses such an extension of SVMs which is tuned towards survival data. A particularly useful feature is that this method can incorporate such additional structure as additive models, positivity constraints of the parameters or regression constraints. Results: Besides discussion of the proposed methods, an empirical case study is conducted on both clinical as well as micro-array gene expression data in the context of cancer studies. Results are expressed based on the log rank statistic, concordance index and the hazard ratio. The reported performances indicate that the present method yields better models for high dimensional data, while it gives results which are comparable to what classical techniques based on a proportional hazard model give for clinical data.

introduction survival analysis concerns the study of the time to occurrence of a certain event. It is best known in cancer studies where one is interested in characterizing which patients will relapse after surgery or pass away. Other applications can be found in electronic or mechanic components where the characterization of the lifetime is useful for optimizing maintenance strategies. Typically, survival data contain censored observations. Censoring indicates a lack of information on the outcome. For example, in a clinical study * To whom correspondence should be addressed. examining relapse of breast cancer patients, where patients are included between 1990 and 2000 and followed until 2008, not all patients will have experienced relapse. For these patients, the failure time is right censored. The statistical literature describes different models for the analysis of failure time data, an overview of which can be found in. The largest breakthrough in modelling survival data came in 1972 when Cox proposed his proportional hazard model (ph) (). The ph model is a semi-parametric model assuming that the hazard of an observation (the instantaneous risk of occurrence of the event given that the event did not occur before) is proportional to a 'baseline' hazard common to all observations. Proportionality is modelled as the exponential of a linear function of the covariates. The semi-parametric character of this model comes from the fact that the baseline hazard is left unspecified. Success of this model is to a certain extend due to the description and analysis of a corresponding partial likelihood function whose properties are proven to be quite similar to ordinary likelihood functions. Although the ph model is perhaps the most common survival model, some drawbacks remain. At first, the model is based on the assumption that hazards for different subjects are proportional to each other, an assumption which is not always realistic. A second drawback is the restrictive parametric form in which the variables affect the outcome. During the last decade, different methods dealing with one or both of those drawbacks have been proposed. The linear parametric form was generalized by means of anova models, splines and artificial neural networks;. Models dealing with non-linear covariate effects and not imposing the proportional hazards assumption were proposed in the field of artificial neural networks (). Due to the good performances obtained with machine learning methods in regression and classification (), ideas underlying methods of machine learning started to pervade also traditional modelling areas. Support vector machine (SVM) regression for censored data was proposed by page 88 8794
