Motivation: high throughput sequencing of RNA in vivo facilitates many applications, not the least of which is the cataloging of variant splice isoforms of protein coding messenger RNAs. Although many solutions have been proposed for reconstructing putative isoforms from deep sequencing data, these generally take as their substrate the collective alignment structure of rnase q reads and ignore the biological signals present in the actual nucleotide sequence. The majority of these solutions are graph theoretic relying on a splice graph representing the splicing patterns and exon expression levels indicated by the spliced alignment process. Results: We show how to augment splice graphs with additional information reflecting the biology of transcription, splicing and translation , to produce what we call an ORF (open reading frame) graph. We then show how ORF graphs can be used to produce isoform predictions with higher accuracy than current state of the art approaches. Availability and implementation: RSVP is available as Cþþ source code under an open source licence: http://ohlerlab.mdc-berlin. de software rsvp
introduction high throughput sequencing of RNA transcripts facilitates many applications, including gene expression analysis, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) detection, discovery of unannotated genes and cataloging of different splice isoforms for individual loci. As the cost of sequencing continues to decline, RNA transcript assays will become increasingly common, and efficient computational methods for extracting biological knowledge from the resulting data will become increasingly crucial. The cataloging of splice isoform variants of protein coding genes remains an especially important goal, as the range of possible downstream effects following the transcription of a gene is constrained by the variety of transcripts that can be produced from that locus. Various other applications using transcript omic data rely on knowing the set of transcripts that can be produced by each gene. Even if not every transcript from a protein coding locus results in stable protein production, identification of those transcripts that do likely produce proteins and an accurate characterization of the protein isoforms produced remain important steps in the process of understanding individual transcription units. Unfortunately, few genomes currently have complete annotations of all splice variants of all genes. Although a full length sequencing of whole transcripts promises to become technologically feasible in the future, at present the inference of the whole transcript structure from short RNA sequencing reads in eukaryotic organisms depends on computational methods for assembling exons into complete structures. In the case of functional protein coding transcripts, these structures should contain a valid open reading frame (ORF) capable of being translated into a functional protein, i.e. beginning with a valid start codon (AUG) and ending with a valid stop codon (UGA, UAA or UAG) in the same period 3 phase. Current methods for discovering splice isoforms from short RNA sequencing reads fall into roughly two categories: those that explicitly perform (spliced) alignment of reads to a reference genome, and those that instead perform de novo assembly of reads without an explicit reference. Given the increasing availability of near complete genomic sequences, we have focused on the first category. reference based methods typically use the mapping of spliced reads to induce a structure, called splice graph, in which each vertex represents an exon and each edge represents an intron. Paths through the graph represent individual combinations of exons comprising putative transcript isoforms. De novo methods also use a graph, called a de Bruijn graph, in which paths again represent transcripts (though vertices now represent km ers. Thus, graph theoretic algorithms based on path enumeration are common to most methods of transcript assembly from RNA sequencing data. Although splice graphs are highly informative to the transcript assembly process because of their inclusion of information about both splicing patterns and relative exon inclusion levels, they lack any information about underlying nucleotide patterns. In particular, they provide no immediate means of determining whether a path through the graph corresponds to a transcript with a valid ORF. For protein coding genes, this is one of the most important constraints in determining whether a transcript can encode a viable protein, as translation occurs only in ORFs. *To whom correspondence should be addressed in this article, we show how to augment splice graphs with additional information reflecting the biology of transcription, splicing and translation, to produce what we call an ORF graph. ORF graphs contain explicit phase information, allowing efficient enumeration of isoforms containing a valid ORF, and they permit phase specific scoring of individual transcript elements, so that isoforms can be efficiently ordered by their likelihood under some joint sequence model. In this way, ORF graphs provide more than simply an indication of whether a putative transcript contains an ORF: via the vertex and edge scores, they provide information regarding coding potential and splice site strength, and via the phase information, they provide an efficient means of ranking exon combinations without invoking the combinatorial explosion of exhaustive enumeration. Finally, we present an efficient software implementation, called RSVP rnase q Variant Prediction), which achieves higher prediction accuracy than current state of the art approaches for identifying transcript isoforms. Our implementation has the advantage that it does not depend on particular library preparation protocols (e.g. strand specific libraries, paired end reads), although the ORF graph formalism is flexible enough that many such considerations could be accommodated. Our implementation is made available under an open source software license.
