Motivation: The translocon recognizes sufficiently hydrophobic regions of a protein and inserts them into the membrane. Computational methods try to determine what hydrophobic regions are recognized by the translocon. Although these predictions are quite accurate, many methods still fail to distinguish marginally hydrophobic transmembrane (TM) helices and equally hydrophobic regions in soluble protein domains. In vivo, this problem is most likely avoided by targeting of the tm proteins so that non tm proteins never see the translocon. Proteins are targeted to the translo-con by an n terminal signal peptide. The targeting is also aided by the fact that the n terminal helix is more hydrophobic than other tm helices. In addition, we also recently found that the c terminal helix is more hydrophobic than central helices. This information has not been used in earlier top-ology predictors. Results: Here, we use the fact that the N-and c terminal helices are more hydrophobic to develop a new version of the first principle based topology predictor, SCAMPI. The new predictor has two main advantages; first, it can be used to efficiently separate membrane and non-membrane proteins directly without the use of an extra prefilter, and second it shows improved performance for predicting the topology of membrane proteins that contain large non-membrane domains. Availability and implementation: The predictor, a web server and all datasets are available at

introduction the biogenesis of most a helical transmembrane (TM) proteins follows a path where the synthesis is halted after a signal peptide is recognized by a signal recognition particle (). After the recognition, the ribosome is transported to the ER-, organelle or plasma membrane where translation starts again with the emerging peptide chain threaded through the translocon channel, additional TM helices being recognized and, in some cases, the signal peptide is cleaved off. Although it is clear that, for some proteins, additional rearrangements occur (), most membrane proteins appear to follow a folding procedure where the recognized TM helices come together to pack optimally (). This means that the location of membrane helices is primarily determined by the recognition of hydrophobic segments by the translocon. The positive inside rule (von) governs the overall orientation of a protein, so that there is a global pattern of positively charged amino acids in the loops that occur on the periplasmic side of the membrane. The exact way in which the positive inside rule acts is unclear, but even the presence or lack of positively charged residues close to the c terminal can shift the orientation of the protein entirely (). Ultimately, the combination of hydrophobic segments recognized by the translocon and the the topology of membrane proteins. All membrane protein topology predictors take into account the biological mechanisms for membrane protein biogenesis, consciously or non consciously. Many different computational methods, including Hidden Markov Models (HMMs) (), Support vector machines (SVMs) (), Dynamic Bayesian Networks () and Artificial Neural Networks () have been used in topology prediction. A common feature in all these methods is that they identify hydrophobic TM helices and then combine these predictions with the positive inside rule in order to determine the topology. The positive inside rule is used to allow for less hydrophobic tm segments to be recognized if this results in that more positive residues are found in periplasmic loops. Exactly how the balance between the hydrophobicity cut off and the positive inside rule is optimized varies between methods. In some methods, such as top pred () the two parts are performed independently, while in most others the optimization is done simultaneously. In contrast to most other topology predictors, the SCAMPI predictor performs topology prediction using no additional information apart from the hydrophobicity of the segments and the positive inside rule (). SCAMPI only requires that two parameters, namely the hydrophobicity weight and the relative weight of the positive inside rule, are optimized. The performance of SCAMPI is comparable with other state of the art methods that utilize much more complicated schemes and many more parameters (). One frequent problem when predicting the topology is that tm helices are often erroneously predicted in non tm domains. This problem becomes stronger in predictors that show the best overall performance (). The reason is that the hydrophobicity of the most hydrophobic segments in non tm domains may overlap with the hydrophobicity of some TM helices, see. This makes it impossible to use a single strict cut off to separate membrane and non-membrane regions, see the overlap p in most non tm proteins never see the translocon and therefore the insertion of hydrophobic non tm segments is not a problem in vivo (). Here, the targeting of proteins to the translocon is either guided by a signal peptide or by the most n terminal tm helix. In either case, the n terminal helix is, on average, more hydrophobic than later helices (), see. From a prediction point of view this means that, at least one helix in a tm protein has to be more hydrophobic than almost any segment in a non tm protein. This fact has been used by many predictors by including a prefilter that determines whether a protein is a membrane or a non-membrane one (). In, it can be seen that the overlap in hydrophobic regions of non tm proteins (dotted line) is smaller for the n terminal helix, than for the other tm helices. Because of that, a stricter cut off can be used in the prefilter, resulting in fewer falsely predicted tm proteins. Although this strategy is useful for tm protein identification, it does not solve the problem of falsely identifying TM helices in non tm domains of a tm protein. In addition to the more hydrophobic n terminal helix, we recently found that the c terminal tm helix is also more hydrophobic than central tm helices (), see. To understand this, we have to take into account marginally hydrophobic helices, i.e. helices that under normal circumstances are not fully recognized by the translocon. These helices can be inserted if the number of positively charged residues in an inside loop is sufficient. However, we noted that the effect of the positive residues in the loop is weaker if they are located at the c termini i.e. if they are not followed by another tm scampi was trained both with and without the prefilter, i.e two or three parameters were optimized.. A simplified version of the HMM used for SCAMPI2. Four parameters are used, the positive inside bias P kr , and three DG (biological hydrophobicity) cut-offs for n terminal central and c terminal helices. These parameters are optimized individually. The arrows denote the orientation of the helices (from the cytoplasm to the extracellular space and vice versa). The grey parts show the original SCAMPI model the terminal hydrophobic rule helix. It therefore seems as if the positive inside rule is stronger when a following TM helix is present. Since no tm helix follows the most c terminal helix, the insertion of it can not be aided by the positive inside rule, i.e. it needs to be sufficiently hydrophobic to be inserted by itself (). To the best of the authors' knowledge, all topology predictors treat all tm helices equally and do therefore ignore the fact that the N-and c terminal tm helices should be more hydrophobic. Here, we present a new version of SCAMPI that improves predictions by utilizing this observation.
