Motivation: rnase q (also called whole transcriptome sequencing) is an emerging technology that uses the capabilities of next generation sequencing to detect and quantify entire transcripts. One of its important applications is the improvement of existing genome annotations. rnase q provides rapid, comprehensive and cost effective tools for the discovery of novel genes and transcripts compared with expressed sequence tag (EST), which is instrumental in gene discovery and gene sequence determination. The rat is widely used as a laboratory disease model, but has a less well annotated genome as compared with humans and mice. In this study, we incorporated deep rnase q data from three rat tissues bone marrow, brain and kidney with EST data to improve the annotation of the rat genome. Results: Our analysis identified 32 197 transcripts, including 13 461 known transcripts, 13 934 novel isoforms and 4802 new genes, which almost doubled the numbers of transcripts in the current public rat genome database (rn5). Comparisons of our predicted protein coding gene sets with those in public datasets suggest that rnase q significantly improves genome annotation and identifies novel genes and isoforms in the rat. Importantly, the large majority of novel genes and isoforms are supported by direct evidence of rnase q experiments. These predicted genes were integrated into the Rat Genome Database (RGD) and can serve as an important resource for functional studies in the research community. Availability and implementation: The predicted genes are available at http://rgd.

introduction the rat, Rattus norvegicus, is the first mammalian species to be domesticated for scientific research, with work dating back 4150 years (). The rat has become a widely used disease model in the fields of physiology, pharmacology, toxicology, nutrition, behavior and immunology (). The genome sequence of the Brown Norway (BN) rat strain is the third completed mammalian genome after the human and mouse genomes (); however, its genome annotation has progressed slowly. Genome annotation is the process of attaching biological information to sequences (). One of the most important steps of genome annotation is to find regions of genomic sequence that encode genes. This includes annotation of protein coding genes and RNA genes, such as microRNAs, small nucleolar RNA and long non-coding RNA. In this article, we focused on improving annotation of protein coding genes in the rat. Compared with the human and mouse genomes, the current build of rat genome rn5 is considerably less comprehensive. As of November 2013, the human build hg19 annotated 37 556 mRNAs and 18 667 consensus protein coding genes, and the mouse build mm10 annotated 28 646 mRNAs and 19 962 genes. These are compared with 17 938 mRNAs and 16 744 genes in the rat build rn5. Existing annotation methods fall into two groups according to the type of data used for gene discovery (). The first group consists of ab initio programs, which are intrinsic methods based on gene content and signal detection (). All the programs in this group use only queried genomic sequences as input for gene discovery. The second group is composed of extrinsic methods, which comprise all programs that use data such as cDNA or protein other than the query genomic sequence to improve the accuracy of gene finding (). A few programs, such as AUGUSTUS (), combine extrinsic and ab initio approaches by mapping protein and expressed sequence tag (EST) data to the genome to validate ab initio predictions (). AUGUSTUS is one of the most accurate programs for gene discovery due, in large part, to its ability to incorporate multiple 'hints' into gene prediction models, making it a flexible program capable of using information from various sources. These hints are pieces of extrinsic evidence, which includes the location of exons, introns and biological signals of a given input DNA *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com sequence and can be retrieved from EST, rnase q and other data sources. ESTs are short subsequences of a cDNA library, and are one source of extrinsic data. They are an enormous resource for determining the exon intron structures of genes. However, ESTs are often incomplete and only reflect small pieces of full mRNAs (). rnase q (also called whole transcriptome sequencing) is a recently emerging technology that uses the capabilities of next generation sequencing to detect and quantify entire transcripts. This technology is a more rapid, comprehensive and cost effective approach in the discovery of novel genes and transcripts compared with EST data from conventional Sanger sequencing (). rnase q mapping of short reads in exon junctions can reveal the precise location of exon intron boundaries, to a single nucleotide resolution (), and thus has the potential to significantly improve existing genome annotations (). Moreover, because a larger number of reads can be obtained with deep sequencing, rnase q has the sensitivity to detect transcripts for genes with low expression levels, which are often missed by EST analysis (). In this study, we developed an analysis pipeline in which we incorporate high throughput rnase q data from three rat tissues (kidney, brain and bone marrow) into a gene prediction model based on the AUGUSTUS algorithm (). We compared our predicted protein coding gene sets with public datasets and found that rnase q significantly improved genome annotation and identified novel genes and gene isoforms in the rat. These predicted genes were deposited into the RGD (http://rgd.mcw.edu) (Supplementary) and may serve as an important resource for the research community.

discussion compared with the human and mouse genomes, the rat genome is not as highly annotated. In this study, we improved the prediction of protein coding genes after incorporation of rnase q evidence of transcription from bone marrow, brain and kidney tissues. Our analysis yielded nearly twice the number of transcripts in the public rat genome database (rn5) that currently contains 17 938 transcripts that span 16 744 loci. Specifically, we identified 32 197 transcripts, including 13 461 known transcripts, 13 934 novel isoforms and 4802 new genes. In general, the new analysis predicted longer and more complete transcripts and discovered more isoforms per gene locus when compared with the public database. A large majority of novel genes and isoforms identified in our analyses resulted from the use of rnase q data. This was because the rnase q data contain abundant evidence from transcribed sequences that may be unavailable in ESTs. In addition, the high depth of sequence coverage of the rnase q in our experiments allows the detection of extremely low expressed transcripts in each rat tissue, which are usually missed by EST methodology. We used rp km to measure mRNA abundance in rnase q experiments, and found that novel genes tend to have smaller rp km than known genes that are present in the public database. In addition to their lower expression, novel transcript isoforms within known gene loci are usually expressed in a tissue specific manner. Because of these features, deep RNA sequencing of multiple tissues (and from different experimental conditions) may be ideal for predicting protein coding genes in less well annotated eukaryotic genomes. This method can provide a more rapid, comprehensive and cost effective discovery of novel genes and transcripts compared with ESTs from conventional Sanger sequencing (). We noticed that although the large majority of predicted transcripts are common between rnase q and est rnase q they also had unique sets of transcripts. Integration of different sets of extrinsic hints may lead to different predicted protein coding genes transcripts. AUGUSTUS is based on a generalized hidden Markov model and searches the most likely gene structure given queried genomic sequences and extrinsic hints (). As a consequence of this, the introduction of hints changes the relative likelihood of the gene structures. The introduction of hints has two effects on the prediction of gene structure: the 'bonus effect' and 'malus effect'. The former increases the likelihood of a particular gene structure that is compatible with the hint, whereas the latter decreases that likelihood (). Combined hints from rnase q and EST (i.e. the est rnase q method) do not necessarily increase the relative likelihood of a particular gene structure that was initially predicted by the rnase q. Several caveats from our analysis should be acknowledged. First, the rat shows high genetic similarity to both human and mouse (). In our approach, to more accurately identify transcripts and genes, we filtered results from AUGUSTUS by considering their phylogenetic conservation across species and homology with known gene and transcripts. Although such a filtering strategy is extremely useful to identify a list of transcripts/ genes with high confidence (Supplementary), it could potentially overlook a small proportion of species specific genes in the rat genome. It should also be noted that the number of the identified transcripts with high confidence is almost doubled when compared with the current public database. Second, we have demonstrated that many of novel transcript isoforms are expressed in a tissue specific manner (Supplementary). In our study, this included only three tissues, and thus genome annotation could be further improved through analysis of more tissues under additional experimental conditions. Third, to detect transcripts with low expression levels, we combined rnase q reads from multiple libraries of the same tissues from different genetic backgrounds. This might overlook some strain specific transcripts. Nevertheless, such strain specific transcripts account for 51% of total number of the identified transcripts (Supplementary). In summary, we have demonstrated that incorporation of rnase q with EST data into a gene prediction procedure significantly improves annotation of the rat genome. Our study has identified 40% more high confidence novel genes and or isoforms in the rat. The large majority of novel genes and isoforms are supported by direct evidence from rnase q experiments. These predicted genes were integrated into the RGD (http://rgd.mcw.edu) and can serve as an important resource for further studies by the research community. Accessing the predicted genes in the RGD is detailed in Supplementary.
