Motivation: Disulfide bonds stabilize protein structures and play relevant roles in their functions. Their formation requires an oxidizing environment and their stability is consequently depending on the redox ambient potential, which may differ according to the subcellular compartment. Several methods are available to predict cysteine bonding state and connectivity patterns. However, none of them takes into consideration the relevance of protein subcellular localization. Results: Here we develop DISLOCATE, a two step method based on machine learning models for predicting both the bonding state and the connectivity patterns of cysteine residues in a protein chain. We find that the inclusion of protein subcellular localization improves the performance of these predictive steps by 3 and 2 percentage points, respectively. When compared with previously developed methods for predicting disulfide bonds from sequence, DISLOCATE improves the overall performance by more than 10 percentage points. Availability: The method and the dataset are available at the Web page

introduction the formation of disulfide bonds between cysteine residues is essential for folding, stability and maturation of many proteins (). Predicting which cysteines in a protein sequence form disulfide bonds plays a relevant role in protein structural and functional annotation (). Several computational methods are available, which can be grouped as: (i) methods that predict the disulfide bonding state (); (ii) methods that predict the connectivity patterns, assuming that the cysteine bonding state is known (); (iii) methods that compute both features (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed proteins that contain disulfide bonds are rarely found in the cytoplasm and are routinely secreted (). Disulfide bond formation in Eukaryotes happens in the lumen of the endoplasmic reticulum (). These experimental studies show that the localization in the different cell compartments plays a relevant role in disulfide bond generation and stabilization. However, to the best of our knowledge none of the methods developed so far has actually exploited information on the subcellular localization of proteins. Protein datasets with experimentally known subcellular localization are available as well. Several efficient prediction methods were developed to predict subcellular localization (). Here, we propose DISLOCATE, a novel two stage method for disulfide bond prediction in Eukaryotes based on machine learning approaches. We show that the inclusion of protein subcellular localization improves the performance of disulfide bond prediction methods. This improvement is noticeable also when the subcellular localization is predicted with ba cello ().
