Motivation: template based modeling, the most successful approach for predicting protein 3D structure, often requires detecting distant evolutionary relationships between the target sequence and proteins of known structure. Developed for this purpose, fold recognition methods use elaborate strategies to exploit evolutionary information, mainly by encoding amino acid sequence into profiles. Since protein structure is more conserved than sequence, the inclusion of structural information can improve the detection of remote homology. Results: Here, we present ORION, a new fold recognition method based on the pairwise comparison of hybrid profiles that contain evolutionary information from both protein sequence and structure. Our method uses the 16 state structural alphabet Protein Blocks, which provides an accurate 1D description of protein structure local conformations. ORION systematically outperforms PSI-BLAST and hh search on several benchmarks, including target sequences from the modeling competitions CASP8, 9 and 10, and detects $10% more templates at fold and superfamily SCOP levels. Availability: Software freely available for download at

introduction understanding how proteins adopt their 3D structure remains one of the most challenging questions in science (). The resolution of this problem would have a great impact on various fields of biology and medicine, allowing, for example, the rational design of new protein functions and drug molecules. Despite the progress made over the last decades, our biochemical knowledge and computational power are still insufficient to accurately predict protein structure solely from the amino acid sequence. Nevertheless, on the basis of the evolutionary relationship that many proteins share, it is possible to model the structure of a target protein using, as a template, a related protein of known structure. This approach, called comparative modeling, is currently the most successful in constructing theoretical models of protein structures. Since the quality of the resulting structure prediction largely depends on the template protein selected, the initial step of homology detection is crucial in comparative modeling. When proteins share 30% sequence identity, evolutionary relationships can be found using simple pairwise sequence comparison methods (): heuristic such as BLAST () or optimal such as s search (). However, in the case of non obvious relationships below the 'twilight zone' of 2035% sequence identity between the target and the template (), fold recognition methods have been proposed to find related proteins for template based modeling. Early methods of remote homology detection were based on profile to sequence comparison (). A profile can be represented as a position specific scoring matrix (PSSM) encoded from multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of related proteins and, therefore, contains evolutionary information specific to a protein family and defined by the levels of residue conservation at each sequence position. The first profile to sequence algorithm proposed by, and the widely used PSI-BLAST (), were followed by methods derived from the probabilistic interpretation of profiles using hidden Markov models (profile HMMs) (), like SAM-T98 () or HMMER (), which improved both the alignment quality and the sensitivity specificity of detection. Compared with sequence to sequence alignment, profiles and profile HMMs greatly improved identification of distantly related proteins and, consequently, comparative modeling (). Fold recognition was later taken to a new level with the ff as method (), which was based on profileprofile alignment. By using profiles for both target and template, such methods fully exploit the transitivity of sequence homology, making them more sensitive and specific than profile to sequence comparisons (). Finally, the pairwise profile HMM comparison introduced with the hh search algorithm (S ding, 2005) has further pushed the boundaries of remote homology detection and provided one of the current best approach for protein fold recognition. Besides these methods solely based on sequence, some authors have proposed structure based fold recognition methods called 'threading' (). The principle of threading is to assess the compatibility between the target sequence (1D) and different solved protein structures (3D) by using knowledge based scoring functions. Thus, comparative modeling may still be achieved by using templates sharing no detectable homology with the target sequence, since proteins may be structurally similar, even without detectable evolutionary relationship between their sequences. Despite interesting success, these 1D3D methods are limited by the quality of the sequence to structure alignment and do not reach the accuracy of the most advanced purely sequence based methods (). Following the success of both sequence and structure based fold recognition methods, combined approaches have emerged. Indeed, structural information from solvent accessibility, secondary structure or backbone torsion angle can be used to improve sequence based fold recognition. Such structural features have the advantage of being predictable, which addresses the absence of experimental model for the target protein. Thus, several methods combining discrete structural descriptors with amino acid sequence information have been proposed (). Given that structural cores change less rapidly, between 3 and 10 times slower than sequences (), one can imagine the advantage of using 'structural profiles' that would be generated from 1D descriptions of protein structures, in the same way that sequence profiles are generated from amino acid sequences. Indeed, protein structure being more conserved than sequence through evolution, these structural profiles would be more conserved and richer in evolutionary information than sequence profiles and, therefore, better at detecting distant homologies. In this article, we present ORION, a new method for fold recognition using evolutionary information from both amino acid sequence and protein structure, and encoded as combined sequence/ structure profiles. Our method uses the accurate sequential description of protein local conformations provided by the 16 state structural alphabet protein blocks (PB) (), instead of the conventional three state secondary structure, which has important drawbacks, especially for describing the loops which constitutes $45% of the local structure of the proteins. The relevance of PB structural information has previously been demonstrated through numerous applications (), such as structural alignment () and local structure prediction (). The novelty of our method also lies in the use of a combination of sequence and structural profiles for both target and template. The structural profiles used for the template were derived from structural alignments of the homs trad database (). For distantly related proteins, structural alignments have been shown to be more relevant than sequence alignments (). Thus, using as a benchmark the 1032 structural families from homs trad and 150 targets from the eighth, ninth and tenth editions of the Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) experiments (), we show that ORION outperforms the hh search algorithm in recognizing proteins with same or similar folds. Our detailed analysis further indicates that this accurate homology detection can be attributed to the inclusion of the PB structural descriptors into profileprofile alignments.

conclusion we have developed ORION, a profileprofile alignment method for fold recognition based on a structural alphabet that improves remote homology detection. ORION is able to detect between 2 and 10% more homologs than the state of the art method hh search on a balanced test set derived from the homs trad database. On another test set of target sequences from CASP8, 9 and 10, ORION systematically outperforms hh search and PSI-BLAST, detecting, respectively, 4.6 and 16.0% more templates at fold level (, mean difference in success rate for top 1, 5 and 10). Our method works particularly well for distantly related proteins due to the addition of accurate predictions of local structural information in the form of PBs. A possible improvement of ORION would be to incorporate other accurately predicted structural features, such as solvent accessibility. The combination of such structural descriptors with the PBs should provide a good approximation of the environment orion ORION with PBs profiles; hh search hh search with predicted secondary structure information.. Examples of protein structure predictions based on templates detected by ORION. The structural models were obtained with MODELLER, using ORION sequence alignments. CASP targets (on the right) are colored in grey and models are on the left. Target and model structures were aligned with the tm align program (). The three CASP11 targets are T0773-D1 (A), T0829-D1 (B) and T0855-D1 c improving protein fold recognition preferences for each amino acid of the target protein sequence. This information is helpful to predict structural core positions and, therefore, identify more remote homologs. For example, a series of central buried alpha helices could be identified from the target sequence with a combination of the predicted PBs and solvent accessibility descriptors, these latter restricting the number of possible template hits. Another possible improvement would touch on the weights of the different terms in the scoring function. Optimal weights were obtained from an evaluation of the successful detection rate on a balanced homs trad test set. This assessment indicates that the sequence and structural scoring terms should be equally weighted for the highest success rate (Supplementary). However, the weights could be dynamically adjusted according to the target sequence. Thus, while close homologs detection is based on the sequence, very remote homologs detection requires using more structural information, since the structure is more conserved than the sequence throughout the evolution. To address the issue of the weighting of the scoring terms, ORION may evaluate the difficulty of the detection in the initial search and then adjust the different parameters and perform another search in the template library. Finally, ORION and hh search show significant differences in template detection suggesting that they are complementary. Thus, ORION would also contribute to the improvement of the quality of meta servers and other consensus based prediction algorithms.
