Motivation: Intrinsically disordered proteins play a crucial role in numerous regulatory processes. Their abundance and ubiquity combined with a relatively low quantity of their annotations motivate research toward the development of computational models that predict disordered regions from protein sequences. Although the prediction quality of these methods continues to rise, novel and improved predictors are urgently needed. Results: We propose a novel method, named m fdp (Multilayered fusion based Disorder predictor), that aims to improve over the current disorder predictors. m fdp is as an ensemble of 3 Support Vector Machines specialized for the prediction of short, long and generic disordered regions. It combines three complementary disorder predictors, sequence, sequence profiles, predicted secondary structure, solvent accessibility, backbone dihedral torsion angles, residue flexibility and b factors. Our method utilizes a custom designed set of features that are based on raw predictions and aggregated raw values and recognizes various types of disorder. The m fdp is compared at the residue level on two datasets against eight recent disorder predictors and top performing methods from the most recent CASP8 experiment. In spite of using training chains with ≤25% similarity to the test sequences, our method consistently and significantly outperforms the other methods based on the MCC index. The m fdp outperforms modern disorder predictors for the binary disorder assignment and provides competitive real valued predictions. The mf dps outputs are also shown to outperform the other methods in the identification of proteins with long disordered regions.

introduction the intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), also referred to as unstructured proteins, lack stable tertiary structure under physiological conditions in vitro. The IDPs play a crucial role in transcriptional regulation, translation and cellular signal transduction (). Their prevalence was also implicated in various human disorders including the neurodegenerative diseases such as Huntington, Parkinson's and Alzheimer's disease (). However, the functional role of IDPs is not as well understood when compared with the well packed proteins. Importantly, the annotations of the disorder lag behind the rapidly accumulating number of known * To whom correspondence should be addressed. protein chains. To compare, the curated dis prot database () includes little over 500 chains, the PDB database () that allows finding unstructured segments in the solved tertiary structures (which are assumed to be equivalent to disordered segments) includes 58 000 proteins, while the overall number of known protein chains is 9 million. The disorder is frequently observed in regions with low sequence complexity and with low content of hydrophobic amino acids, which would often form a core of a folded globular protein (). These and other sequence characteristics can be used to differentiate between disordered and ordered regions, which in turn implies that disorder is predictable from the sequence. The past decade observed development of a number of computational models for the prediction of the disordered regions. These methods allow for high throughput annotations of protein chains which provide a viable solution to close the annotation gap. These predictors could be categorized into four groups: (i) methods based on relative propensity of amino acids to form disorder ordered regions which include glob plot (), i up red (), fold index () and Ucon (); (ii) methods built utilizing machine learning classifiers, such as dis pro (), dis op red () DISOPRED2 (), pr dos (), POODLES (), poodle l (), poodle w (), Spritz (), d isps smp (), DisPSSMP2 (), i up (), nors net () and on dcr fs (); (iii) methods based on a meta approach which combines predictions from multiple base predictors including recent MD (), met apr dos (), gs meta disorder j buj nicki unpublished data) and MULTICOM (); and (iv) methods based on analysis of predicted 3D structural models, such as di soc lust (). Since 2002, the sequence based disorder predictors are biannually assessed and compared during the critical assessment of structure prediction (CASP) experiments. Although the prediction quality continues to rise, as shown in the most recent CASP8 (), improved prediction methods are still urgently needed (). We propose a novel architecture, named m fdp (Multilayered fusion based Disorder predictor), that aims to improve the overall quality of the prediction when compared with modern methods. We analyze and quantify improvements provided by m fdp for a generic prediction of all disordered segments and also for the prediction of long disordered segments. The latter is motivated by recent results that show that long disordered regions are useful for target selection for structure determination of integral membrane protein (Punta), they are implicated in protein protein recognition () and were found helpful in prediction of protein crystallization propensity (). The m fdp is based on four novel ideas. First, motivated by the observation that combining orthogonal predictors is helpful (), we fuse four complementary disorder predictors. This is in contrast to earlier ensemble based solutions that combined predictors selected in an ad hoc manner. When compared to the recently proposed orthogonal ensemble based MD predictor (), we consider different aspects to judge dissimilarity. MD combines four predictors that tackle different 'types' of disorder, while we combine three methods that differ in their approach to perform predictions. We use a machine learning based predictor DISOPRED2, residue propensity based i up red and a recent di soc lust that is based on tertiary structure predictions (i.e. prediction based on the sequence derived tertiary structure). The usage of the 3d based predictor is the novel aspect of our ensemble. We select DISOPRED2 since it was demonstrated to provide high quality predictions and to be orthogonal to other machine learning based methods (). The i up red provides two models that specialize in prediction of long and short disordered regions, respectively. The di soc lust utilizes a premise that ordered residues should be conserved in 3D space in multiple models, whereas residues that vary or are consistently missing are correlated with the disorder. It predicts per residue error in multiple fold recognition models which is followed by an analysis of the conservation of the per residue errors across all models (). Second, we use the most comprehensive selection of the input information sources when compared with the recent methods (). Similar to MD, dis pro and MULTICOM, we use the sequence profiles (the most widely used inputs;), predicted secondary structure (SS) [disordered regions are characterized by lack of SS (and solvent accessibility [unstructured regions have a large solvent accessible area (. We also utilize sequence based predictions of backbone dihedral torsion angles, b factor [which are associated with disordered regions (and the sequence terminus indicator [similarly to pr dos (. The usage of the backbone angles is motivated by their usefulness in building scoring function for fold recognition and 3D structure prediction (), and by the success of the 3d based di soc lust that ranked fourth in CASP8 (). We tried predictions of signal peptides, but we did not find them useful. Third, we aggregate the predictions, before feeding them into a classifier, using a sliding window to facilitate predictions of long disordered regions. The aggregation utilizes neighboring predictions to perform averaging, to find maximal and minimal prediction value probability and to analyze local SS conformations, which helps the classifier to find longer stretches of disordered residues. Fourth, we use two layered architecture where the first layer includes three predictors, one designed for all disordered residues, one for short (30 residues), and one for long segments. These predictors use different inputs encoded using numerical descriptors derived from the above mentioned sources. The second layer combines their outputs to generate our disorder predictions. m fdp is capable of recognizing various types of disorder, since it is trained using a dataset that includes residues from disordered regions of all sizes and that combines proteins from the dis prot database and X-ray structures from the PDB.
