Motivation: The recognition of translation initiation sites and stop codons is a fundamental part of any gene recognition program. Currently, the most successful methods use powerful classifiers, such as support vector machines with various string kernels. These methods all use two classes, one of positive instances and another one of negative instances that are constructed using sequences from the whole genome. However, the features of the negative sequences differ depending on the position of the negative samples in the gene. There are differences depending on whether they are from exons, introns, intergenic regions or any other functional part of the genome. Thus, the positive class is fairly homogeneous, as all its sequences come from the same part of the gene, but the negative class is composed of different instances. The classifier suffers from this problem. In this article, we propose the training of different classifiers with different negative, more homogeneous, classes and the combination of these classifiers for improved accuracy. Results: The proposed method achieves better accuracy than the best state of the art method, both in terms of the geometric mean of the specificity and sensitivity and the area under the receiver operating characteristic and precision recall curves. The method is tested on the whole human genome. The results for recognizing both translation initiation sites and stop codons indicated improvements in the rates of both false negative results (FN) and false positive results (FP). On an average, for translation initiation site recognition, the false negative ratio was reduced by 30.2% and the FP ratio decreased by 10.9%. For stop codon prediction, FP were reduced by 41.4% and FN by 31.7%. Availability and implementation: The source code is licensed under the General Public License and is thus freely available. The datasets and source code can be obtained from http://cib.uco.es/ site recognition
introduction the recognition of translation initiation sites (TISs) and stop codons () is one of the most critical tasks for gene structure prediction. Most successful current gene recognizers first implement a step of site recognition (), which is followed by a process of combining the sites into meaningful gene structures. This first step is of the utmost importance because the program can not find genes whose functional sites are not identified. Furthermore, a large number of fp results might inundate the second step of the programs, making it difficult to predict accurate gene structures. The best current approaches use powerful classifiers, namely support vector machines (SVMs), and moderately large sequences around the functional site (). In accordance with common practices in machine learning, these methods construct a positive instance set using sequences that contain true TISs or stop codons and a negative instance set; in the negative instance set, the sequences centered around an ATG triplet are not TISs, and the sequences centered around TAG, TAA or TGA triplets are not stop codons. The negative sequences are obtained from all the available information or are randomly selected when sampling is used (). Thus, negative sequences can be part of intergenic regions, introns, exons, UTRs, etc. However, the negative sequences from these different regions have different features. Therefore, the negative class, which the classifier must learn, is highly non-homogeneous. This inhomogeneity is an unnecessary difficulty that the learning algorithm must face and that might damage its performance. In this article, we show how the performance of the classifier can be actually improved if the negative instances are divided into different classes based on their position in the gene; subsequently, different classifiers are learned for each pair of positive and negative instance sets. Some previous works have also considered the idea of differentiating between functional sites before proceeding to their recognition. tr it is a () is a method for detecting TISs in microbial genomes that classifies all candidate TISs into three categories based on evolutionary properties, and characterizes them in terms of Markov models. Also, other methods () have developed different models depending on the structure and composition of the sequences to recognize. However, these approaches are different from ours, as these models are trained and used separately instead of combined as in our proposal.

conclusion in this article, we presented a new approach for TIS and stop codon recognition. This approach uses more than one classifier, divides the negative class into four different groups and trains one classifier for each type of negative class. This approach was applied to the recognition of TIS and stop codons in five human chromosomes. The approach was compared with the best current method for TIS and stop codon prediction. The proposed approach also has the advantage of its simplicity, which makes it easily applicable to any program for TIS or stop codon recognition. The reported results show that the proposed method shows improved sensitivity, specificity, a uroc and a up rc compared with svm wd. The results show a remarkable improvement in the ratio of FN and FP achieved over those of svm wd. Because state of the art annotation systems rely heavily on the accurate prediction of the functional sites of the gene, the proposed method is an effective way of improving current gene recognizers the table shows the values of the specificity (Sp), sensitivity (Sn), geometric mean of the specificity and sensitivity and the area under the roc prc curves a uroc a up rc
