There is a strong and growing need in the biology research community for accurate, automated image analysis. Here, we describe cell profiler 2.0, which has been engineered to meet the needs of its growing user base. It is more robust and user friendly, with new algorithms and features to facilitate high throughput work. image j plugins can now be run within a cell profiler pipeline.

introduction cell profiler is freely available, open source software that enables researchers without training in computer programming to measure biological phenotypes quantitatively and automatically from thousands of images. With an interface designed by biologists and underlying algorithms developed by computer scientists, cell profiler bridges the gap between advanced image analysis algorithms and scientists who lack computational expertise. In the 4 years since its publication (), it has been rapidly adopted by the worldwide biological community and cited in more than 250 articles. Roughly half of its users are outside the USA. cell profiler was initially designed for high throughput image analysis but is often used for small scale projects. This highlights the trend toward quantifying information in images regardless of experiment size. cell profilers interface lets researchers build customized chains of interoperable image analysis modules to identify and measure biological objects and features in images. These modular pipelines can be saved and shared with colleagues. cell profiler has been used to measure individual cells, colonies of cells and whole organisms in a wide range of assays (e.g. counting cells, measuring staining intensities and scoring complex phenotypes with machine * To whom correspondence should be addressed. learning) and at many experimental scales (from a few to hundreds of thousands of images). A variety of cell types have been analyzed, including budding yeast, Drosophila, mouse, rat and dozens of human cell types. The diverse measurements generated by cell profiler provide raw material for machine learning algorithms that can identify challenging phenotypes (). cell profiler fills a unique role in the software landscape. It is a modular, high throughput open source biological image analysis package, and it won the 2009 bio it World Best Practices Award in IT  Informatics. cell profiler 2.0 improves upon the design of the original version, resulting in professionally engineered software with improved usability and functionality, as well as integration with other open source image related software.
