Motivation: Some first order methods for protein sequence analysis inherently treat each position as independent. We develop a general framework for introducing longer range interactions. We then demonstrate the power of our approach by applying it to secondary structure prediction; under the independence assumption, sequences produced by existing methods can produce features that are not protein like, an extreme example being a helix of length 1. Our goal was to make the predictions from state of the art methods more realistic, without loss of performance by other measures. Results: Our framework for longer range interactions is described as a km er order model. We succeeded in applying our model to the specific problem of secondary structure prediction, to be used as an additional layer on top of existing methods. We achieved our goal of making the predictions more realistic and protein like, and remarkably this also improved the overall performance. We improve the Segment OVerlap (SOV) score by 1.8%, but more importantly we radically improve the probability of the real sequence given a prediction from an average of 0.271 per residue to 0.385. Crucially, this improvement is obtained using no additional information.

introduction the prediction of secondary structure remains very important in the field of protein biology, even if the methods have matured and development of the algorithms is a far less active area than a decade ago. One of the reasons for this decline in activity is that most of the competing methods have converged on a similar level of performance beyond which they have been unable to improve, and possibly because the level of performance that they achieve is, by bioinformatics standards, exceptionally good. This is reflected in the fact that the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP;) competition for protein structure prediction ceased to assess this as an official category some years ago, as has the EVA () continuous benchmarking project. Accurate prediction of secondary structure elements from an amino acid sequence remains very useful to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. biologists in its own right, but it is worth pointing out that it is also an essential component of tertiary structure prediction, which, in contrast, is far from solved and continues to be a highly active area of research. In addition, sequence comparison methods have more recently incorporated local structure tracks (such as secondary structure or burial). The extra information utilized by the new methods has led to considerable improvements in fold recognition and alignment accuracy. There are many different methods for secondary structure prediction (e.g.), all using neural networks. Analysis of the results of the last CASP competition to include secondary structure () gives a good indication of the state of the art, and the range of methods available; for this work we chose to use predict 2nd (), which is named as one of the three leading original methods. Despite secondary structure prediction methods being able to correctly assign either helix, strand or loop to roughly 80% of the individual positions in a protein sequence, the overall prediction is not protein like. For example these methods are capable of predicting a helix of a single amino acid in length (although consequently most have implemented an ad hoc filter to remove them). What we aim to achieve in this article is to create a model which makes the overall predictions of existing methods more realistic and protein like without loss of performance as measured on a per residue basis. It is possible that in doing this we may improve prediction accuracy, even if it is not our original goal. The idea of implicitly using more than one amino acid has been around for some time (), but many protein sequence comparison methods, when making a prediction, implicitly treat positions in a protein sequence with some level of independence. Even in cases where a sliding window is used, predictions are dependent on the neighbouring amino acids, but not usually directly on neighbouring predictions. While an independence assumption is an acceptable approximation when comparing individual amino acid sequences, it fails dramatically for many local structure alphabets. To give a specific example, when a position in a sequence is an -helix, the adjacent positions are highly likely (90% chance) to also be -helical. In fact, we have observed three broad types of correlations that violate the independence assumption 1 Short range: if H stands for a helix and A for an anti-parallel strand, there are three times more occurrences of HH, 14 times more occurrences of AA, but at least 10 000 times fewer page 597 596602
