I propose a new application of profile Hidden Markov Models in the area of SNP discovery from resequencing data, to greatly reduce false SNP calls caused by misalignments around insertions and deletions (indels). The central concept is per base Alignment Quality, which accurately measures the probability of a read base being wrongly aligned. The effectiveness of BAQ has been positively confirmed on large datasets by the 1000 Genomes Project analysis subgroup. Availability:

introduction one of the leading sources of errors in SNP discovery is errors caused by indels (). Current solutions include realignment and filtering SNPs around predicted indels. However, realignment is computationally intensive; filtering SNPs around predicted indels is hampered by in del discovery which itself is a harder problem. This article aims to provide an effective and efficient solution to sorting out SNPs caused by misalignments. To begin with, we need to make a distinction between read mapping and read alignment, which are often taken as synonymous. I define the alignment of a read as the set of coordinate pairs of read and reference bases that are placed together, while define the mapping of a read as the coordinate interval between the first and the last reference bases inclusive in the alignment. We say an alignment is correct if all bases are aligned correctly and say a mapping is correct if it overlaps the true mapping. Therefore, an alignment can be wrong even if the underlying mapping is correct. Wrong alignments are mostly caused by the ambiguity in the presence of indels when we are unsure whether differences should be explained by mismatches or by indels. They tend to reoccur in the same context and deceive SNP callers into calling false SNPs. To account for the intrinsic alignment ambiguity, I model the read alignment with a profile HMM and compute a per base Alignment Quality (BAQ) to directly evaluate the probability of misalignment of each base. I will show that by replacing the original base quality with the minimum between the base quality and BAQ we can dramatically improve the SNP accuracy.
