Although the 1000 Genomes haplotypes are the most commonly used reference panel for imputation, medical sequencing projects are generating large alternate sets of sequenced samples. Imputation in African Americans using 3384 haplotypes from the exo me Sequencing Project, compared with 2184 haplotypes from 1000 Genomes Project, increased effective sample size by 8.3–11.4% for coding variants with minor allele frequency 51%. No loss of imputation quality was observed using a panel built from phenotypic extremes. We recommend using haplotypes from exo me Sequencing Project alone or concatenation of the two panels over quality score based post imputation selection or IMPUTE2s two panel combination.

introduction genotype imputation is a common practice for both genotyping () and sequencing studies (). Increasingly large reference panels available in the public domain [e.g. those from the 1000 Genomes Project () and UK10K project ()] together with improved statistical methods (Howie *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first four and the last two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. z On behalf of the National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute GO exo me Sequencing) have enhanced imputation quality, especially for rare variants with minor allele frequency (MAF) 55%. These improvements have resulted in both discovery and refined mapping of association with complex traits (). However, few studies have examined the use of large study specific reference panels, particularly the use of exo me sequencing derived panels in admixed populations. Here, we present a new resource for imputation in African Americans, built from 1692 African Americans sequenced by the exo me Sequencing Project (ESP) (). We assessed the use of the ESP data as an imputation reference panel and compared the results with those obtained using the 1000 Genomes Project phase 1 (1000G; version 3, March 2012 release) () data. Additionally, we evaluated the potential consequences of using a reference panel built from samples selected on the basis of phenotypic extremes or disease status instead of a population based random sample. Lastly, we compared multiple approaches to combine the ESP and 1000G panels for the imputation of rare coding variants.

discussion we note that ESP is heavily enriched for extremes from several phenotypes rather than a single phenotype. Thus, it is unclear whether these results generalize to a design where sequenced subjects are selected based on extremes for a single phenotype. We did not attempt to select one phenotype for evaluation, as doing so would reduce our reference size to below 300, which we view as of little value for the imputation of rare variants. We expect such 'Extreme' panels to make little difference for imputation overall and may affect imputation in the specific trait associated regions when the causal variant(s) exert large effect(s). Although we recommend the concatenation of ESP and 1000G, we observed only modest gains in imputation quality by combining the two. Previous studies suggest that these gains may depend in part on the ethnic make up of the study subjects () and whether 1000G data add substantial haplotype diversity. These gains should be weighed against the logistical challenges of combining data from multiple sources to avoid batch effects (e.g. mismatched strands, inconsistent marker naming schemes or systematic differences in genotype calling, QC or phasing). In summary, we found that the ESP African American reference panel outperformed the 1000G reference panel for the imputation of rare coding variants in African Americans, both in terms of imputation quality, the number of imputable markers and consequently power for trait association testing. The finding was robust to adjustment of reference size and matching on ethnicity. We did not observe loss of imputation quality because of the ESP design for enriched sequencing of subjects selected for phenotypic extremes. Regarding the optimal way to combine the two panels, our evaluations suggested that ESP alone or concatenation of the ESP and 1000G reference panels was superior to either post imputation selection based on Rsq or IMPUTE2's implementation of two separate reference panels. We focused here on imputation of coding variants from ESP. However, we believe that the conclusions drawn here apply to rare variants across the genome as recently reported by several whole genome sequencing based studies () in individuals of European ancestry. These studies and our present work strongly suggest that population matched samples, even in diverse populations such as African Americans, can clearly outperform 1000G imputation performance. Therefore, we recommend investigators routinely consider sequencing for the design () and analysis of the study samples.
