Motivation: Previous researches showed that phytoene synthase (Psy) from Dunaliella barda wil is the first regulatory point in car ote no genesis. We hypothesize certain interactions between the environmental stress factors and the regulatory sequences of Psy in d barda wil db psy. Consequently, LA pcr based genomic walking approach was performed for isolation of psy promoter and terminator, respectively. The obtained nucleic acid sequences and the corresponding protein structure of db psy were analyzed and predicted using various bioinformatics tools. Finally, we presented some hints for the regulation mechanisms of db psy at the molecular level according to the computed results. Results: LA pcr based genomic walking results showed that the isolated sequences are the promoter and terminator of psy, correspondingly. Computational analysis demonstrated several candidate motifs of the promoter exhibiting hypothe tic UV-B-, nor glu rz on and salt induced characteristics, as well as some typical domains universally discovered in promoter sequences, such as tata box ccaat box and gata box etc. Furthermore, the structure of Psy was also predicted and aligned along with many counterparts at the protein level. Low homology of n terminus was found in d barda wil while a relatively conserved c terminus was predicted to be involved in the catalytic activity and substrate recogniz at ion binding. phylo genic analysis classified the db psy into a cluster with other algae. These results implied that Psy may share similar regulation mechanisms among algae with respect to their c termini while the diversity in n terminus among p sys along with the predicted inducible motifs in psy promoter from d barda wil may confer the fine tuning differences between d barda wil and other algae. Conclusion: By means of computer techniques, we found in dba raw ali that two interesting conserved motifs of psy promoter may involve in UV-B, nor glu rz on and salt regulation correspondingly; and that the diversity of Psy protein mainly lies in the n termini among algae. These results indicate some hints for regulation mechanisms of car ote no genesis in d brad a wil
introduction carotenoids are a wide family of polyene pigments synthesized by all plants, various algae and certain species of bacteria, fungi and archaea (). In photosynthetic organisms, carotenoids carry out several essential functions, i.e. participating in photosynthesis to protect the photosynthetic apparatus from potential oxidative damage besides light harvesting dem mig. Animals can not synthesize carotenoids but may obtain them through derivative pigmentation from diet (). Some carotenoids have vitamin A activity in humans; therefore, they are classified as essential nutrients (). Many researches show the prevention and treatment properties of carotenoids against several kinds of diseases, such as certain chronic disease (), cardiovascular disease () as well as certain cancers (). These promoting properties of carotenoid have attracted intensive interesting in carotenoid biosynthesis and its commercial exploitation. So far, at least 700 carotenoids have been characterized from nature carotenoid biosynthetic pathways involving in C30 and C40 isoprenoid s (). In recent years, Dunaliella barda wil has received intensive attention as a natural rich source of -carotene, owing to its capability to accumulate massive amount of -carotene under stress conditions such as high light density, high salt concentration and nutrient starvation (). Many studies on accumulation of -carotene and phytoene have been conducted to date (). For large production of -carotene, the optimal conditions should be high UV-A intensity, slightly alkaline pH, low NaCl concentration and moderate NaNO 3 concentration (); while UV-B and other photobleaching compounds could elevate phytoene production, instead of -carotene (). Nevertheless, these investigations were primarily focused on culture condition optimization at physiologic and biochemical level, none of them probed into the molecular mechanisms for car ote no genic regulation in d barda wil. The hypothe tic biosynthetic pathway of carotenoid in Dunaliella is disproportional to synthesize various carotenoids such as -carotene, neo xanth in lutein and so on (). The most universal carotenoid biosynthetic pathway is the successional

DISCUSSION
