Motivation: Accurately predicting protein side chain conformations is an important subproblem of the broader protein structure prediction problem. Several methods exist for generating fairly accurate models for moderate size proteins in seconds or less. However, a major limitation of these methods is their inability to model post-translational modifications (PTMs) and unnatural amino acids. In natural living systems, the chemical groups added following translation are often critical for the function of the protein. In engineered systems, unnatural amino acids are incorporated into proteins to explore structure– function relationships and create novel proteins. Results: We present a new version of side pro to predict the side chains of proteins containing non-standard amino acids, including 15 of the most frequently observed PTMs in the Protein Data Bank and all types of phosphorylation. side pro uses energy functions that are parameterized by neural networks trained from available data. For PTMs, the 1 and 1þ2 accuracies are comparable with those obtained for the precursor amino acid, and so are the RMSD values for the atoms shared with the precursor amino acid. In addition, side pro can accommodate any PTM or unnatural amino acid, thus providing a flexible prediction system for high throughput modeling of proteins beyond the standard amino acids. Availability and implementation: side pro programs and Web server, rotamer libraries and data are available through the SCRATCH suite of protein structure predictors at

introduction posttranslational modifications (PTMs) are critical to the function of many proteins in living systems, and understanding their effects at the molecular level is important for both basic and applied research in biology and medicine. To further this understanding, open databases of curated PTM information have been published. For instance, phospho elm () is a publicly available database dedicated to phosphorylation. The database provides the exact positions of experimentally determined phosphorylation sites as well as information on the specific kinases that produce the modifications. Other databases such as phospho site plus HPRD and phos ida () include information on additional types of PTMs (e.g. ubiquitination, acetylation, methylation) but are still dominated by phosphorylation data. An automated curator of information on PTMs () found in Swiss-Prot () provides the following summary statistics: there are a total of 82 505 PTMs determined by experimental methods, with the following types having a frequency 41%: phosphorylation, 70.9%; acetylation, 8.2%; n linked glycosylation, 6.8%; amid ation 3.5%; hydroxylation, 2.0%; methylation, 1.9%; o linked glycosylation, 1.4%; ubiquitylation, 1.1% and pyrrolidone carboxylic acid, 1.0%. In addition to methods for curating and organizing existing PTM data, there are also methods for predicting which sites are modified in sequences with unknown PTM status. These methods typically use supervised machine learning, statistical and motif based approaches to predict sites of phosphorylation (), acetylation (), glycosylation (), sumo y lation () and less common types of PTMs as well (). Some of these methods predict both the specific phosphorylated sites and the specific kinases responsible for the phosphorylation (). In contrast with these approaches, the fundamental problem of predicting accurate three dimensional (3D) models of PTMs in proteins has been largely ignored. None of the widely used or recently published side chain prediction methods that are free for academic research () are capable of incorporating PTMs or unnatural amino acids into their predictions. The widely used template based modeling software Modeller () allows for manual creation of custom residues; however, the process for doing so is somewhat cumbersome and not realistic for most Modeller users. One notable exception is the incorporation of non-canonical amino acids into Rosetta () for computational protein peptide interface design (). The developers of side chain prediction methods recognize the need for generating accurate models that incorporate PTMs; however, there are a number of practical challenges that have stymied progress in this area: (i) there are far less data in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () for PTM *To whom correspondence should be addressed. residues than native residues for building rotamer libraries or developing statistical potentials; (ii) although one character codes (e.g. A for alanine) work well for efficiently defining protein sequences, it is unfeasible to use one character codes for all possible PTMs (there are 4100 PTMs documented in the literature); (iii) some important modifications (e.g. o linked glycosylation) correspond to broad classes of chemical structures rather than a unique chemical structure, and each of the possible molecules would need to be uniquely identified; and (iv) modified residues are generally larger and contain more rotatable bonds than their natural counterparts. Beyond the 20 standard amino acids and their PTMs, there are also other natural or synthetic amino acids that can be incorporated into proteins. Two additional natural amino acids, selenocysteine (Sec,U) and pyr ro lysine py lo are coded in some species by codons that are usually interpreted as stop codons. pyr ro lysine for instance, is used by some methanogenic archaea in enzymes used to produce methane. In addition, 440 unnatural amino acids have been incorporated into proteins through synthetic biology projects, often by creating a unique codon (recoding) and a corresponding transfer RNA, to explore protein structure and function and create novel proteins (). A tool for modeling the side chains of these rare natural or unnatural amino acids would also be desirable. Thus, despite the challenges described above, we have taken on the problem of rapidly generating reasonably accurate 3D side chain models of proteins that incorporate amino acids beyond the standard 20 amino acids. In the remainder of this article, the term 'non-standard amino acid' (NSA) is used to refer to any amino acid other than the 20 standard amino acids. This includes PTMs, rare natural amino acids and unnatural amino acids.

conclusion the strength of side pro is that it uses the wealth of data in the PDB to learn energy functions, parameterized by neural networks, to model and predict protein side chain conformations. In this study, we have extended the capabilities of side pro to PTMs and ns as. For natural amino acids and fpt ms when sufficient training examples are available, side pro uses amino acid specific energy functions. For all other PTMs and ns as side pro uses a generic energy function. To flexibly accommodate for any nsa side pro allow users to provide 3D structures of ns as to be incorporated into side pro models. Alternatively, the COSMOS () program is used to predict these structures, and any other similar program [e.g. OpenBabel o can be used for the same purposes. The generic neural networks, trained on all possible pairs of atom types agnostic of residue type, are used to score the atom atom interactions for these ns as. Naturally, as more data on ns as become available in the PDB, it will be possible to further expand the set of specific energy functions, thereby increasing the accuracy of the program over time. As demonstrated here for some of the ns as accuracy can also be improved by increasing the number of 3D samples produced by COSMOS, at the expense of time. Finally, side pro is to be used in protein structure prediction and engineering projects for the rapid prediction of side chains conformations in high throughput mode, or to provide good starting points for molecular or quantum mechanics simulations of side chain atoms, for both standard and non-standard amino acids.
