Microarrays are commonly used to detect changes in gene expression between different biological samples. For this purpose, many analysis tools have been developed that offer visualization, statistical analysis and more sophisticated analysis methods. Most of these tools are designed specifically for messenger RNA microarrays. However, today, more and more different microarray platforms are available. Changes in DNA methylation, microRNA expression or even protein phosphorylation states can be detected with specialized arrays. For these microarray technologies, the number of available tools is small compared with mRNA analysis tools. Especially, a joint analysis of different microarray platforms that have been used on the same set of biological samples is hardly supported by most microarray analysis tools. Here, we present in cro map a tool for the analysis and visualization of high level microarray data from individual or multiple different platforms. Currently, in cro map supports mRNA, microRNA, DNA methylation and protein modification datasets. Several methods are offered that allow for an integrated analysis of data from those platforms. The available features of in cro map range from visualization of DNA methylation data over annotation of microRNA targets and integrated gene set enrichment analysis to a joint visualization of data from all platforms in the context of metabolic or signalling pathways.

introduction typical workflows for the analysis of microarray data involve several steps, namely, the preparation of samples and arrays, their hybridization to arrays, scanning the array and processing the image to read out the raw probe intensities. Depending on the array type, several quality control and low level data analysis steps are then performed in silico. These steps mostly include normalization, annotation of gene identifiers and the calculation of diverse measures of differential probe level intensities (such as p values fold changes or log ratios). Mostly, these tasks are performed in R, a statistical programming language (www r project org or by using derived applications with a graphical
