Motivation: Although results from phase III clinical trials substantially support the use of prophylactic and therapeutic vaccines against cancer, what has yet to be defined is how many and how frequent boosts are needed to sustain a long lasting and protecting memory t cell response against tumor antigens. Common experience is that such preclinical tests require the sacrifice of a relatively large number of animals, and are particularly time and money consuming. Results: As a first step to overcome these hurdles, we have developed an ordinary differential equation model that includes all relevant entities (such as activated cytotoxic T lymphocytes and memory T cells), and investigated the induction of immunological memory in the context of wild type mice injected with a dendritic cell based vaccine. We have simulated the biological behavior both in the presence and in the absence of memory T cells. Comparing results of ex vivo and in silico experiments, we show that the model is able to envisage the expansion and persistence of antigen specific memory T cells. The model might be applicable to more complex vaccination schedules and substantially in any biological condition of prime boosting
introduction in the past years both therapeutic and preventive vaccines have been developed with the aim to fight and prevent different types of cancers (). The power of vaccines relies on their ability to stimulate a strong and long lasting antigen specific immune response, mediated both by B and T lymphocytes. Although induction of a protective titer of neutralizing antibodies is the main objective of most of the vaccines against infectious agents, including vaccines to carcinogenic human papillomavirus and hepatitis B virus, which also protect from cervical and liver cancer, respectively (), evidence in humans that antibodies induced by a vaccine can contribute to antitumor immunity is scanty (). Conversely, the major goal of both prophylactic and therapeutic vaccines against non-infectious tumors, which account for $80% of all tumors (), is to induce a long lasting antigen specific CD8 t cell immunity. In support of this concept, high densities of effector memory CD8  cytotoxic T cells are associated with a longer overall survival in several human cancers (). Usually, an effective vaccine requires multiple immunizations in the form of prime boost. Several studies have shown that boosting with a different vector carrying the same antigen is better at enhancing immune responses than boosting with the homologous vector. The mechanism underlying this phenomenon is still obscure. Heterologous prime boost approaches are now widely used in efforts to develop vaccines (). It is also generally accepted that a strong primary immune response is required to give rise to a large pool of memory cells (). However, what affects the longevity of memory T cells is not fully understood, and much controversy exists regarding the role of antigens in this process (). Sustained high amounts of soluble antigens often lead to tolerance or exhaustion both in T and B cells. As a result of exhaustion, antigen specific T and B cells express a variety of inhibitory receptors such as PD-1, LAG-3, CD244, CD160, TIM-3 and CTLA-4 (). Dendritic cell dc based vaccines have been extensively investigated as potential cancer therapeutic vaccines because of the primary role of DCs as antigen presenting cells a pcs and their unique ability in t cell priming (). DCs pulsed with the antigen of choice induce a potent antigen specific immune response and favor the generation of the memory pool. This stems from the asymmetric division of engaged naive T cells into effector and memory cells (). Several phase II clinical trials based on the use of DCs pulsed with tumor associated antigens are ongoing (). Moreover, sip u leu celt (), an autologous apc based vaccine has been the first vaccine approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of cancer patients. In a phase III trial in patients affected by castration resistant prostate cancer, sip u leu celt gave a 4.1 month benefit in overall survival relative to a control arm that *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. received un pulsed a pcs. However, no significant effects on the time to objective disease progression were observed (). These promising results also suggest that some fundamental biological questions remain unanswered. For dc based vaccines, it is not yet known whether booster immunizations should consist of DCs or other means. It has been reported that antigen bearing DCs are rapidly eliminated by antigen specific cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTLs) when injected in previously vaccinated mice (), therefore, arguing for a reduced effectiveness of dc based boosts observed in the GL26 model that DCs are essential for the priming, but they are less effective than tumor cell lysate alone in boosting the antitumor immune response and for the induction of long term immune memory. Another unsolved issue is the frequency of boosting. It has been reported that repeated immunizations result in increased frequencies of memory T cells (). However, overstimulation can drive memory T cells toward terminal differentiation such as activation induced cell death, fratricide or exhaustion (). To address these biological issues, we started analyzing the ability of dc based vaccines to induce a long lasting antigen specific immune response in mice. As immunological readout of antigen primed and functional T cells, we measured the interferon gamma (IFN-) contained in sera of vaccinated mice, and the frequency of CD8  CD44  T cells able to release ifn upon ex vivo specific antigen challenge (). Preliminary experiments suggested that to optimize the best boosting strategy, we would have had to set many experiments each lasting several months. To investigate these biological problems, as a first step, we began by setting up an in silico model capable to describe the biological phenomena observed in the animal model. The aim of the model is to verify the memory t cell induction hypothesis by a dc based vaccine observed in vivo and to give new suggestions on the designing of boosting strategies. During the past decades, several approaches have been devoted to model the immune system or parts of it, with mathematical equation based models representing the largest slice among these approaches. Differential equation based models usually reproduce the dynamics of the average concentrations of the immune system involved entities over time, to obtain the main aspects of the immune response. Simple models based on systems of ordinary or partial differential equations can be easily analyzed to obtain, for example, asymptotic behaviors. On the other hand, for more complex scenarios, it is usually difficult to build complex ordinary differential equations ode based models, as well as incorporate new aspects. The trade-off between an accurate biological representation and the mathematical feasibility may lead to biologically useless models or to mathematically intractable models. Cellular automata (CA) or agent based models represent a large class of discrete modeling techniques where each entity is followed individually, and global behaviors are obtained from local behaviors of all involved entities. In this way, it is possible to model the immune system in much more detail, allowing it to determine behavior distribution (and not just the average). Moreover, it is easy to add and remove new entities and nonlinear interactions, to expand or update the model to the last biological insights, leaving the problem computationally tractable. Cellular automata and agent based models can be successfully used to simulate without any problems the receptor diversity of the immune repertoire, opening the door to natural scale simulations. An example of approaches in this direction is discussed in (). However, even such approaches have their own flaws. Because of the lack of a solid mathematical theory, they miss tools allowing any asymptotic analysis, and require considerable computational power to simulate individual agents, in particular for large scale simulations. Some good review articles that can introduce the reader to the modeling techniques of the immune system are presented in, and Perelson and weis buch (1997). The problem we are dealing with requires the ability to uniquely represent the immune response of CTLs specific for the immunodominant tag iv antigen from the on co virus SV40 [, and also in vivo measurements refer to this]. This is a valid argument for supporting the assumption that a monoclonal model based on ODE described in this article can be considered adequate. The ODE model includes all the relevant entities (such as activated CTLs and memory T cells) needed to confirm the presence of immunological memory. We simulated the biological behavior in the presence and in the absence of memory T cells.

conclusion our in silico model showed the ability to predict the dimension of the immune response induced in mice by DC vaccination, and allowed us to define the relative contribution of several parameters (i.e. memory cell differentiation and death rates and naive cell recovery rate) to the success of the prime boost strategy. It also predicted the role of the second injection (Boost) over the pool of memory T cells. Nevertheless, it allowed the identification of a time window in which boosts may be detrimental (Supplementary Data S1). These findings appear to be consistent with data reported by us () and (). We have demonstrated that boosting healthy mice every 2 weeks instead of every month hindered persistence of ifn competent memory CD8  T cells (). In addition, when vaccinated mice were challenged with melanoma cells, 80% of the mice that had received a monthly boosting rejected the tumor. Conversely, mice treated with tighter vaccination schedules survived similarly to non boosted mice and remarkably less than mice boosted every month (). One of the advantages of the system is that several entities and variables can be added each time. As an example, it might be interesting to investigate the role of endogenous DCs and the antigen formulation (e.g. synthetic peptide, protein or cell fragment) in t cell priming induced by the vaccine. It has been reported that the requirement of antigen transfer to endogenous a pcs for in vivo CTL priming by dc based vaccines may depend on the antigen formulation (). Furthermore, by adding the characteristic of the patient (e.g. age, sex, weight, general health status, stage of cancer, comorbidities and medications) a personalized vaccination schedule might be generated. One limitation of the reported data is that they were obtained modeling a healthy subject, and therefore, they are applicable only for the design of preventive vaccines. The system needs to be challenged against more stringent biological contexts, such as in the presence of minimal residual disease or bulky tumors. Our recent findings suggest that tumor antigens released from the tumor as a consequence of either the tumor cell turnover or the immune attack already boost memory T cells induced by vaccine priming, and vaccine boosts may be detrimental. On the other hand, the model does not take into account the regulation of t cell longevity and the peculiarities of the antigens. These issues appear important and future version of the model could incorporate them, as wet experiments reveal their roles. An additional limit of the study is that it is entirely based on mouse data. There are no published clinical trials in which different vaccination schedules have been compared with induction of long lasting antitumor immunity. Most of the vaccination protocols tested so far in cancer patients stemmed from the experience with prophylactic vaccines against infectious diseases, which are dissimilar to non-infectious tumors. Thus, reliable preclinical models are needed to investigate the therapeutic efficacy of cancer vaccines. Mice are the experimental tool of choice for the majority of tumor immunologists because of the remarkable similarities between mouse and human immune system. Nevertheless, significant differences exist between mice and humans in immune system development, cell subpopulations of both the innate and adaptive arms and perception of endogenous and exogenous activation signals (). This should sound a word of caution to avoid over interpreting results obtained in mouse models. Due to the fact that information is also available for humans on the six different populations we used to develop the related ODEs, our model might be easily tested in the human context and provide useful information for dc based cancer vaccines.. Importance of the second injection over the pool of memory CTLs predicted by the mathematical model (in silico) and confirmed by the in vivo experiment (animal model). eight week old C57BL/6 mice were primed by i.d. injection of dc tag and either killed 1 week later (week 9, n  5) or boosted (Boost, n  13) or not (No Boost, n  13) 4 weeks later, and sacrificed 10 weeks after priming (week 18). For the in silico experiment the number of specific memory CTLs (Tm  Ta) at week 9, and at week 18 both in presence and absence of the boosting were taken into account. For the in vivo experiments, the effector function of tag specific CD8  T cells was assessed ex vivo by flow cytometry analysis of intracellular ifn production in the presence of tag iv. Percentage of ifn producing cells are depicted after electronic gating on CD8  CD44  viable cells. (Data are representative of at least three independent experiments. Statistical analyses were done using the Student's t test. **: 0.001 5P50.01
