Motivation: The discovery of therapeutic targets is important for cancer treatment. Although dozens of targets have been used in cancer therapies, cancer remains a serious disease with a high mortality rate. Owing to the expansion of cancer related data, we now have the opportunity to infer therapeutic targets using computational biology methods. Results: Here, we describe a method, termed anticancer activity enrichment analysis, used to determine genes that could be used as therapeutic targets. The results show that these genes have high likelihoods of being developed into clinical targets (460%). Combined with gene expression data, we predicted 50 candidate targets for lung cancer, of which 19 of the top 20 genes are targeted by approved drugs or drugs used in clinical trials. A hexokinase family member, hexokinase domain containing protein 1 (HKDC1), is the only one of the top 20 genes that has not been targeted by either an approved drug or one being used in clinical trials. Further investigations indicate that HKDC1 is a novel potential therapeutic target for lung cancer. Conclusion: We developed a protocol to identify potential therapeutic targets from heterogeneous data. We suggest that HKDC1 is a novel potential therapeutic target for lung cancer.

introduction in the past decade, targeted cancer therapies have improved cancer treatment (). Dozens of molecular targets have been used in cancer treatment, including EGFR () and VEGFR (). Although multiple drugs that selectively inhibit these targets have been developed and are used in cancer treatment, cancer is still a highly challenging disease (). Therefore, discovering novel therapeutic targets is still an important and challenging task for cancer treatment. Several hallmarks of cancer have been defined and have helped guide cancer therapy (). Of these hallmarks, uncontrolled growth is the most critical for cancer propagation. Therefore, a cancer therapeutic target should have the following two characteristics i the target should be essential for the growth of cancer cells (), and inhibition of the target should directly or indirectly suppress cancer cell growth; and (ii) disturbing the target should have minimal side effects in normal cells. It would be 'perfect' if the target was not expressed in normal cells but highly expressed in cancer cells. In this study, we used a computational biology method to infer potential therapeutic targets from heterogeneous data. We first used our previously published method c drug () to predict anticancer ligands in the ch embl database (). c drug is a web server (or method) used to predict whether a chemical compound has anticancer activity (). ch embl is a manually curated chemical database of bioactive molecules that includes 49000 genes and 41 million compounds (). We then performed a hypergeometric test, termed anticancer activity enrichment analysis ace a to determine genes with significant enrichment of anticancer ligands. Further investigation revealed that these anticancer ligand enriched genes have high potentials to become clinical targets. After overlapping these genes with expression data from lung cancer tissues, we inferred 50 candidate therapeutic targets for lung cancer. We further propose that HKDC1, one of these 50 genes, is a novel potential therapeutic target for lung cancer.

discussion we have developed a computational biology method, ace a to determine potential therapeutic target genes. Further analysis shows that these genes have high likelihoods of being developed into clinical targets. Combined with gene expression data, we predicted 50 candidate targets for the treatment of lung cancer. Further validation investigations suggest that HKDC1 is a novel therapeutic target for lung cancer. HKDC1 encodes the fifth mammalian hexokinase, which phosphorylates hexoses (). Because phosphorylation is the first step in glucose metabolism, hexokinase s may play an important role in regulating energy metabolism and thus regulating cell growth. Hexokinase type II (HK2) is a well studied therapeutic target ().shows that HK2 is overexpressed in lung cancer tissues (fold change 51, P  0.03). However, only HKDC1 showed a dramatic overexpression in cancer tissues when compared with other hexokinase s (fold change 42, P510 10 ) (). This result suggested that HKDC1 might play an important role in cancer growth that is different from other hexokinase s. Further experimental elucidation of the exact role of HKDC1 in cancer growth will be important to its development as a therapeutic target.

conclusion we developed the novel computational biology method ace a to determine which genes are significantly enriched for anticancer ligands. We inferred 50 candidate targets for the treatment of lung cancer, and we suggest that HKDC1 is a novel potential therapeutic target for lung cancer.
