Motivation: To validate the candidate disease genes identified from high throughput genomic studies, a necessary step is to elucidate the associations between the set of candidate genes and disease phenotypes. The conventional gene set enrichment analysis often fails to reveal associations between disease phenotypes and the gene sets with a short list of poorly annotated genes, because the existing annotations of disease causative genes are incomplete. This article introduces a network based computational approach called r cnet to discover the associations between gene sets and disease phenotypes. A learning framework is proposed to maximize the coherence between the predicted phenotype gene set relations and the known disease phenotype gene associations. An efficient algorithm coupling ridge regression with label propagation and two variants are designed to find the optimal solution to the objective functions of the learning framework. Results: We evaluated the r cnet algorithms with leave one out cross validation on Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) data and an independent test set of recently discovered disease gene associations. In the experiments, the r cnet algorithms achieved best overall rankings compared with the baselines. To further validate the reproducibility of the performance, we applied the algorithms to identify the target diseases of novel candidate disease genes obtained from recent studies of genome wide Association Study g was DNA copy number variation analysis and gene expression profiling. The algorithms ranked the target disease of the candidate genes at the top of the rank list in many cases across all the three case studies.

introduction determination of the molecular cause of diseases is a major focus in genomics research since early 1960s (). Recently, powered by the advanced high throughput genomic technologies, numerous large scale genome wide disease studies such as genome wide association studies (), DNA copy * To whom correspondence should be addressed. number detections () and gene expression profiling (van't) were conducted toward this goal. Typically, the objective of a study is to perform a high throughput scanning for a list of genes that are involved with the disease under study, and then a standard follow-up enrichment analysis or its variants and extensions is applied to analyze the gene set, based on the statistical significance of the overlap between the genes and gene functional annotations or associations with disease phenotypes. Examples of the well known tools are DAVID (), g sea (), go toolbox () and many others. However, in many cases, since the existing annotations of disease causative genes is far from complete (), and a gene set might only contain a short list of poorly annotated genes, enrichment based approaches often fail to reveal the associations between gene sets and disease phenotypes. The availability of large phenotypic and molecular networks provides a new opportunity to study the association between diseases and the gene sets identified from the high throughput genomic studies. The human disease phenotype network (van) provides information on phenotype similarities computed by text mining of the full text and clinical synopsis of the disease phenotypes in OMIM (). Large molecular networks such as the human protein protein interaction network () or functional linkage network () provide functional relations among genes or proteins. Based on the observation that genes associated with the same or related diseases tend to interact with each other in the gene network, many network based approaches are proposed to utilize the disease modules and gene modules in the networks to prioritize disease genes, a task of ranking genes for studying genetic diseases (). In this article, we propose a general network based approach to infer associations between disease phenotypes and gene sets, utilizing the disease phenotype network and the gene network. We formulate the problem as a gene set query problem. By querying the networks with a given gene set, a user expects to retrieve a list of disease phenotypes with the highest predicted association with the gene set. The principle is that, if genes are ranked by their relevance to the query gene set, and disease phenotypes are ranked by their relevance to the hidden target disease phenotypes of the query gene set, the known associations between the most relevant genes and phenotypes tend to be over-represented compared with random cases. We formulate a simple learning framework maximizing Rank. Illustration of Rank Coherence in Networks. A query gene set of four genes is given in (A). The four genes are mapped in the gene network and the corresponding nodes are marked with 1 in (B). The graph Laplacian scores are then computed to quantify the relevance between each gene (including the query genes) and the query gene set. In (D), if a disease phenotype is selected as the candidate target phenotype and marked with 1, the graph Laplacian scores can also be derived to quantify the relevance between each disease phenotype and the selected phenotype. We contrast the case with the target phenotype selected (the upper case) to the case with an unrelated phenotype selected (the bottom case) in (D) to demonstrate the difference in the relevance scores. As showed in (C), the known OMIM associations are represented as the dashed edges connecting the associated phenotype and gene. Based on the coherence assumption, similarly ranked genes and phenotypes in the two networks should be highly connected with each other in the upper case, and the connectivity will be close to random in the bottom case. The edges connecting associated genes and phenotypes are labeled by the discrepancy between their ranking scores. Clearly, the phenotype ranking given by the relevance to the target phenotype is more coherent than the ranking given by the relevance to an unrelated phenotype. Coherence in Networks r cnet with respect to the known disease phenotype gene associations in OMIM.
