Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play a key role in regulating tumor progression and metastasis. Identifying key miRNAs, defined by their functional activities, can provide a deeper understanding of biology of miRNAs in cancer. However, miRNA expression level can not accurately reflect miRNA activity. Results: We developed a computational approach, act mir for identifying active miRNAs and mirna mediated regulatory mechanisms. Applying act mir to four cancer datasets in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA), we showed that (i) miRNA activity was tumor subtype specific; (ii) genes correlated with inferred miRNA activities were more likely to enrich for miRNA binding motifs; (iii) expression levels of these genes and inferred miRNA activities were more likely to be negatively correlated. For the four cancer types in TCGA we identified 77–229 key miRNAs for each cancer subtype and annotated their biological functions. The mirna target pairs, predicted by our act mir algorithm but not by correlation of miRNA expression levels, were experimentally validated. The functional activities of key miRNAs were further demonstrated to be associated with clinical outcomes for other cancer types using independent datasets. For ER À /HER2 À breast cancers, we identified activities of key miRNAs let-7d and miR-18a as potential prognostic markers and validated them in two independent ER À /HER2 À breast cancer datasets. Our work provides a novel scheme to facilitate our understanding of miRNA. In summary, inferred activity of key miRNA provided a functional link to its mediated regulatory network, and can be used to robustly predict patients survival. Availability and implementation: the software is freely available at http://research.mssm.edu/ integrative network biology software html
introduction micrornas (miRNAs) have been shown to control cell growth, differentiation and apoptosis; consequently, impaired miRNA expression has been implicated in tumorigenesis (). In recent years, miRNA expression signatures have been used to classify cancers and to predict favorable prognosis including). However, these studies did not provide direct mechanistic links between miRNAs and their mRNA targets, therefore, whether and how the identified miRNAs play key regulatory roles in post-transcriptional regulation is not clear. A conventional way for identifying key regulatory miRNAs, which potentially regulate expression levels of a large number of genes, is to explore mirna mrna relationships based on their expression levels. By integration of mRNA and miRNA expression levels, key cellular pathways related with miRNA signatures are shown to associate with cancer progression (). However, the association between miRNA and mRNAs does not imply that the miRNA causally regulates these genes. It may be due to pleiotropic effect of upstream regulators. Furthermore, miRNA expression level is not equivalent to its functional activity (). There are proteins or RNAs that can mediate the influence of miRNAs on target genes, such as RISC complex (). The relative abundance of miRNAs to its target genes determines the functional activity levels of miRNAs (). Thus, to infer key miRNAs and understand their gene regulatory networks, it is critical to accurately quantify the regulatory activity of miRNAs by considering their effectiveness on target genes. By applying systematic computational models integrated with prior information on the regulatory sequence of miRNAs, multiple mirna mediated pathways have been identified. For example, key miRNAs are shown to affect genes' expression levels using an integrative model (). Different approaches for identifying key miRNAs have been proposed such as testing miRNAs binding sites enrichment among sets of co-expressed genes (). Some studies infer the miRNA activity using mRNA expression data of genes enriched for miRNA target sites () or average difference in expression levels of miRNA targets versus non targets (). However, these methods do not explicitly consider the role of miRNAs as a post-transcriptional regulator. The amount of expression level variation attributed to miRNA regulation corresponds to the changes from the total transcribed mRNA level (or baseline mRNA expression level). The model to consider pre-processed mRNA level is essential to accurately infer miRNA activities. Here we present a novel computational method act mir for explicitly inferring the activity of miRNAs based on the changes in the expression levels of target genes due to post-transcriptional regulation. The inferred miRNA activity is further used to identify key miRNAs that regulate expression levels of a large number of genes and may drive tumor progression. Key miRNAs identified from its inferred activity can be used as biomarkers for predicting prognosis or as therapeutic targets for cancer treatment. Our act mir method for inferring miRNA activity is based on two assumptions about miRNA function: (i) the baseline expression levels of target genes (when a miRNA has no impact) is approximated by their levels in samples with low expression level of the corresponding miRNA (as sufficient miRNA concentration is essential for its function); (ii) the suppression of target genes by a miRNA depends on the expression levels of the mRNAs (). We applied act mir to four cancer types in The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). act mir identified 77229 key miRNAs that play a key role in transcriptional regulations for each cancer subtype. We demonstrated that our inferred miRNA activity could be further used for identifying functional target genes and as prognostic biomarkers. Notably, we identified let-7d and let-7g as key tumor suppressors in ER  /HER2  breast cancers, targeting on the expression level of collagen and extracellular matrix genes. The predicted putative causal relationships between let-7d and let-7g and target genes based on the inferred activity were experimentally validated. Additionally, the predicted activities of let-7d and let-7g were associated with survival. We further demonstrated in two independent cohorts that predicted activities of two key miRNAs (i.e. let-7d and miR-18a) in ER  /HER2  breast cancers were consistently associated with survival, while none of expression levels of these key miRNAs was significantly associated with survival. The phenomenon that only miRNA activity predicted by our act mir method was robustly associated with patient survival was observed in multiple cancer types. Taken together, our proposed act mir method does not only identify key miRNAs, but also provides direct mechanism links between miRNAs and their functional mRNA targets which in turn act together to affect clinical phenotypes.

discussion we presented a novel computational approach act mir for inferring miRNA activity and identifying key miRNAs that might causally. Activities of key miRNAs identified in TCGA datasets are of robust prognostic value in independents cohort datasets for OV. (A) Survival prognosis by miRNA activity based on the independents cohort dataset yaxis ovarian cancer dataset, were compared to the results from TCGA data x axis. (B) kaplan meier survival curve based on the activity of miR-9 based on dataset. The blue and red curve represents under and over active group, respectively regulate a large number of genes and applied it to multiple cancer types. Our approach explicitly infers miRNA activities instead of using miRNA expression levels as a surrogate. By applying this method to mRNA and miRNA expression profiles in four different cancer types, we identified 77229 key miRNAs for each tumor subtype. In particular, when applied our approach to the TCGA breast cancer dataset, we identified 85 and 96 key miRNAs for ER  / HER2  and ER  breast cancers, respectively. It is worth to note that results based on clinical subtyping (ER/HER2/PR status) and molecular subtyping (PAM50 classification) were similar supplementary and detailed in Supplementary Results). Key miRNAs of prognostic potentials were still significantly associated with survival after adjusting clinical pathological parameters (Supplementary). ER  /HER2  especially triple negative breast tumors are frequently invasive and metastatic involving biological processes such as extracellular matrix remodeling. Interestingly, we identified two miRNAs (let-7d and let-7g) that regulated genes involved in extracellular matrix. Furthermore, we showed that activities of let-7d were consistently associated with survival in the independent breast cancer studies. Our results not only support metastasis is associated with survival of triple negative breast cancers, but also show that let-7d, and let-7g are putative key regulators of metastasis. Additionally, the activity of miR-18a was prognostic in all three independent cohorts. In addition to as potential prognostic biomarkers, the inferred activities of these key miRNAs in ER  /HER2  breast cancers can also be valuable therapeutics targets as there are very limited therapeutic options for triple negative breast cancers. Our findings based on an unbiased systematic approach were supported by the previous observations based on experimental approach in great details (). Our analyses suggested the role of let-7g in tumor metastasis () and miR-18a as a malignancy promoting factor in breast tumors () by the miRNA activity followed by its functional annotation and prognosis test. Furthermore, our result also suggested the novel role of let-7d in metastasis and prognosis, whereas the previous study failed to identify it because their study was based on the expression levels of let-7 miRNA family instead of miRNA activity (). This suggests our approach based on the inferred miRNA activity will facilitate to find more tumor promoting or prognostic miRNAs that may not be identified based on their expression levels alone. Different types of survival outcomes were used in the TCGA, d vinge et al., and Buffa et al. breast cancer datasets. By overlapping results based on these datasets, we reduced potential false positives, but might also miss many true positives. However, survival analyses based on both miRNA expression level and miRNA activities suffered the same drawback. Our result showed that there was no prognostic miRNA based on expression level consistent in multiple independent datasets while there were multiple prognostic miRNAs based on activities consistent in multiple independent datasets, suggesting our approach based on the miRNA activity is robust. In an effort to uncover prognosis biomarkers of cancers, miRNAs would be a suitable candidate due to their small size resulting in resistant to RNase degradation (). Furthermore, we showed that the effect of miRNAs for prognosis was robust. We measured the effectiveness and robustness of miRNAs vs. CNV as prognostic markers using two independent cohorts of OV supplementary and detailed in Supplementary Results). cn vs are predominant functional genomic alterations in OV (). Interestingly, we found only one consistent prognostic CNV factor or associated mRNA factor, whereas three consistent prognostic miRNAs based on activity in OV (Supplementary), suggesting a potential of miRNA activities as effective and robust biomarkers. It is worth to note that our act mir approach aims to infer miRNA activities, not to comprehensively identify miRNA targets. The act mir procedure for inferring miRNA activities is based on regression models. Too few candidate targets of a miRNA included in the act mir procedure may result in less robustness of miRNA activity estimation. On the other hand, too many low confident candidate targets included will bias miRNA activity estimation to zero. There were multiple miRNA target prediction data bases in addition to targets can such as miRanda () and PITA (). Compared to other databases, targets can covered more miRNAs (Supplementary). Also, target genes based on targets can were more consistent with experimentally derived targets (such as by CLASH containing both canonical and non-canonical targets (), and par clip containing canonical targets () methods) than other database (Supplementary). Unlike targets can which predicted canonical miRNA targets, experimental approaches such as CLASH () revealed both canonical and non-canonical miRNA targets. However, mirna target gene interactions are subtype context specific. Most experimental methods covered only limited number of conditions, resulting large numbers of false positives or false negative, which in turn affect accuracy of miRNA activity inference based on the regression model. Also, experimentally derived target sets were only available for a fraction of miRNAs. For example, CLASH dataset () consisted of 399 miRNAs and par clip dataset () consisted of only 68 miRNAs. It is hard to make fair comparison of miRNA activities across all miRNAs if target genes for some miRNAs contain experimentally derived targets while others do not. Thus, we used only targets can but excluding other experimentally derived target databases in our current study. The target genes from the targets can database were mainly predicted based on seed sequences so that miRNAs in the same miRNA family share targets. To test whether considering miRNAs in the same miRNA family together enhance the ability to identify potential miRNA functional targets, we compared the percentage of negative correlations between the predicted target genes' expression levels with the sum of the expression levels of miRNAs in a family or the expression levels of individual miRNAs. Our result (Supplementary) showed that considering all members in a miRNA family as a whole did not improve regulatory potentials of miRNAs. On the other hand, many studies () suggested that miRNAs in the same miRNA family have different binding patterns to their target genes even though they have the same seed sequences. Also, only a fraction of predicted target genes were regulated by a miRNA, reflecting to idiosyncratic patterns of miRNAs in the miRNA family. We used WLS regression to account for binding affinity differences to different target genes when inferring a miRNA activity. As a result, different miRNAs in the same miRNA family, which had the same set of target genes based on targets can had different sets of functional targets. For example, activities of let-7a and let-7d correlated with different genes among the same set of target genes (Supplementary). A miRNA can post transcriptionally regulate many target genes. In our validation experiment, we only tested two targets whose expression levels most correlated corresponding miRNA activities. Validation of a few target genes may not guarantee that other target Inferred miRNA activity genes will be regulated by miRNAs nor related pathways regulated miRNAs. Instead of genome wide target gene validation and functional validation, which are needed in future studies, we validated mirna target relationships by showing that miRNA functional target sets based on independent datasets were significantly overlapped. Our regression procedure for inferring miRNA activity fully accounts for post-transcriptional regulation by miRNA activity in contrast to directly use the expression level of either the miRNA or targeted genes as a surrogate for miRNA regulatory activity. Indeed, the target genes of miRNAs that were predicted based on the activity and were experimentally validated in this study could not be detected as target genes based on corresponding miRNA expression. There are multiple experimental approaches for estimating miRNA activities proposed to experimentally measure miRNA activity by quantifying its target genes in high throughput manners. They demonstrated that some highly expressed miRNAs might exhibit relatively weak activity, which in some cases correlated with a high target to mirna ratio or increased nuclear localization of the miRNA. Our results were consistent with their results: only one third of miRNAs analyzed show significant (FDR  1%) correlation between their expression levels and activities. However, our method is different from their method in several aspects: (i) our inferred activity is cell context specific instead of synthetic environments; (ii) our method is based on degradation levels of all genes with predicted miRNA binding motifs instead of expression levels of a few genes with conserved binding motifs. Similarly, peco t et al. (2013) and other papers showed that genes and associated pathways functionally regulated by a miRNA were cancer subtype specific combined experimentally defined miRNA binding sites and targets can predicted miRNA binding sites to define miRNA target genes and used difference of median correlations of miRNA target genes or miRNA non target genes with miRNA expression level to indicate miRNA activity showed that only a fraction of target genes predicted by targets can were repressed by a miRNA and miRNA activity was cancer subtype specific. Even though some conclusions were similar, our approach significantly differed from faraz i et al.'s approach in multiple ways. First, our iterative weighted regression approach for inferring miRNA activity explicitly identified functional target genes of miRNAs in each cancer subtype based on in vivo data. In contrast, faraz i et al. inferred subtype specific target genes based on in vitro data of one single cell line of other cancer subtype, which contradicted with their own assumption that miRNA target genes were cancer subtype specific. Second, even though the choice of using correlation between gene expression and miRNA activity and target gene enrichment test to infer functionally active miRNAs in our approach or correlation between gene expression and miRNA expression level to reflect miRNA function activity used by is subjective, our approach is applied to multiple breast cancer datasets, indicating that our act mir approach for inferring miRNA activities is robust. More importantly, our approach can be readily applied to any cancers without the need of experimentally deriving miRNA targets in the specific cancer type. Taken together, our results underscore the value of inferring miRNA activity from a systems biology perspective as a promising strategy for investigation of its causal effects on target genes, and furthermore survival outcomes of cancer patients. There are several directions in which this approach can be extended. First, the integration of miRNA, mRNA, CNV and other high throughput data into Bayesian causal models () may shed light on how key miRNAs are regulated and lead to further refine mirna mediated regulatory networks. It will also be interesting to uncover the mechanisms underlying the miRNA functions by comparison of regulators between activity and expression of miRNAs using CNV or mutation data. Furthermore, a model considering several miRNAs together is needed to investigate the cooperative or synergetic effects between miRNAs function. Finally, it is worth to further assess potentials of key miRNAs as prognosis biomarkers and therapeutic agents experimentally.
