Motivation: Transcriptional regulatory networks, which consist of linkages between transcription factors (TF) and target genes t gene control the expression of a genome and play important roles in all aspects of an organisms life cycle. Accurate prediction of transcriptional regulatory networks is critical in providing useful information for biologists to determine what to do next. Currently, there is a substantial amount of fragmented gene regulation information described in the medical literature. However, current related text analysis methods designed to identify protein protein interactions are not entirely suitable for finding transcriptional regulatory networks. Result: In this article, we propose an automatic regulatory network inference method that uses bootstrapping of description patterns to predict the relationship between a TF and its t genes. The proposed method differs from other regulatory network generators in that it makes use of both positive and negative patterns for different vector combinations in a sentence. Moreover, the positive pattern learning process can be fully automatic. Furthermore, patterns for active and passive voice sentences are learned separately. The experiments use 609 HIF-1 expert tagged articles from PubMed as the gold standard. The results show that the proposed method can automatically generate a predicted regulatory network for a transcription factor. Our system achieves an f measure of 72.60%. Availability: The software, training test datasets and learned patterns are available at

introduction transcription factors (TFs) play an important role in regulatory systems. A substantial amount of biological research is continuously being conducted, and the cumulative results obtained from the subsequent analyses are increasing rapidly. Many of these results are reported in the medical literature (). However, given this explosive growth, it is becoming more difficult for biologists to search, read and assemble the information they need. * To whom correspondence should be addressed therefore many high throughput techniques for extracting useful information from the literature have been proposed. Much research () has been conducted on predicting protein protein interactions pp is through text mining. These methods aim to extract more information than what is currently contained in curated databases such as BIND (), KEGG (), SwissProt () and the Database of Interacting Proteins (). However, current related text analysis methods designed for finding PPI are not entirely suitable for finding transcriptional regulatory networks, because the presence of two proteins in a PPI sentence does not necessarily indicate these proteins have a TF and Target gene t gene relationship or that one controls the gene activity of the other. The descriptive terms used for determining pp is may be different from those necessary to determine gene regulation. For example, the words 'associate' and 'interact', which are descriptions that are useful for predicting pp is will cause a high throughput automatic method to find substantial amounts of false positives in a regulatory network. Moreover, the regulatory descriptions could be different in articles written in passive versus active voice. Other existing systems () use manually defined patterns, a popular writing style for describing gene interactions. However, these systems have low recall values. Furthermore, existing methods rarely discuss how negative terms will cause false positives (Sanchez). Therefore, this study takes advantage of bootstrapping () to automatically learn patterns for describing gene regulation relationships and generating a transcriptional regulatory network.

conclusion this study introduced a pattern learning method using bootstrapping. Based on our experimental results, we found that users do not need to manually mark sentences for pattern learning. In positive pattern training, data consisting of tft gene style sentences resulted in better performance of the gene network finding method than data consisting of t genet f style sentences. The difference may be due to the writing habits of biomedical researchers. The literature tends to record research achievements Page: 1427 14221428 that is, positive results), and therefore authors are likely to describe their findings using active phrasing. We also found that including only three to five abstracts for the initial training datasets generated acceptable results. This may be because many articles are published about the same TF and its specifically regulated genes; therefore, it is easy to collect such literature entries into an initial dataset. When a tuple is used for bootstrapping training, it is easy to find many sentences from which to learn new patterns. Based on the retrieval effects from the seven vector styles in Experiment 1, the recall value of the Middle vector is the highest at 92.58% for tft gene style sentences and 87.86% for t genet f style sentences. The values of precision are 40.36% for tft gene style sentences and 33.64% for t genet f style sentences. This result shows that patterns generated by the Middle vector are the most representative. This may be because the keywords related to 'certain TF regulates this particular gene' almost always appears in the Middle vector for phrases such as 'activation of,' 'induction of,' 'transactivation of,' 'activate' and other similar phrases. Experiment 2 indicated that the three methods for generating initial datasets do not result in obviously different performances of the gene network finding method. Performance using manually marked sentences is not always better than using automatically or semi automatically marked sentences. In addition, the trained patterns were similar whether we manually marked results or used Page: 1428 14221428
