Motivation: Accurate, context specific regulation of gene expression is essential for all organisms. Accordingly, it is very important to understand the complex relations within cellular gene regulatory networks. A tool to describe and analyze the behavior of such networks are Boolean models. The reconstruction of a Boolean network from biological data requires identification of dependencies within the network. This task becomes increasingly computationally demanding with large amounts of data created by recent high throughput technologies. Thus, we developed a method that is especially suited for network structure reconstruction from large scale data. In our approach, we took advantage of the fact that a specific transcription factor often will consistently either activate or inhibit a specific target gene, and this kind of regulatory behavior can be modeled using monotone functions. Results: To detect regulatory dependencies in a network, we examined how the expression of different genes correlates to successive network states. For this purpose, we used Pearson correlation as an elementary correlation measure. Given a Boolean network containing only monotone Boolean functions, we prove that the correlation of successive states can identify the dependencies in the network. This method not only finds dependencies in randomly created artificial networks to very high percentage, but also reconstructed large fractions of both a published Escherichia coli regulatory network from simulated data and a yeast cell cycle network from real microarray

introduction boolean networks were popularized by Stuart Kauffman as models for genetic regulatory networks (). In this kind of model, only two states are discriminated active inactive for each gene. The dynamics of the network can then be described by Boolean functions. This model works with a very small set of parameters and thus represents a very stringent application of Occam's Razor, which makes it especially suitable for modeling large genetic networks * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.(). Nonetheless, it is powerful enough to model the structure of network motifs, basic network components frequently found in gene regulatory networks (). Gene transcription in eukaryotic cells has to be tightly regulated to ensure proper cell function, i.e. according to a particular cellular context (cell cycle phase, cell type, environmental conditions, developmental stage), a specific subset of genes is expressed while the expression of other genes has to be actively repressed. This regulation is generally mediated via certain proteins, called transcription factors, that bind to specific sequence motifs in the promoter region of a gene and either enhance or inhibit the transcription of this gene [reviewed e.g. in (. If a promoter region contains binding motifs for different transcription factors, these factors can either cooperate in the regulation of a certain target gene or counteract each other. Moreover, in some cases, specific cofactors determine whether a transcription factor acts as activator or repressor. Despite the variety in the modes of transcriptional regulation, most transcriptional regulators will be either activators or inhibitors of a certain gene in a specific cell type. In this case, the activating or repressing effect of a transcription factor monotonically depends on its cellular concentration. In other words, an increase in the concentration of an activator will increase but never decrease transcription of its target, while an increase in the concentration of a repressor will decrease but never increase transcription of its target. This kind of transcriptional regulation can be modeled mathematically in a very simplistic manner by the use of monotone Boolean functions which describe exactly this monotonic relation. Besides the monotone Boolean functions applied in this work, there exist further related classes of functions describing such monotonic relations. Among them are, for example, nested c analyzing functions (), single layer perceptrons () and multilinear functions (). Gene expression data can be analyzed and visualized on the basis of correlations identified in the observed expression patterns of the analyzed genes. Models from information theory correlate expression values from two genes directly and predict an interaction between two genes to be present if the correlation coefficient is exceeding a certain threshold. Algorithms based on this principle are for example CLR () or ar acne (). However, these correlations generally reflect co-expression of genes and can, under some restrictions to the underlying network like e.g. absence of cyclic dependencies, also give information on direct causal relationships page 1530 15291536

conclusion for a Boolean network consisting only of monotone Boolean functions, we showed that Pearson correlation is a fast method to find dependencies in the network. This method makes it possible to analyze large networks that contain nodes with large input degree. We could show for both simulated and real microarray data that our approach could reconstruct large parts of published regulatory networks.
