Motivation: A basic problem of broad public and scientific interest is to use the DNA of an individual to infer the genomic ancestries of the parents. In particular, we are often interested in the fraction of each parents genome that comes from specific ancestries (e.g. European, African, Native American, etc). This has many applications ranging from understanding the inheritance of ancestry related risks and traits to quantifying human assortative mating patterns. Results: We model the problem of parental genomic ancestry inference as a pooled semi markov process. We develop a general mathematical framework for pooled semi markov processes and construct efficient inference algorithms for these models. Applying our inference algorithm to genotype data from 231 Mexican trios and 258 Puerto Rican trios where we have the true genomic ancestry of each parent, we demonstrate that our method accurately infers parameters of the semi markov processes and parents genomic ancestries. We additionally validated the method on simulations. Our model of pooled semi markov process and inference algorithms may be of independent interest in other settings in genomics and machine learning.

introduction recent developments in DNA technology bring personal genomics to reality. This opens up unprecedented possibilities for individuals to learn about their genomic history (e.g. ancestry, family history) as well as their genomic future (e.g. disease risk). A particular aspect of personal genomics that has garnered significant public and medical interest is the ability to precisely quantify the ancestry composition of one's genome (). Consider a Mexican individual as an example. Her genome consists of alternating blocks of DNA sequences, where each block has African, European or Native American ancestry. The length and frequency distributions of blocks from different ancestries reflect the patterns of admixtures over the last several centuries. A substantial fraction of humans today are offsprings of historical mixing between distinct populations and their genomes are such mosaics of ancestry blocks (). The ability to quantify genomic ancestries has important biomedical implications. For example, African ancestry is a risk factor for asthma. This partially explains the high prevalence of asthma in african American as well as Puerto Ricans with larger African genomic ancestry (). In addition, genomic ancestry gives insights into many social science questions, and expands the common notions of ethnicity and race (). Given the genome of an individual, recent machine learning methods can accurately determine the fraction of this person's genome that originates from each ancestry (). However, for many applications in biomedical and social science research, it is important to go beyond the individual's ancestry and to infer the genomic ancestries of the parents (since most genetic datasets do not have genotype information from the parents). In studies of ancestry linked risk factors, genomic ancestry information of parents can be used to investigate how risks propagate through generations. In social science applications, parental genomic ancestry can be used to understand genetic basis of human mate selection, a subject of substantial recent interest. Latino parents, e.g. were shown to have significant correlations in their genomic ancestries ().
