Motivation: Time course data are often used to study the changes to a biological process after perturbation. Statistical methods have been developed to determine whether such a perturbation induces changes over time, e.g. comparing a perturbed and unperturbed time course dataset to uncover differences. However, existing methods do not provide a principled statistical approach to identify the specific time when the two time course datasets first begin to diverge after a perturbation ; we call this the perturbation time. Estimation of the perturbation time for different variables in a biological process allows us to identify the sequence of events following a perturbation and therefore provides valuable insights into likely causal relationships. Results: We propose a Bayesian method to infer the perturbation time given time course data from a wild type and perturbed system. We use a non-parametric approach based on Gaussian Process regression. We derive a probabilistic model of noise corrupted and replicated time course data coming from the same profile before the perturbation time and diverging after the perturbation time. The likelihood function can be worked out exactly for this model and the posterior distribution of the perturbation time is obtained by a simple histogram approach, without recourse to complex approximate inference algorithms. We validate the method on simulated data and apply it to study the transcriptional change occurring in Arabidopsis following inoculation with Pseudomonas syrin-gae pv. tomato DC3000 versus the disarmed strain DC3000hrpA.

introduction gene expression time profiles can reveal important information about cellular function and gene regulation (see, e.g.). A common experimental design is to perturb a biological system either before or during a time course experiment. In this case, a fundamental problem is to identify the precise perturbation time when a gene's time profile is first altered. In this paper we present an exactly tractable Bayesian inference procedure to infer the perturbation time by comparing perturbed and wild type gene expression profiles. Ordering genes by their perturbation time gives valuable insight into the likely causal sequence of events following a perturbation. We demonstrate the applicability of our method by studying the timing of transcriptional changes in Arabidopsis thaliana leaves following inoculation with the V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

conclusion we have introduced a fully Bayesian approach to infer the initial point where two gene expression time profiles diverge using a novel GP regression approach. We model the data as noise corrupted samples coming from a shared function prior to some 'perturbation time' after which it splits into two conditionally independent functions. The full posterior distribution of the perturbation point is obtained through a simple histogram approach, providing a straightforward method to infer the divergence time between two gene expression time profiles under different conditions. The proposed method is applied to a study of the timing of transcriptional changes in A. thaliana under a bacterial challenge with a wild type and disarmed strain. Analysis of differences in the gene expression profiles between strains is shown to be informative about the immune response. Many transcriptional perturbation experiments are focused on a single perturbation. However, multiple perturbations occurring at different times or a single perturbation targeting many conditions will be needed to unmask complex gene regulatory strategies. An interesting future line of research would be the development of GP covariance structures to uncover the ordering of events under these more general scenarios.
