Motivation: We propose an efficient method to infer combinatorial association logic networks from multiple genome wide measurements from the same sample. We demonstrate our method on a genetical genomics dataset, in which we search for Boolean combinations of multiple genetic loci that associate with transcript levels. Results: Our method provably finds the global solution and is very efficient with runtimes of up to four orders of magnitude faster than the exhaustive search. This enables permutation procedures for determining accurate false positive rates and allows selection of the most parsimonious model. When applied to transcript levels measured in myeloid cells from 24 genotyped recombinant inbred mouse strains, we discovered that nine gene clusters are putatively modulated by a logical combination of trait loci rather than a single locus. A literature survey supports and further elucidates one of these findings. Due to our approach, optimal solutions for multi-locus logic models and accurate estimates of the associated false discovery rates become feasible. Our algorithm, therefore, offers a valuable alternative to approaches employing complex, albeit suboptimal optimization strategies to identify complex models. Availability: The MATLAB code of the prototype implementation is available on: http://bioinformatics.tudelft.nl/ or http://bioinformatics.

introduction to explain complex biological phenomena it is of vital importance to measure in the same sample all relevant (complementary) biological variables, and to measure these at a genome wide scale. For this reason, many multimodal screens have been performed that have complemented transcriptional profiling with, among others, copy number variation measurements, transcription factor binding assays, methylation status profiling or genotype calls (). A common aim in analyzing these multimodal datasets is to find associations between the biological variables measured to infer their regulatory role. Consider, for instance, a study in which expression profiles and genome wide genotype data were obtained in hematopoietic cells from a panel of fully homozygous recombinant inbred mouse strains (). This 'genetical genomics' approach * To whom correspondence should be addressed. enables the determination of expression quantitative trait loci e qtls characterized by strong associations between the genotype and the observed expression levels (). In the absence of a strong direct association between the genotype and gene expression, real multi-locus interactions may still be present, due to epistatic interaction (). Such interactions may not be detectable as (marginal) direct associations between the genotype and gene expression (). To alleviate this, approaches which evaluate the joint association of multiple loci and a phenotype of interest are required. Several approaches have been proposed to attack this problem. These approaches differ mostly regarding the way the associations are modeled and the strategy employed to solve the combinatorial optimization problem. Some approaches () follow what could be loosely termed a two stage approach, where all two locus models are first evaluated, which, in stage two, are used in a greedy search to yield multilocus models. Approaches employing more advanced strategies to traverse the space of possible models are represented by a genetic programming approach () and Markov Chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) approaches associated with Bayesian analyses (). Since two stage approaches have been demonstrated to be suboptimal () and advanced search strategies such as MCMC are very sensitive to their implementation and parameter settings, and are not guaranteed to be optimal, an approach that finds a provably global solution to a selected model within reasonable time is highly desirable. Of particular interest is the method of which is used for the pairs can analysis that is available on the gene network on http://genenetwork.org.stress the importance of performing a global search rather than relying on greedy searches by pre selecting markers based on their marginal effects. To deal with the computational complexity associated with such an optimization problem, the authors present a method to find global optima of a linear regression problem for up to three predictors that is fast enough to be employed in permutation procedures. In contrast to the class of additive models employed by and many other approaches), we follow others () and employ Boolean combinatorial logic to explicitly incorporate interactions in the e qtl inference. To this end, we infer combinatorial association logic (CAL) networks that combine the observed genotypes through and (), or () and xor
