Motivation: Recent genomic studies have confirmed that cancer is of utmost phenotypic al complexity, varying greatly in terms of subtypes and evolutionary stages. When classifying cancer tissue samples, subnetwork marker approaches have proven to be superior over single gene marker approaches, most importantly in cross platform evaluation schemes. However, prior subnetwork based approaches do not explicitly address the great phenotypic al complexity of cancer. Results: We explicitly address this and employ density constrained bi clustering to compute subnetwork markers, which reflect pathways being dysregulated in many, but not necessarily all samples under consideration. In breast cancer we achieve substantial improvements over all cross platform applicable approaches when predicting TP53 mutation status in a well established non cross platform setting. In colon cancer, we raise prediction accuracy in the most difficult instances from 87% to 93% for cancer versus non-cancer and from 83% to (astonishing) 92%, for with versus without liver metastasis, in well established cross platform evaluation schemes. Availability: Software is available on request. Contact:

introduction throughout the decades, cancer has been not only a most daunting, but also most intriguing disease to study. It is daunting since it persistently keeps escaping our deeper understanding while, at the same time, it is the reason for as many as 13% of human deaths worldwide. As a mere object to study, however, it is also most fascinating since it is crucially entangled with the mechanisms which are responsible for cellular welfare. Clearly, a deeper understanding of cancer would shed light on a wealth of aspects being essential for eukaryotic life. In the meantime, there has been abundant evidence that cancer is phenotypically of utmost complexity. On one hand, most recent studies on cancer genomes reveal the extent of DNA damage (; Hampton * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint last numbers of copy number variations and genomic rearrangements are so large that one can hardly believe that cancer cells are viable at all. On the other hand, it has been well known that cancer cells evolve (). Starting out as healthy human cells they gradually undergo phenotypic al changes through accumulating genomic alterations first transforming into malignant and finally into metastatic and or therapy resistant specimens. In conclusion, it is safe to assume that no two cancer genomes of two different people, at least at first glance, even look similar and even one person's cancer is made up by a variety of different cell types belonging to the different stages of cancer evolution. Nevertheless, it is possible to classify cancer, to identify subtypes common to many people and also to cure or at least to slow down progression in many patients by means of identical therapy protocols. Therefore, one of the most driving questions in most recent research is to reveal the genetic alterations common to all cancer cells within and also across its many subtypes. To successfully classify cancer tissue samples one needs reliable criteria on the biomolecular level that is disease markers. While markers serve as indicators of cancer and or its subtypes in the first place they can also point at the crucial processes and perturbations giving rise to cancer such that it may be worth studying them beyond their role as classification features. In a seminal study successfully identified 50 differentially expressed genes which can successfully distinguish between two leukemia subtypes. Similar approaches determined differentially expressed genes for b cell lymphoma (), breast (van) and lung cancer (), which served as monogenic, that is single gene markers (SGMs). However, SGM sets determined based on differential expression varied considerably when inferring them from different platforms such that they were useless in cross platform studies, hence of no universal applicability ().finally pointed out that multi genic markers were able to address this issue. multi genic markers consist of several differentially expressed genes which also form a connected region in protein protein interaction (PPI) networks and proved to be more stable predictors in cross platform evaluation schemes. Similar approaches followed () where only the latter focuses on cancer. While the primary purpose of subnetwork marker computation is to provide cross platform applicable indicators of disease, they can also yield further insights on cancer because they usually reflect (parts of) dysregulated pathways.
