Motivation: Finding genes which are directly perturbed or targeted by drugs is of great interest and importance in drug discovery. Several network filtering methods have been created to predict the gene targets of drugs from gene expression data based on an ordinary differential equation model of the gene regulatory network (GRN). A critical step in these methods involves inferring the GRN from the expression data, which is a very challenging problem on its own. In addition, existing network filtering methods require computationally intensive parameter tuning or expression data from experiments with known genetic perturbations or both. Results: We developed a method called delta net for the identification of drug targets from gene expression data. Here, the gene target predictions were directly inferred from the data without a separate step of GRN inference. delta net formulation led to solving an underdetermined linear regression problem, for which we employed least angle regression delta net lar or LASSO regu-larization delta net lasso. The predictions using delta net for expression data of Escherichia coli, yeast, fruit fly and human were significantly more accurate than those using network filtering methods, namely mode of action by network identification mn i and sparse simultaneous equation model s sem. Furthermore, delta net using LAR did not require any parameter tuning and could provide computational speed up over existing methods.

introduction knowing the molecular targets of a drug or chemical compound is crucial in the drug discovery research for, among other things, identifying therapeutic properties and side effects, understanding the mechanism of action of a drug, finding alternative compounds with similar or greater efficacy and exploring new applications of a drug for treatment of other diseases (drug repositioning). In this regard, advances in high throughput omics technology have been playing a crucial role in providing the data for elucidating cellular entities which interact with drug and chemical compounds. cellular wide response such as whole genome gene expression profile, to genetic perturbations and chemical compounds can now be measured easily and cheaply. Furthermore, large amount of omics data are available from the ever growing public biological databases. Because such data are typically of high dimensionality, the use of computational methods has become necessary in their analysis, for example in the inference of gene regulatory networks (). Computational systems biology has provided many tools to analyze gene expression profiles for drug target predictions. A summary of different methods in this topic can be found in a review article (). Briefly, there exist two main strategies: comparative analysis and network analysis. In comparative analysis, the gene targets are determined by comparing the gene expression profiles under drug treatments of interest with those from experiments with known genetic perturbations. This strategy generally involves gathering a compendium of expression profiles from genetic perturbations and chemical compound treatments with known mechanisms, followed by an association analysis of the expression profiles from drugs (e.g. using clustering, distance or connectivity score) (). A strong degree of association suggests a high similarity between the molecular targets of a drug of interest and the known perturbations. In network analysis strategy, a model of the GRN is employed to predict GRN perturbations caused by drugs. The perturbation analysis requires constructing a network model of gene transcriptional regulation. One class of network analysis called network filtering is based on an ordinary differential equation (ODE) model of the gene transcription process. By taking the steady state assumption, the inference of GRN and drug targets reduces to solving a multivariate linear regression problem (see Methods and Materials for more details). Algorithms from this class of network analysis include network identification by multiple regression (NIR) (), mode of action by network identification mn i () and sparse simultaneous equation model s sem (). Here, the gene target predictions are obtained by first inferring the GRN using a library of gene expression data from the same species or cell line. Subsequently, the inferred GRN is used to filter the expression data of drug treatments. More precisely, genes with expressions which could not be explained by the transcriptional activity of their regulators are scored more likely to be direct targets of the drug. Another type of network analysis methods rely on statistical test or enrichment analysis of the gene expression profiles to identify drug targets. One strategy called reverse causal reasoning uses literature mined gene regulatory networks to generate hypotheses, which are subsequently scored against the gene expression profile (). Another set of methods employ a transcription factor (TF) enrichment analysis followed by an upstream analysis, which involves a search for proteins that are highly connected to enriched TFs in signal transduction or protein protein interaction networks (). Meanwhile, a method called Master Regulatory Inference algorithm (MARINa) applies gene set enrichment analysis using a transcriptional regulatory network to identify TFs whose regulon s are enriched for differentially expressed genes (). Finally, a recent algorithm named Detecting Mechanism of Action by Network Dysregulation (DeMAND) uses an input GRN and expression data from control and drug treatments to identify target genes based on dysregulated gene interactions (). Despite the differences in how grn s are used in network analysis methods, the accuracy of the target predictions naturally depend on the fidelity of the GRN model. Unfortunately, the inference of GRN is known to be very challenging as the problem has been shown to be underdetermined (). In this work, we developed a network analysis method called delta net for predicting the genetic perturbations caused by a drug or chemical compound using gene expression profiles. delta net is also based on an ODE model of the GRN, but does not require a separate step of GRN inference. Instead, the target predictions are obtained directly from the data, while the GRN is only inferred implicitly. delta net relies on the least angle regression (LAR) () and the LASSO regularization () to tackle the curse of dimensionality of the underlying regression problem. We demonstrated the advantages of delta net over z scores and other network filtering methods, namely mn i and s sem using compendia of gene expression data from Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Drosophila melanogaster and Homo sapiens.

discussion we developed a method called delta net for predicting the molecular targets of drugs or chemical compounds from gene expression data. Many applications of great interest and importance in drug discovery research, including elucidating the mode of action (MoA) of drugs and the mechanisms of diseases, fall within the problem that is addressed by this work. delta net formulation uses an ODE model of gene transcription process under steady state condition. We employed two strategies for solving the resulting underdetermined linear regression problem: least angle regression delta net lar and LASSO regularization delta net lasso. One can relax the assumption in delta net which sets a kk to zero, by treating the predicted p ki as the sum between the self regulatory feedback and the perturbations caused by the treatment. In such a case, instead of using the magnitude of the perturbation coefficients p ki to rank genes, we could use the q values of p ki (). However, for the case studies above, we did not observe any improvement in the prediction accuracy when using gene ranking according to the q values (see Supplementary Material and Supplementary). The output of delta net comprises a ranked list of gene target predictions. Such a list is amenable for further enrichment analysis to identify other type of molecular targets, such as TFs in the second case study above. An upstream analysis can also be applied to find protein partners of enriched TFs, for example by using expression 2 kinase () and enrich r (). Beyond TF and protein targets, one can also apply functional enrichment analysis to obtain the functional relevance of the gene target predictions. Several web server tools exist for such a purpose, notably to pp cluster analysis () which provides 17 categories of human ortholog gene annotations such as gene ontology, pathways, microRNAs and human phenotype. delta net uses the same ODE model of the gene transcription process as the methods mn i and s sem but with a key difference in the manner by which the target predictions are inferred from the data. The first phase of mn i and s sem involve the identification of the GRN matrix A using a compendium of gene expression data. The perturbation matrix P is subsequently obtained for the treatment samples of interest by network filtering, which in essence uses the difference P  C  CA: In mn i the matrix A is estimated from training data together with the unknown matrix P, using a procedure that resembles Expectation Maximization algorithm (di). The convergence of this procedure is however not guaranteed and the solution often varies with the initial starting guess. Also, the performance of mn i is known to sensitively depend on the tuning of method parameters which often leads to numerically intensive optimization (). Not to mention, mn i also requires data from known genetic perturbations for parameter tuning. In contrast, s sem uses LASSO regularization to identify the matrix A using the complete gene expression data, where the perturbation matrix P is initially set to zero. By doing so, s sem ignores the treatment or perturbation effects when inferring the grn s. The matrix P is subsequently obtained from the residuals of the regression above. The LASSO regularization enforces a limit on the model complexity, an assumption which is based on the observed sparsity of grn s (). The implementation of LASSO requires selecting the appropriate constraint parameter T for model complexity. As the optimal value is not known a priori and is also problem dependent, a cross validation is often used for setting T. As shown in, analyses using LASSO, including delta net lasso and s sem were the slowest among the methods considered. Here, the majority of the computational time was contributed by the cross validation step. One can view delta net as a hybrid between mn i and s sem. The inference of the matrices A and P in delta net is performed simultaneously, which resembles the first step of mn i. But, like s sem we employed a GRN sparsity assumption by way of LAR and LASSO regularization to tackle the underdetermined problem. Nevertheless, delta net does not involve an explicit network filtering step. Instead, the perturbation matrix P for the treatment samples is obtained together with the other samples in the compendium. We could therefore fully use the information contained in the available data (training and treatment sets) in predicting the effects of a treatment. As demonstrated in the case studies, delta net offers a significant improvement in the accuracy of target prediction over mn i and s sem. Furthermore, delta net lar has better numerical efficiency and robustness with respect to parameter tuning over delta net lasso mn i and s sem. We therefore recommend delta net lar using a threshold parameter d r of 10%, since in our experience, this setting provides a good balance between target prediction accuracy and computational performance. While the difference between delta net and the existing network filtering methods may appear slight, this deviation is nevertheless important and fundamental. There were two key factors motivating the single step inference in delta net. First, the inference of grn s from the typical gene expression has been shown to be underdetermined (). Thus, any method relying on the solution of such an inference problem could be sensitive to the associated uncertainty. Second, despite the underdetermined issue, it is often possible to predict the effects of a network perturbations from existing gene expression data with reasonable accuracy (). We formulated delta net based on the premise that the available gene expression data, while lacking information for the accurate inference of GRN, have enough information to identify the network perturbations caused by a treatment. The differences between the gene target predictions from delta net lasso and s sem are quite interesting, considering that both methods employ the same LASSO regularization. In the first case study, we noted that for yeast and E.coli datasets, delta net lasso produced sparser grn s than s sem (see Supplementary). This trend is expected since in comparison to s sem delta net formulation has additional degrees of freedom that come from the perturbation vector. However, the network sparsity between delta net and s sem in the Drosophila dataset did not differ significantly. We further looked at the set of known gene targets among the top 10 predictions from delta net lasso but not from s sem. For these gene targets (n  10, 15 and 13 for E.coli, yeast and Drosophila, respectively), delta net lasso clearly produced fewer non-zero coefficients than s sem for all three datasets (see Supplementary). The observations above indicated a possibility of overfitting in s sem as the regression problem did not consider perturbations on the genes. Finally, time series expression data have become routine and increasingly available in public databases. Applying delta net and similar methods such as s sem and mn i to time series data should be done with caution because of the underlying steady state assumption in the method formulation. In the case studies, we included time series data as a part of the training dataset. Excluding time series data however did not affect the accuracy of delta net predictions significantly (see Supplementary). An extension of delta net to take advantage of time series data is currently being developed, the results of which will be reported in a separate publication.
