Motivation: high throughput data is providing a comprehensive view of the molecular changes in cancer tissues. New technologies allow for the simultaneous genome wide assay of the state of genome copy number variation, gene expression, DNA methylation and epigenetics of tumor samples and cancer cell lines. Analyses of current data sets find that genetic alterations between patients can differ but often involve common pathways. It is therefore critical to identify relevant pathways involved in cancer progression and detect how they are altered in different patients. Results: We present a novel method for inferring patient specific genetic activities incorporating curated pathway interactions among genes. A gene is modeled by a factor graph as a set of interconnected variables encoding the expression and known activity of a gene and its products, allowing the incorporation of many types of omic data as evidence. The method predicts the degree to which a pathways activities (e.g. internal gene states, interactions or high level outputs) are altered in the patient using probabilistic inference. Compared with a competing pathway activity inference approach called spi a our method identifies altered activities in cancer related pathways with fewer false positives in both a glioblastoma multiform (GBM) and a breast cancer dataset. PARADIGM identified consistent pathway level activities for subsets of the GBM patients that are overlooked when genes are considered in isolation. Further, grouping GBM patients based on their significant pathway perturbations divides them into clinically relevant subgroups having significantly different survival outcomes. These findings suggest that therapeutics might be chosen that target genes at critical points in the commonly perturbed pathway(s) of a group of patients. Availability: Source code available at

introduction a central premise in modern cancer treatment is that patient diagnosis, prognosis, risk assessment and treatment response prediction can be improved by stratification of cancers based on genomic, transcriptional and epi genomic characteristics of the tumor alongside relevant clinical information gathered at the time of diagnosis (e.g. patient history, tumor histology and stage) as well as subsequent clinical follow-up data (e.g. treatment regimens * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors. and disease recurrence events). While several high throughput technologies have been available for probing the molecular details of cancer, only a handful of successes have been achieved based on this paradigm. For example, 25% of breast cancer patients presenting with a particular amplification or overexpression of the ERBB2 growth factor receptor tyrosine kinase can now be treated with trastuzumab, a monoclonal antibody targeting the receptor (). However, even this success story is clouded by the fact that 50% of patients with erbb2 positive breast cancers actually achieve any therapeutic benefit from trastuzumab, emphasizing our incomplete understanding of this well studied oncogenic pathway and the many therapeutic resistant mechanisms intrinsic to erbb2 positive breast cancers (). This overall failure to translate modern advances in basic cancer biology is in part due to our inability to comprehensively organize and integrate all of the omic features now technically acquir able on virtually any type of cancer. Despite overwhelming evidence that histologically similar cancers are in reality a composite of many molecular subtypes, each with significantly different clinical behavior, this knowledge is rarely applied in practice due to the lack of robust signatures that correlate well with prognosis and treatment options. Cancer is a disease of the genome that is associated with aberrant alterations that lead to dis regulation of the cellular system. What is not clear is how genomic changes feed into genetic pathways that underlie cancer phenotypes. high throughput functional genomics investigations have made tremendous progress in the past decade (). However, the challenges of integrating multiple data sources to identify reproducible and interpretable molecular signatures of tumorigenesis and progression remain elusive. Recent pilot studies by TCGA and others () make it clear that a pathway level understanding of genomic perturbations is needed to understand the changes observed in cancer cells. These findings demonstrate that even when patients harbor genomic alterations or aberrant expression in different genes, these genes often participate in a common pathway. In addition, and even more striking, is that the alterations observed (e.g. deletions versus amplifications) often alter the pathway output in the same direction, either all increasing or all decreasing the pathway activation. Approaches for interpreting genome wide cancer data have focused on identifying gene expression profiles that are highly correlated with a particular phenotype or disease state, and have led to promising results (). Methods using analysis of variance (), false discovery () and non-parametric methods () have been proposed page i238 i237i245

discussion the PARADIGM method integrates diverse high throughput genomics information with known signaling pathways to provide patient specific genomic inferences on the state of gene activities, complexes and cellular processes. The core of the method uses a factor graph to leverage inference for combining the various data sources. The use of such inferences in place of, or in conjunction with, the original high throughput datasets improves our ability to classify samples into clinically relevant subtypes. Clustering the GBM patients based on the paradigm integrated activities revealed patient subtypes correlated with different survival profiles. In contrast, clustering the samples either using the expression data or the copy number data did not reveal any significant clusters in the dataset. PARADIGM produces pathway inferences of significantly altered gene activities in tumor samples from both GBM and breast cancer. Compared to a competing pathway activity inference approach called spi a our method identifies altered activities in cancer related pathways with fewer false positives. For computational efficiency, PARADIGM currently uses the NCI pathways as is. While it infers hidden quantities using EM, it makes no attempt to infer new interactions not already present in an NCI pathway. One can imagine expanding the approach to introduce new interactions that increase the likelihood function. While this problem is intractable in general, heuristics such as structural EM () can be used to identify interactions using computational search strategies. Rather than searching for novel connections de novo one could speed up the search significantly by proposing interactions derived from protein protein interaction maps or gene pairs correlated in a significant number of expression datasets. The power of the pathway based approach is that it may provide clues about the possible mechanisms underlying the differences in observed survival. Informative ip as may be useful for suggesting therapeutic targets or to select the most appropriate patients for clinical trials. For example, the ErbB2 amplification is a well known marker of particular forms of breast cancer that are treatable by the drug trastuzumab. However, some patients with the ErbB2 amplification have tumors that are refractory to treatment. Inspection of a circle map display could identify patients with ErbB2 amplifications but have either inactive or unchanged ip as as inferred by PARADIGM. Patients harboring the ErbB2 amplification but without predicted activity could be considered for alternative treatment. As more multidimensional datasets become available in the future, it will be interesting to test whether such pathway inferences provide robust biomarkers that generalize across cohorts.
