Motivation: The ability to jointly learn gene regulatory networks grn s in, or leverage grn s between related species would allow the vast amount of legacy data obtained in model organisms to inform the grn s of more complex, or economically or medically relevant counterparts. Examples include transferring information from Arabidopsis thaliana into related crop species for food security purposes, or from mice into humans for medical applications. Here we develop two related Bayesian approaches to network inference that allow grn s to be jointly inferred in, or leveraged between, several related species: in one framework, network information is directly propagated between species; in the second hierarchical approach, network information is propagated via an unobserved hyper network. In both frameworks, information about network similarity is captured via graph kernels, with the networks additionally informed by species specific time series gene expression data, when available, using Gaussian processes to model the dynamics of gene expression. Results: Results on in silico benchmarks demonstrate that joint inference, and leveraging of known networks between species, offers better accuracy than standalone inference. The direct propagation of network information via the non hierarchical framework is more appropriate when there are relatively few species, while the hierarchical approach is better suited when there are many species. Both methods are robust to small amounts of mis labelling of orthologues. Finally, the use of Saccharomyces cerevisiae data and networks to inform inference of networks in the budding yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe predicts a novel role in cell cycle regulation for Gas1 (SPAC19B12.02c), a 13betaglucanosyl transferase. Availability and implementation: MATLAB code is available from http://go.warwick.ac.uk/system-sbiology/software/.

introduction the gene regulatory networks grn s of related species should share common topological features with one another by virtue of a shared ancestry. Consequentially, the joint inference (JI) of grn s from gene expression datasets collected from different species should result in better overall accuracy in the inferred networks, due to the increased amount of data from which to learn the shared components (). Similarly, the leveraging of a GRN that has been experimentally verified in one species into a related species should also improve the accuracy of inferred networks. Both tasks are related, and require the leveraging of data between species, either in the form of multiple time series gene expression datasets, as is the case for JI, or combinations of times series gene expression data with experimentally verified networks during network leveraging (NL). Due to the increasing availability of heterogeneous datasets in a range of species, flexible approaches to network inference that can be adapted to both JI and NL tasks should be particularly useful, and would allow vast amounts of data and information available in model organisms to be translated into more complex or medically or economically relevant ones. Although a number of methods that can directly leverage networks from one species to another exist, such as network alignment algorithms () or graph kernels (), these algorithms do not, typically, utilize other available data, such as time series, to refine the networks. Additionally, network alignment methods are of limited utility where little is known about the network in one of the species. Some existing approaches that could be adapted to, or have been applied to, jin l between species exist, provided that the orthologues can be mapped 1:1 between the species (). However, complete lists of orthologues may not always exist or may be incomplete or incorrect. one to one mapping, however, may not always be possible due to gene or chromosome duplications. This effect may be particularly compounded in plant species where whole ancestral genomes may be duplicated, or where hybridization events can result in multiple ancestral genomes being combined into a single organism (). In cases where no orthologues are known beforehand, associations can be assigned within the inference procedure (). In the study by gholam i and f ellenberg (2010) and other approaches for JI in multiple species (), inferred networks represent an average network rather than a species specific one. Biologically, the set of genes in one species may not fully correspond to the genes in another due to loss of genes, emergence of proto genes () or horizontal gene transfers (), and the network connections themselves may undergo rearrangement due to evolutionary processes acting on the promoter regions of the genes or on coding sequences, or else due to context specific effects arising in the different experimental conditions. These differences in network structure may be just as significant as the underlying similarities, and should therefore be inferred alongside the core aspects of the network, that is, while it is desirable to share information between species, we nonetheless wish to retain species specific elements. Increasingly, it is common to measure time series data (), from which directed graphs can be inferred. Consequentially, new methods and approaches are needed that can handle time series data, are flexible enough to deal with multiple orthologues and can be readily adapted to both JI and NL when required. Previous approaches that can do so include the work by, which uses heuristic models for evolution, demonstrating the general usefulness of multi-species network inference in silico and in Drosophila. In this article, we develop two related Bayesian approaches to network inference (Sections 2.1 and 2.2) that allow both the JI of grn s in related species from time series data, and the leveraging of networks from one species to another, even when multiple copies of an orthologue exist. In particular, each node in the respective networks may be assigned a node label according to which orthologues the node has. This labelling may come from manually curated lists of orthologues or can be computed according to sequence similarity. Crucially, graph kernels are used to quantify the similarity between labelled graphs, allowing a joint prior to be placed over network topologies that favours, but does not strictly enforce, similarity between networks. The use of graph kernels in this way opens up a diverse suite of nonparametric tools for characterizing network similarity within the inference procedure, without the need to employ heuristic models of evolution as in Zhang and more t (2010). Finally, a Gaussian process model is used to capture the dynamics of the time series gene expression data, conditional on network structure, in the individual species, allowing for species specific embellishments to the grn s. In Section 3, we characterize the performance of our methods using three different graph kernels on a variety of in silico time series datasets and demonstrate that the methods are more accurate than related approaches which do not share information between the species (). Furthermore, we demonstrate that the methods are robust to small amounts of orthologue mis labelling and node duplication. In Section 3.3, we use these methods to leverage cell cycle networks from the budding yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae into the fission yeast Schizosaccharomyces pombe alongside S.pombe time series gene expression data, and to jointly infer networks in both S.pombe and S.cerevisiae from time series gene expression datasets. This approach is able to recapitulate known interactions in the S.pombe cell cycle network and identifies a novel role for Gas1, a 13betaglucanosyl transferase (SPAC19B12.02c) as a major hub in the S.pombe cell cycle. Finally, in Section 4, we outline the advantages of this approach and discuss other possible applications and future developments.

discussion deciphering complex biological networks and elucidating how those networks influence emergent properties increasingly rely on piecing together many diverse sets of experimental data. The ability to leverage data from several related species is particularly desirable, and would allow the vast amount of information obtained in model orthologous gene regulatory networks i103 organisms to be translated into more medically or economically relevant ones. Possible applications include the joint learning of grn s associated with disease progression in mice and humans, or the direct leveraging of networks associated with seed yield, seed quality, stress tolerance or resistance that have been constructed in the model plant Arabidopsis into crops. Despite the underlying similarities in the grn s of closely related species, however, significant evolutionary differences may still exist that can confound standard approaches to inferring grn s from large scale transcript omics data. Here, we have developed two Bayesian approaches to network inference that allow for such leveraging of interspecies data. These models perform better than a related approach on in silico benchmarks, and are robust to small amounts of orthologue mis labelling and to gene duplication. We have also successfully used them to leverage information about the S.cerevisiae cell cycle network into S.pombe, and also performed JI between S.cerevisiae and S.pombe. Our analysis of the networks in S.pombe showed some agreement with the literature, although the true positive rate was relatively low, perhaps reflecting that the 'gold standard' networks we used did not necessarily contain many direct interactions. Nonetheless, our method identified a number of known key cell cycle interactions and predicted a novel role for Gas1 (SPAC19B12.02c) in cell cycle activities. The methods outlined here share many of the same principles as earlier works (). Our methods, however, rely on graph kernels to capture the similarity between labelled graphs, rather than explicit evolutionary models. Broadly speaking, the labelling procedure requires that nodes to be assigned to groups, which can be informed by manually curated lists of orthologues, or on the basis of sequence similarity (). Because the networks are additionally informed by time series data, the method is robust to some mis labelling of nodes, although more adaptive procedures can be envisaged in which node labels are assigned, or refined, within the inference procedure (). In general, there is no explicit requirement to use labelled graph kernels, although doing so represents an effective way of encoding biological expectations that orthologues function similarly between species. Graph kernels for unlabelled graphs do exist, and could be used within ocs i which would favour similar structures between the networks as a whole, without placing any implicit restraints on where a given node belongs with respect to the others: that is, the joint prior in the method would favour similar network properties rather than similar biological positioning. One possible future line of work could focus on combining labelled and unlabelled graph kernels for situations in which only smaller sets of orthologues can be identified. The diversity of graph kernels, however, may be problematic, as it is not immediately clear which graph kernels yield the best results for a given situation. Here, we have used three different graph kernels, with the WL kernel appearing to offer better performance than the graph let and shortest path kernels overall. It is not currently clear why this might be, although one possibility is that the graph let and shortest path kernels are not suited to the small or densely connected networks we used for benchmarking. Alternatively, the choice of b for the shortest path and graph let kernels may be inappropriate. Future approaches might therefore look to address how to tune b automatically within the algorithm as in. It has been noted, however, that at high values of b, the MCMC procedure, that is, a Gibbs update of the parental set of each node in turn, begins to fail due to the high modality in the parameter space. To develop approaches that can tune b, more advanced MCMC algorithms will be needed (). Alternatively, another promising approach would be to automatically combine multiple graph kernels together allowing for increased flexibility in characterizing network similarity, albeit at additional computational costs. Finally, as well as the flexibility conferred on the inference process by using graph kernels, our approach allows the possibility of exploiting other properties of graph kernels. Because the graph kernels we have used are positive semi-definite, this will allow algorithms that not only jointly infer networks over species, but also tie those networks to phenotypic observations via a separate Gaussian process model utilizing the graph kernels as a covariance function.
