Motivation: in fire Insertion Finder via Restriction digest, is a novel software tool that allows for the computational identification of transposon insertion sites in known bacterial genome sequences after transposon mutagenesis experiments. The approach is based on the fact that restriction endonuclease digestions of bacterial DNA yield a unique pattern of DNA fragments with defined sizes. Transposon insertion changes the size of the hosting DNA fragment by a known number of base pairs. The exact size of this fragment can be determined by Southern blot hybridization. Subsequently, the position of insertion can be identified with computational analysis. The outlined method provides a solid basis for the establishment of a new high throughput technology. Availability and implementation: The software is freely available on our web server at www in fire tubs de. The algorithm was implemented in the statistical programming language R. For the most flexible use, in fire is provided in two different versions. A web interface offers the convenient use in a web browser. In addition, the software and source code is freely available for download as r packages on our website.

introduction transposons are mobile genetic elements capable of random insertions into host genomes. This fundamental feature has been employed for decades to inactivate genes, leaving a detectable signature at the locus of integration. This well developed genetic technique is applicable to the genomes of viruses, prokaryotes and eukaryotes (). Various modifications of traditional transposon mutagenesis facilitated the development of new techniques, such as signature target mutagenesis (), transposon mediated differential hybridization (), genetic footprinting () and gene expression analysis (). The crucial step of all these methods is the localization of the transposon insertion sites. In the course of the last years, several methods for the localization of transposons have been developed. Among them are the vector ette PCR, inverse PCR and the cloning of restricted chromosomal DNA fragment into vectors with subsequent amplification (). single primer PCR allows a rapid identification of insertion sites, but often requires optimization of the amplification conditions (). With the improvement of DNA sequencing techniques, it became possible to determine the transposon insertion site from the bacterial chromosomal DNA (). Here, we present a novel computational method for the identification of insertion sites in transposon mutagenized bacterial genomes. The functionality of the algorithm was successfully demonstrated using a mini-Tn10 transposon Legionella pneumophila Corby library.

discussion in this study, we developed a new approach for the prediction of transposon insertion sites in transposon mutagenized bacteria. in fire is based on a simple algorithm and allows the simultaneous determination of insertion sites by standard restriction digestion combined with Southern blot hybridization. The method is applicable to all sequenced organisms and therefore has a great potential to bring benefits in a wide range of applications. In comparison to existing methods, in fire has several advantages. First, the method does not require intensive experimental optimization, therefore numerous insertion mutants can be analyzed simultaneously. Second, in fire overcomes the difficulties associated with the amplification and sequencing of gc rich genomic fragments. Lastly, the method allows for the determination of exact position of a transposon insertion in any genome. This is especially important for identification of the transposons, which are integrated in repetitive sequences. Although long repeated sequences are carefully annotated in sequenced genomes, less attention was paid to investigate the biological role of these structures (). Thus, in fire may also open new ways to analyze the functions of repeated sequences in prokaryotic genomes.
