Motivation: De novo transcriptome assembly is an integral part for many rnase q workflows. Common applications include sequencing of non model organisms, cancer or meta transcriptome s. Most de novo transcriptome assemblers use the de Bruijn graph (DBG) as the underlying data structure. The quality of the assemblies produced by such assemblers is highly influenced by the exact word length k. As such no single km er value leads to optimal results. Instead, dbg s over different km er values are built and the assemblies are merged to improve sensitivity. However, no studies have investigated thoroughly the problem of automatically learning at which km er value to stop the assembly. Instead a suboptimal selection of km er values is often used in practice. Results: Here we investigate the contribution of a single km er value in a multi km er based assembly approach. We find that a comparative clustering of related assemblies can be used to estimate the importance of an additional km er assembly. Using a model fit based algorithm we predict the km er value at which no further assemblies are necessary. Our approach is tested with different de novo assemblers for datasets with different coverage values and read lengths. Further, we suggest a simple post processing step that significantly improves the quality of multi km er assemblies. Conclusion: We provide an automatic method for limiting the number of km er values without a significant loss in assembly quality but with savings in assembly time. This is a step forward to making multi km er methods more reliable and easier to use. Availability and implementation a general implementation of our approach can be found under: https://github.com/SchulzLab/KREATION.

introduction with the massive amounts of rnase q data () produced for many non model organisms, the interest for de novo analyses of rnase q data has increased over the last few years. These analyses include the de novo assembly of full length transcripts, expression level computation of novel transcripts, detecting differentially expressed transcripts and detection of related genes in close species or polymorphism detection (). Due to the large number of applications, several methods have been proposed for the de novo transcriptome assembly. Most of these methods are based on building a de Bruijn graph (DBG) from the rnase q reads. The nodes of the DBG are substring of length k (also know as km ers obtained from the reads and two nodes are connected if they have k-1 overlap. After obtaining the DBG, various heuristic algorithms are used to predict alternative transcripts from each DBG component. These algorithms either use a single km er value () or merge transcripts generated from multiple km er values to obtain a final non-redundant assembly (). A multi km er based approach outperforms a single km er based approach as one km er size rarely fits all genes (). Large km er values resolve repeats and regions with many errors, whereas small km er values are necessary to connect lowly expressed transcripts that have low coverage regions. Hence even for most single km er methods it is beneficial to run the assembler for different km er values and merge the final results. But the question about the core set of km er sizes that are needed to achieve a good quality assembly has received little attention for multi km er methods. Currently, approaches (i) use the default km er series of the assembler which is tuned on a limited number of datasets, (ii) select an arbitrary subset of km er sizes or (iii) use all possible km er sizes for the assembly. In practice that means that most often the resulting assembly is suboptimal. Either important km er sizes are missed (cases 12) and therefore the sensitivity is reduced or the complete assembly contains more mis assemblies than necessary and has wasted computational resources (case 3). Selecting a suitable km er size for de novo assembly has been previously explored in the context of genomic sequencing. For example () devised a method to select the best km er size for de novo genome assembly. Simpson devised a method to estimate a number of interesting characteristics like paths with variations or repeats in the DBG for different km er sizes from a fm index over the reads (). Further, computing an optimal km er range for de novo read error correction was also proposed (). However, all these methods assume a uniform coverage distribution and are not applicable to nonuniform rnase q data. Here we investigate in detail how the number of km er assemblies can be minimized to save computational resources, without a large loss in sensitivity and without using a reference annotation for assembly quality assessment. We introduce the k reation km er Range EstimATION) algorithm that is based on two novel contributions: (i) a comparative clustering of single km er assemblies to define extended clusters which gives a notion of the assembly quality and (ii) a heuristic model assessment that allows to predict the optimal stopping point for a multi km er assembly method. We show that our new de novo strategy automates the choice of km er sizes to explore, while achieving close to optimal performance.
