Motivation: A tool for reliably predicting the impact of variations on protein stability is extremely important for both protein engineering and for understanding the effects of Mendelian and somatic mutations in the genome. Next Generation Sequencing studies are constantly increasing the number of protein sequences. Given the huge disproportion between protein sequences and structures, there is a need for tools suited to annotate the effect of mutations starting from protein sequence without relying on the structure. Here, we describe in ps a novel approach for annotating the effect of non-synonymous mutations on the protein stability from its sequence. in ps is based on SVM regression and it is trained to predict the thermodynamic free energy change upon single point variations in protein sequences. Results: We show that in ps performs similarly to the state of the art methods based on protein structure when tested in cross validation on a non-redundant dataset. in ps performs very well also on a newly generated dataset consisting of a number of variations occurring in the tumor suppressor protein p53. Our results suggest that in ps is a tool suited for computing the effect of non-synonymous polymorphisms on protein stability when the protein structure is not available. We also show that in ps predictions are complementary to those of the state of the art structure based method mcs m. When the two methods are combined, the overall prediction on the p53 set scores significantly higher than those of the single methods. Availability and implementation: The presented method is available as web server at http://inps. bio comp uni boit
introduction the increasing amount of data generated by the several sequencing initiatives () calls for accurate and reliable computational approaches to predict the impact of mutations on the phenotype, and possibly for methods to correlate them with diseases (). More to this, the ability of accurately predicting the impact of non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms ns snps on protein stability is essential for understanding the effects of human genome variations (). Several methods have been developed so far to predict the effect of ns snps on the protein stability. Some of them require the knowledge of the protein structure: auto mute (), cups at (), d mutant (), fold x (), Eris (), pop music (), SDM (), mcs m ((). Other methods are based only on protein sequences ip trees tab or can use both protein sequences and protein structures (I-mutant2.0:). Besides the single methods, other approaches have been tested, such as meta predictors is table filtering approaches based on the available information about mutations in the same protein site () and ensemble predictors (). The available methods were trained under different conditions and on different datasets. They address three different questions. Briefly, they can: (i) predict the DDG real values (in regression) upon residue substitution, (ii) predict whether a residue substitution promotes a DDG increase or decrease (two class predictors) and (iii) predict whether a mutation is stabilizing, destabilizing or not affecting the protein stability (three class predictors). Noticeably, it is also very difficult to find a good benchmark test set, since all the methods have to deal with the paucity of the available experimental data. Almost all methods are trained on data derived from the same source: the pro therm database (). In 2010, Khan and vih in en made a thorough evaluation of the different methods considering them as 'pure classifiers' (i.e. the methods that predicted the DDG real values were converted into classifiers). The authors showed that the best performing methods (I-Mutant3.0, d mutant and fold x exploit the protein structure information (). Recently, Pires et al. (2014a) introduced two relevant advancements when evaluating the performance of different methods. They described: (i) a more correct way to avoid similarity between training and testing sets when adopting a cross validation procedure and (ii) a new independent benchmark consisting of a wide range of mutations occurring in the tumor suppressor protein p53, not present in the original pro therm database (). In this article, we take advantage of these efforts, and we describe in ps (a predictor of the Impact of nonsynonymous variations on Protein Stability), a new method that computes the DDG values of protein variants without requiring the knowledge of the protein structure. We show that when evolutionary information is taken into account, in ps performances are very close to those obtained by the state of the art methods based on 3D structure, mcs m and Duet. We also show that in ps predictions are complementary to those obtained with mcs m (or Duet) and that their combinations, obtained by averaging the predictions, outperform previously introduced and combined approaches ().
