Motivation: Cellular mRNA levels originate from the combined action of multiple regulatory processes , which can be recapitulated by the rates of pre mrna synthesis, pre mrna processing and mRNA degradation. Recent experimental and computational advances set the basis to study these intertwined levels of regulation. Nevertheless, software for the comprehensive quantification of RNA dynamics is still lacking. Results: INSPEcT is an R package for the integrative analysis of rna and 4sU-seq data to study the dynamics of transcriptional regulation. INSPEcT provides gene level quantification of these rates, and a modeling framework to identify which of these regulatory processes are most likely to explain the observed mRNA and pre mrna concentrations. Software performance is tested on a synthetic dataset, instrumental to guide the choice of the modeling parameters and the experimental design.

introduction the study of eukaryotic cellular transcriptional responses following external stimuli or during cell differentiation processes is typically based on profiling of mRNA abundances over time. This allows discriminating between early, intermediate and late responsive genes, but leaves undisclosed the dynamic transcriptional regulatory processes determining the resulting observed RNA level. mRNAs are synthesized within the nucleus thanks to a complex process that is controlled by numerous factors, including chromatin accessibility, transcription factors binding events and RNA Polymerase release (). The joint action of these regulatory processes determines the efficiency of transcription, which can be recapitulated and measured as the RNA synthesis rate. Precursor mRNA molecules pre mrnas originated through the synthesis step, need to be processed in order to make a mature, functional mRNA molecule. Maturation involves the excision of the introns and the addition of a 5 0-cap and a 3 0 poly adenine tail, modifications that co occur at the transcription site and impact transcript stability once mature mRNA is produced, it is translocated within the cytoplasm where it can be either translated or bound by rna binding proteins and targeted for degradation (). Overall, synthesis, processing and degradation rates determine the levels of mRNA within the cell, and the combined modulation of these three elements determines changes in mRNA abundance over time (). Recently, an experimental technique based on a short pulse of a labeled nucleotide 4thio uridine 4sU) and consequent incorporation in the nascent RNA was developed, to measure the concentration of nascent mRNA and for the genome wide inference of gene level synthesis rates. During a short pulse (typically few minutes), cells medium is complemented with 4sU, a naturally occurring modified uridine that is incorporated within mRNA growing chains with minimal impact on cell viability (). RNA chains having incorporated the uridine variant (newly synthesized) can be isolated from the total RNA population by biotinylation and purification with streptavidin coated magnetic beads, followed by sequencing (4sU-seq). Consequently, various studies have elucidated the different roles that RNA synthesis, processing and degradation can have in response to various environmental conditions in yeasts and metazoans (), illustrating how various and complex can be the transcriptional responses originated by the concerted action of these regulatory mechanisms. Few analytical methods were proposed for the study of these regulatory mechanisms. The DTA Bioconductor package was used to determine synthesis and degradation rates in a number of works (). The main limitations of this tool are (i) the lack of inference of processing rates, (ii) the lack of computationally based normalization between 4sU and rnase q data, and more importantly (iii) the absence of a modeling framework. A similar method was described for the inference of synthesis and degradation rates, lacking a corresponding software implementation (). In a first study, raban i et al. introduced a framework where rates are modeled to improve the confidence in the determination of rates absolute values. Additionally, this modeling approach was used to discriminate between constant and varying degradation processes (). This method was extensively described in the publication but no software implementation was released. At the moment of this publication, the method described in was extended to distinguish between constant and varying processing rates and a software implementation was released (DRiLL) (). The software currently available has major limitations in terms of both documentation and implementation, and lacks functionalities to test its performance and provide guidance on the most suitable experimental design. Given the limitations of these studies and their corresponding tools, we developed INSPEcT (INference of Synthesis, Processing and dEgradation rates in time course analysis), a computational tool for the joint analysis of 4su and rnase q data providing robust synthesis, processing and degradation rates over time, based on a system of differential equations describing mRNA production, maturation and degradation processes. INSPEcT can determine the probability of a given combination of rate(s) to regulate the gene expression during the time course by modeling and comparing alternative scenarios of transcriptional regulation. Importantly, INSPEcT allows testing the performance of the tool given a dataset and predicting how many additional replicates and or time points would be needed to reach the desired performance.
