Motivation: Gene normalization (GN) is the task of normalizing a textual gene mention to a unique gene database ID. Traditional top performing GN systems usually need to consider several constraints to make decisions in the normalization process, including filtering out false positives, or disambiguating an ambiguous gene mention, to improve system performance. However, these constraints are usually executed in several separate stages and can not use each others input output interactively. In this article, we propose a novel approach that employs a Markov logic network (MLN) to model the constraints used in the GN task. Firstly, we show how various constraints can be formulated and combined in an MLN. Secondly, we are the first to apply the two main concepts of co-reference resolution discourse salience in centering theory and transitivity— to GN models. Furthermore, to make our results more relevant to developers of information extraction applications, we adopt the instance based precision recall f measure (PRF) in addition to the article wide PRF to assess system performance. Results: Experimental results show that our system outperforms baseline and state of the art systems under two evaluation schemes. Through further analysis, we have found several unexplored challenges in the GN

introduction the task of recognizing named entities in text, i.e. identifying words phrases that indicate the presence of entities and associating them with their corresponding semantic types has been studied extensively. In biomedical fields, the most commonly used type of named entity recognition is gene mention recognition. In the largest public biomedical text mining competitions, bio creative I and II, the top gene mention recognition systems achieve f scores of 89% () However, gene mention recognition results are still hard to apply in real world research applications because of two main issues: name variation and entity ambiguity (). Name variation * To whom correspondence should be addressed is when one gene is referred to by many textual expressions. For example, in, the authors refer to the gene 'EntrezGene ID 966' as 'CD95', protect in 'membrane inhibitor of reactive lysis,' and '(MIRL)'. Entity ambiguity is when the same name can refer to more than one gene. For example, a search for the name 'CD59' in EntrezGene returns 377 matches belonging to over 10 species. To spur development in regards to the above two issues, bio creative has held several open competitions for the task gene normalization (GN), mapping recognized gene mentions to standard database IDs, such as EntrezGene or UniProt IDs (). Continuing with the example in, a GN system must normalize the human gene 'CD59' and all its instances in the first sentence to the EntrezGene ID 966. However, 'CD59' in the title must be normalized to 12 509 because it is a murine gene. bio creative has also curated and released standard evaluation datasets as part of its GN tasks, and many novel and useful approaches have come out of the bio creative workshops. Generally speaking, after gene mention recognition, the current top performing systems include three main steps: (i) candidate ID matching, (ii) false positive (FP) filtering and (iii) disambiguation. Some research only focuses on improving one of these steps. For example utilized logistic regression to improve the accuracy of candidate IDs matching proposed a knowledge based disambiguation approach that combines features from text and knowledge sources via an information retrieval method used the maximum entropy model to classify valid IDs from candidate ID lists collected external knowledge for each gene, such as chromosome locations, gene ontology terms, etc. and calculated the likelihoods stating the page 2587 25862594
