Motivation: Recently, a shift was made from using Gene Ontology (GO) to evaluate molecular network data to using these data to construct and evaluate GO. du tk owski et al. provide the first evidence that a large part of GO can be reconstructed solely from topologies of molecular networks. Motivated by this work, we develop a novel data integration framework that integrates multiple types of molecular network data to reconstruct and update GO. We ask how much of GO can be recovered by integrating various molecular interaction data. Results: We introduce a computational framework for integration of various biological networks using penalized non-negative matrix tri factorization pn mtf. It takes all network data in a matrix form and performs simultaneous clustering of genes and GO terms, inducing new relations between genes and GO terms (annotations) and between GO terms themselves. To improve the accuracy of our predicted relations, we extend the integration methodology to include additional topological information represented as the similarity in wiring around non-interacting genes. Surprisingly, by integrating topol-ogies of bakers yeasts protein protein interaction, genetic interaction (GI) and co-expression networks, our method reports as related 96% of GO terms that are directly related in GO. The inclusion of the wiring similarity of non-interacting genes contributes 6% to this large GO term association capture. Furthermore, we use our method to infer new relationships between GO terms solely from the topologies of these networks and validate 44% of our predictions in the literature. In addition, our integration method reproduces 48% of cellular component , 41% of molecular function and 41% of biological process GO terms, outperforming the previous method in the former two domains of GO. Finally, we predict new GO annotations of yeast genes and validate our predictions through GIs profiling.

introduction in many areas of biomedical research, ontologies play an important role in unification of knowledge as a hierarchy of terms and their mutual relationships. Among widely used ontologies is Gene Ontology (GO), which describes genes and gene products in terms of their associated biological process (BP), molecular function (MF) and cellular component (CC) (). GO is a current major source of information for annotating genes and proteins across various species and providing tools for systematic assessment of experimental gene sets via enrichment analysis. Since its foundation, GO has been growing in size and complexity containing today vast amounts of annotated biological data. Initially, GO was manually curated by domain experts and members of the research and annotation communities. However, because of their inconsistency in translation to GO terms and relations, manual curation s have encountered many difficulties (). Additionally, rapid development of technologies for biological data acquisition has resulted in an accumulation of biological data exceeding our ability to interpret (). To overcome these problems, many computational tools for automatic gene and protein annotation have been devised. Much effort has been invested in assessing the accuracy of such annotation predictions (). Methods for gene annotation prediction have either followed approaches that transfer annotations from well observed to partially observed genes based solely on sequence similarity () or approaches that directly predict function of unknown genes using machine learning methods (). Recent methodologies focus more on integration of distinct biological data sources, which contribute to more accurate predictions of gene annotation. The availability of genomic level information from high throughput measurements of genetic and protein interactions, messenger RNA expression profiles and metabolic pathways has created new opportunities for function prediction. A major challenge is how to integrate all these diverse data to predict annotations of yet unannotated proteins. Among the widely used computational methods addressing this problem are Bayesian reasoning (), network based analysis (), kernel based statistical learning () and matrix factorization based data fusion (). All these methods have demonstrated that the integration of complementary biological data significantly improves accuracy of gene function annotation prediction. Recent work incorporated large gene and protein interaction networks into a probabilistic clustering procedure to reconstruct the GO (). It identified new terms and relations that were missing from GO based solely on network topology. This work provides evidence that a large part of GO can be reconstructed using only topologies of molecular networks. In this work, we propose a new data integration method for prediction of GO term annotations of unannotated genes and finding new relations between existing GO terms purely from network topology. The method is based on penalized nonnegative matrix tri factorization pn mtf for heterogeneous *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com data clustering (). pn mtf has been used for prediction of disease associations (), identification of cancer subtypes (), predicting protein protein interactions pp is () and detecting phenotype gene associations (). Here, we extend this method to take multiple types of molecular network data and use them to reconstruct and update GO with new information. We apply our method to Saccharomyces cerevisiae data used by: PPI network, genetic interaction (GI) network, gene co-expression (Co-Ex) network and integrated functional network known as yeast net (). Our method takes all data in a matrix form and performs simultaneous clustering of genes and GO terms inducing new associations between genes and GO terms and between GO terms themselves. We extend the integration methodology to include similarity in wiring around non-interacting genes. We measure this by distance graph let degree vectors gd vs (). graph lets and graph let based measures have bridged molecular network topology and biological function. For instance, simple homogeneous clustering of proteins in a PPI network based on the GDV similarity has revealed groups of proteins with a common biological function (). Therefore, we add these to incorporate more topology into the integration process and improve accuracy of predictions. Using various measures for assessing the quality of our prediction, we systematically examined the contribution of these additional topological constraints to GO prediction. graph let based similarity has not been exploited in any of the previous network integration approaches. Surprisingly, we find that our method can successfully reconstruct almost the entire GO by using solely topology of molecular interaction networks. Furthermore, we predict new GO term associations and gene annotations from integrated topologies of molecular interaction network and validate our predictions.
