Motivation: The MEDLINE database, consisting of over 19 million publication records, is the primary source of information for biomedicine and health questions. Although the database itself has been growing rapidly, the search paradigm of MEDLINE has remained largely unchanged. Results: Here, we propose a new system for exploring the entire MEDLINE collection, represented by two unique features: (i) interactive: providing instant feedback to users query letter by letter, and (ii) fuzzy: allowing approximate search. We develop novel index structures and search algorithms to make such a search model possible. We also develop incremental update techniques to keep the data up to date. Availability: Interactive and fuzzy searching algorithms for exploring MEDLINE are implemented in a system called i pubmed freely accessible over the web at

introduction the PubMed service provided by NCBI is the most widely used system for accessing the MEDLINE database, which contains more than 19 million (as of) records from approximately 5000 selected publications covering biomedicine and health from 1950 onwards. It handles over 2 million searches per day, has become an essential part of every biomedical scientist's research effort, and is increasingly employed by physicians and patients as an indispensable tool to answer clinical questions. PubMed uses keywords and Boolean operators to retrieve documents from MEDLINE. To perform a search, users need to first compose a keyword query, submit it to the server, wait and finally review the returned search results. If the returned results are too many or not pertinent, the users need to modify or refine the query, and resubmit it to the server. This type of try and see search paradigm requires the users to have certain knowledge to choose wisely the appropriate keywords, and often requires numerous iterations to reach the desired documents (), creating significant delay between the initial query and the final results. Even though there are several systems supporting search in the medical domain such as cit explore and HubMed, all of these systems use this traditional search paradigm. Recently, PubMed has started to give automatic suggestions as typing the query; but these suggestions are not based on the entire dataset. The suggestions are obtained by performing prefix search on the popular queries made by other users. For instance, if we type 'Weinberg oncogene' to search for publications written by 'Weinberg' related to 'oncogene', PubMed does not give any suggestions, while there are a lot of documents containing these terms. In addition, PubMed can not automatically handle approximate query search. Instead, it provides a list of candidate terms close to the query string and relies on users to pick up the right one, based on which it then performs exact search. This limitation is problematic for searching biomedical literatures, for which user queries frequently contain difficult to spell author names, non-standard gene symbols or specialized medical terms. We propose an interactive and dynamic model of information retrieval and implement it to explore MEDLINE. The new model incorporates two unique features: (i) interactive: providing instant feedback as the query is being typed, and (ii) fuzzy: allowing approximate search (). Under this model, the system updates search results online invoked by every keystroke from the users. This type of search as you type paradigm allows the users to find results 'on the fly' and enables them to dynamically modify or refine queries, removing the major barrier between queries and search results. The existing PubMed system has several similar features, such as 'browsing the index of terms', 'automatic term mapping' and 'truncating search terms'. The main difference between these features and i pubmed s features is that we do prefix based search on the fly as the user types in a query, and we allow minor errors. The new search paradigm poses significant computational challenges, due to the requirement of high interactive speed and the capability of relaxing keyword conditions. The total round trip time between the client browser and the backend server includes the network delay and data transfer time, query execution time on the server, and the javascript execution time on the client browser. To achieve an interactive speed, this total time should not exceed milliseconds (typically within 100 ms); the query execution time on the server should be even shorter. This high speed is challenging to achieve especially since we allow keywords to appear at different places and to match approximately, both of which are not permitted by the popular autocompletion method implemented in major search engines () and more recently by pubmed in this article, we show that the goal of high speed for interactive and fuzzy search is achievable by employing novel index structures, caching techniques and search algorithms. We implemented these algorithms and techniques in a system called i pubmed (stands for Interactive PubMed), which is currently able to search the entire MEDLINE. The preliminary algorithmic aspect of this work was presented previously in a conference proceeding (). Here, we provide a full description of the algorithms used and deploy these techniques specifically for MEDLINE search, incorporating additional methods such as incremental update, article ranking and parallel computing shows a screenshot of the system as a user typed in four keywords am yo lateral ri lu z acco. The user intended to find the publications describing the treatment of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis with drug riluzole authored by zoc colella. PubMed at NCBI failed to return any publication record for this query as it contains a misspelling of the author name and two incomplete query keywords. In contrast, i pubmed was able to retrieve the right publications. More importantly, because the search results are returned in real time as query strings are being typed, users can adaptively change queries until desired results are reached. The i pubmed interface has several important features that make it powerful and user friendly. It allows users to specify whether the system should do fuzzy search by clicking the on or off links. In addition, keywords in returned results are highlighted in the client's browser, with different colors depending on whether it is a fuzzy or an exact match. The system has also a pagination feature that helps users easily navigate through the results by using the provided links for the previous and next pages.

discussion we described a new system for searching the MEDLINE database, implemented in a fully functional server called i pubmed. Comparing with the most widely used PubMed system at NCBI, the i pubmed system contains two unique features: (i) being interactive, returning search results on the fly and allowing users to change queries adaptively, and (ii) allowing approximate search. We emphasize that our goal is not to replace the PubMed system, which contains a number of useful features not implemented in i pubmed such as limiting search within different fields, allowing boolean operations and so on. If a user knows exactly the authors and the title of the paper he or she wants to find, the PubMed system is sufficient for the task. Instead, i pubmed is targeting at a different category of searches, in which the users have uncertain or partial information regarding the publication records that they would like to find as showed in. Through interactive search, i pubmed allows users to refine and or modify queries on the fly without the need of issuing separate, independent queries as in PubMed. Although i pubmed is fully functional in its current form, there is a lot of room for further improvement. Currently, i pubmed does not search abstracts of articles due to computational constraints. In the future, we plan to increase the scalability of the system by utilizing parallel computing and expanding system hardware. We also plan to increase the functionality of i pubmed in several other directions, such as limiting search in different fields and allowing boolean operations. Our goal is to make i pubmed a truly practical and useful tool for biomedical researchers.
