We have implemented a computational platform moks is kaan that integrates pathway, protein protein interaction, genome and literature mining data to result in comprehensive networks for a list of genes or proteins. moks is kaan is able to generate hypothetical pathways for these genes or proteins as well as estimate their activation statuses using regulation information in pathway repositories. An automatically generated result document provides a detailed description of the query genes, biological processes and drug targets. moks is kaan networks can be downloaded to Cytoscape for further analysis. To demonstrate the utility of moks is kaan we use gene microarray and clinical data from 200 glioblastoma multiforme primary tumor samples and translate the resulting set of 124 survival associated genes to a network.

introduction high throughput technologies, such as gene microarrays, are effective in profiling gene expressions genome wide and have become standard means in biomedicine. Consequently, a multitude of computational methods have been successfully applied to high throughput data resulting in the discovery of a large number of disease associated genes. An unresolved issue to date, however, is how to interpret these results, such as gene lists, in biological context. A popular solution is to apply statistical methods to identify Gene Ontology categories or pathways that are associated with the differentially expressed genes (DEGs), such as spi a (), sub pathway miner () and kob as (). These methods typically use a pathway repository, such as KEGG (), to assess whether a pathway is significantly influenced by the DEGs and produce a p value or a score for each pathway. Many pathways crosstalk, i.e. two or more pathways influence each other. Thus, a gene may belong to a number of canonical pathways or be influenced by many canonical pathways. Pathway analysis methods that do not take cross talking into account may not be able to produce a comprehensive view on the impact of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the DEGs to pathways. In order to address the crosstalk issue, we have implemented a computational platform called moks is kaan that integrates data from KEGG pathway and drug databases (), cPath ()-based Pathway Commons repository of pathways (http://www.pathwaycommons.org/pc/), Ensembl genome database (), PINA protein protein interaction database () and SNPs3D literature mining database () to translate gene or protein lists to networks. moks is kaan is able to (i) rapidly give an overview of the biological functions of a list of genes, such as degs and (ii) form hypothetical pathways consisting of interconnections between the genes. It can also be used to suggest drugs to target proteins. moks is kaan generated networks can be viewed as PDFs or downloaded to Cytoscape () for further analysis.

discussion in the network for 124 survival associated genes, the genes EGFR and ErbB2 are linked with a brown line with a triangle, which denotes a protein complex (). Indeed, the genes EGFR and ErbB2 encode receptors that can form a heterodimer, which activates downstream signaling affecting various phenotypes, such as cell growth and cell motility (). The moks is kaan network further suggests that the EGFR and ErbB2 complex activates the PI3K pathway directly (a node with eight PIK3 genes) and via JAK1. Activation of the PI3K pathway directly by EGFR and ErbB2 is well known (). However, JAK1 has been mainly associated with the immune system () and is not considered as a part of the canonical EGFR pathway (). Thus, the latter connection between EGFR/ErbB2 and PI3K pathway could have remained unnoticed without a comprehensive network approach. The drug data integration together with Gene Ontology analysis, protein interactions and gene annotations are provided in Supplementary Material. In summary, we have designed and implemented a platform that allows translation of gene lists to comprehensive networks by integrating pathway, protein protein interaction, literature mining and genome data. This integrated set of regulatory connections allows identification of novel and experimentally testable hypotheses. The networks generated by the moks is kaan platform can be downloaded to Cytoscape for editing and advanced analysis.
