Motivation: Our goal is to develop a screening platform for quantitative profiling of colony organizations in 3D cell culture models. The 3D cell culture models, which are also imaged in 3D, are functional assays that mimic the in vivo characteristics of the tissue architecture more faithfully than the 2D cultures. However, they also introduce significant computational challenges, with the main barriers being the effects of growth conditions, fixations and inherent complexities in segmentation that need to be resolved in the 3D volume. Results: A segmentation strategy has been developed to delineate each nucleus in a colony that overcomes (i) the effects of growth conditions, (ii) variations in chromatin distribution and (iii) ambiguities formed by perceptual boundaries from adjacent nuclei. The strategy uses a cascade of geometric filters that are insensitive to spatial non-uniformity and partitions a clump of nuclei based on the grouping of points of maximum curvature at the interface of two neighboring nuclei. These points of maximum curvature are clustered together based on their co planarity and proximity to define dissecting planes that separate the touching nuclei. The proposed curvature based partitioning method is validated with both synthetic and real data, and is shown to have a superior performance against previous techniques. Validation and sensitivity analysis are coupled with the experimental design that includes a non transformed cell line and three tumorigenic cell lines, which covers a wide range of phenotypic diversity in breast cancer. Colony profiling, derived from nuclear segmentation, reveals distinct indices for the morphogenesis of each cell line. Availability: All software are developed in itk vtk and are available at https://vision.lbl.gov/Software/3DMorphometry. Contact: b parvin lbl gov or h chang lbl gov
introduction high content screening of cell culture models continue to play a major role in evaluating therapeutic targets, elucidating aberrant pathways and identifying novel biomarkers. Traditionally, cell culture models are based on 2D monolayers that are grown on plastic, but recent research indicates that cells grown in a 3D culture often be have more like cells in living organisms. This is partly due to the cellular organization, cell cell contact and unique cell extracellular matrix (ECM) adhesions and motility phenotype. 3D cell culture models offer many advantages over the 2D monolayer systems: (i) Each cell forms an ellipsoid with dimensions of 1030 microns (), whereas in the monolayer system, each cell remains flat with a thickness of a few microns; (ii) In a 3D system, the entire cell surface is exposed to neighboring cells and extracellular matrix. In contrast, in a 2D system, a small percentage of the cell surface is exposed to the other cells. These differences in shape and surfaces are significant given that $30% of the genome is known to encode membrane bound macromolecules (). (iii) Studies have shown that 3D morphological organizations have a profound impact on cellular function, such as morphogenesis (), development (), response to therapy () and patterns of gene expression (). (iv) Unlike conventional 2D models, 3D culture assays distinguish tumor phenotypes from non-malignant ones, where the tumor phenotype is often manifested as multicellular organizations (). Owing to these differences, there is a greater need for characterizing and quantifying organizations through the delineation of each cell. Because the protocols for nuclear staining are well established, we focus on delineating nuclear regions, which also provides context for quantifying multiple endpoints in high content screening. In addition, cell by cell analysis enables characterization of heterogeneity, which is one of the central challenges and a fundamental property in cellular systems (). It has been suggested that heterogeneity enables cellular systems to explore a wide range of phenotypic responses, where a specific subpopulation may serve as a predictor of response to perturbations. An example is shown in supplementary in the Supplementary Section. Given the aforementioned motivation, there is clear gap in quantitative methods for characterizing multicellular organizations for the next generation of high content screening systems. This is partly due to the massive amounts of 3D data that have to be acquired through confocal or deconvolution microscopy, and the ambiguities that were present in the 2D assays () must now be resolved in the 3D volume space. In this article, we propose a pipeline, implemented within the Insight Segmentation and Registration Toolkit (ITK) and The Visualization Toolkit (VTK) framework, to delineate each nucleus and to profile morphometric and colony organization. At an abstract level, our approach is an extension of a previously developed method for monolayer cell culture models (). Nevertheless, such an extension has proven to be challenging because of structural heterogeneity and partitioning of clumped nuclei in a 3D volume. Our approach consists of a *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com series of filters that remove ambiguities in (i) the nuclear stain through prior modeling; (ii) the structural heterogeneity through object level adaptive smoothing; and (iii) the perceptual boundaries within a clump of cells by detecting and grouping points of maximum curvature. These processes are intrinsically compute intensive in a 3D volume. As a result, the segmentation strategy initially detects isolated nuclei and groups of nuclei that are clumped together prior to subsequent partitioning. The net result is increased throughput for processing a large amount of data. The proposed method is referred to as curvature based partitioning (CBP) in the remainder of the article. Organization of the article is as follows. Section 2 provides a brief review of the motivation, issues and prior research. Section 3 discusses details of the experimental design and computational approach. Section 4 provides validation results on synthetic and real data, and compares performance of CBP with the previous techniques. Section 5 compares morphogenesis of multiple cell lines in terms of the colony organization. Section 6 concludes the article.
