Motivation: high throughput single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have become the standard platform for linkage and association analyses. The high SNP density of these platforms allows high resolution identification of ancestral recombination events even for distant relatives many generations apart. However, such inference is sensitive to marker mistyping and current error detection methods rely on the genotyping of additional close relatives. Genotyping algorithms provide a confidence score for each marker call that is currently not integrated in existing methods. There is a need for a model that incorporates this prior information within the standard identical by descent (IBD) and association analyses. Results: We propose a novel model that incorporates marker confidence scores within IBD methods based on the lander green Hidden Markov Model. The novel parameter of this model is the joint distribution of confidence scores and error status per array. We estimate this probability distribution by applying a modified expectation maximization (EM) procedure on data from nuclear families genotyped with Affymetrix 250K SNP arrays. The converged tables from two different genotyping algorithms are shown for a wide range of error rates. We demonstrate the efficacy of our method in refining the detection of IBD signals using nuclear pedigrees and distant relatives. Availability: plink e a new version of PLINK with an extended pairwise IBD inference model allowing per marker error probabilities is freely available at:

introduction the emergence of high throughput genotyping platforms introduces various challenges to genetic mapping. In particular, high throughput genotyping data contain errors which even in small rates can obscure signals in genetic mapping (). An important analysis in genetic mapping is identical by descent (IBD) inference, which aims to detect regions inherited from a common ancestor (). Merlin and Plink are examples of popular tools for IBD inference in pedigrees and distantly related individuals, respectively (). These tools are based on an efficient implementation of the Lander and Green algorithm for IBD inference (). It is well recognized that IBD inference is sensitive to errors which in certain situations could result in loss of IBD signals (). Although not complete, error detection in pedigree data can be quite effective and cleaning processes became a routine prior to IBD analysis (). A major drawback of error detection methods is the need to set threshold values for flagging a mistyped genotype. These thresholds balance between false positive and false negative rates and often depend on other specific parameters such as pedigree structure, allele frequencies and error rates (). Moreover, IBD mapping using distant relatives and case control association analyses hold little or no information that facilitate error detection in individual genotypes. The alternative in these situations is to conduct strict QC procedures and re genotype suspicious samples (). An alternative approach is to incorporate error probabilities per marker in the statistical models (). Models that deal with inconsistent markers within long, nearly identical stretches of markers were implemented for identical in state (IIS) and identical by descent (IBD) methods. For example, Purcell et al. implemented an IIS procedure for detecting runs of homozygosity allowing for a few mismatched markers within a candidate run ().allowed a small probability of marker error for estimating homozygosity by descent and pairwise IBD probabilities, respectively (). These models assume a predefined error rate for the entire data despite the fact that marker error probability may not be homogeneous. Error rates may vary between samples, due to sample specific preparation details (Wellcome Trust). Marker error probabilities may also depend on specific SNP parameters. For example, markers with extreme allele frequencies are generally more challenging for genotype calling algorithms ().Page: 2881 28802887

discussion in this study, we proposed a model that integrates confidence scores within the standard model for IBD inference. Confidence scores measure the amount of certainty a genotyping algorithm has in each call and therefore contain relevant information for error modeling even without pedigree data. We found that the joint distribution of confidence score and error status holds relevant information for error Page: 2886 28802887
