Motivation: Despite ongoing cancer research, available therapies are still limited in quantity and effectiveness, and making treatment decisions for individual patients remains a hard problem. Established subtypes, which help guide these decisions, are mainly based on individual data types. However, the analysis of multidimensional patient data involving the measurements of various molecular features could reveal intrinsic characteristics of the tumor. large scale projects accumulate this kind of data for various cancer types, but we still lack the computational methods to reliably integrate this information in a meaningful manner. Therefore, we apply and extend current multiple kernel learning for dimensionality reduction approaches. On the one hand, we add a regu-larization term to avoid overfitting during the optimization procedure, and on the other hand, we show that one can even use several kernels per data type and thereby alleviate the user from having to choose the best kernel functions and kernel parameters for each data type beforehand. Results: We have identified biologically meaningful subgroups for five different cancer types. Survival analysis has revealed significant differences between the survival times of the identified subtypes, with P values comparable or even better than state of the art methods. Moreover, our resulting subtypes reflect combined patterns from the different data sources, and we demonstrate that input kernel matrices with only little information have less impact on the integrated kernel matrix. Our subtypes show different responses to specific therapies, which could eventually assist in treatment decision making. Availability and implementation: An executable is available upon request.

introduction cancer is not only a very aggressive but also a very diverse disease. Therefore, a number of approaches aim to identify subtypes of cancer in a specific tissue, where subtypes refer to groups of patients with corresponding biological features or a correlation in a clinical outcome, e.g. survival time or response to treatment. Nowadays, most of these methods utilize single data types (e.g. gene expression). However, subtypes that are merely based on information from one level can hardly capture the subtleties of a tumor. Therefore, huge efforts are made to improve the comprehensive understanding of tumorigenesis in the different tissue types. large scale projects, e.g. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) (), provide a massive amount of data generated by diverse platforms such as gene expression, DNA methylation and copy number data for various cancer types. Still, we require computational methods that enable the comprehensive analysis of these multidimensional data and the reliable integration of information generated from different sources. One simple and frequently applied method to combine biological data consists of clustering the samples using each data type separately and subsequently integrating the different cluster assignments. The latter step can be performed either manually or automatically, e.g. using consensus clustering (). Manual integration tends to be biased, leading to inconsistent results. However, both manual and automatic integration can not capture correlated information between the data types because low signals might V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
