Motivation: Infectious disease research is generating an increasing amount of disparate data on pathogenic systems. There is a growing need for resources that effectively integrate, analyze, deliver and visualize these data, both to improve our understanding of infectious diseases and to facilitate the development of strategies for disease control and prevention. Results: We have developed Disease View, an online host pathogen resource that enables infectious disease centric access, analysis and visualization of host pathogen interactions. In this resource, we associate infectious diseases with corresponding pathogens, provide information on pathogens, pathogen virulence genes and the genetic and chemical evidences for the human genes that are associated with the diseases. We also deliver the relationships between pathogens, genes and diseases in an interactive graph and provide the geolocation reports of associated diseases around the globe in real time. Unlike many other resources, we have applied an iterative, user centered design process to the entire resource development, including data acquisition, analysis and visualization. Availability and Implementation: Freely available at http://www.patricbrc.org; all major web browsers supported.

introduction infectious diseases are complex systems, involving multiple organisms (e.g. pathogens and hosts) interacting across different environments and time scales. Much of the data that we have related to infectious disease is multidimensional, incomplete and likely to be biased in ways we do not fully understand. In addition, these data are often not integrated nor interoperable making it difficult for researchers from different disciplines to communicate and relate their work to others. Integrating these data remains a formidable challenge, and although a handful of individual parts of the system. An iterative process of gathering data, interviewing representative users, and evolving user interface designs to develop and publically release PATRIC Disease View. user interfaces (UIs). Specifically, we apply usability engineering: a cost effective user centered iterative process that ensures a high level of effectiveness and efficiency in complex interactive user interfaces (). Our ultimate goal is to use informatics frameworks to help reduce barriers in infectious disease research and development by providing a broader spectrum of infectious disease, pathogen, host and outbreak data to enable infectious disease centric access and analysis of host pathogen interactions. Toward this end, we have developed Disease View, a host pathogen data and visualization resource that integrates diverse data sources, including host, pathogen, host pathogen interactions and disease outbreak, and provides a mechanism for infectious disease centric data analysis and visualization. We instantiate Disease View as a component of PATRIC: a National Institutes of Health (NIH), National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID) bioinformatics resource center containing a wealth of resources related to bacterial pathogens ().
