Motivation: Genome browsers that support fast navigation through vast datasets and provide interactive visual analytics functions can help scientists achieve deeper insight into biological systems. Toward this end, we developed Integrated Genome Browser i gb a highly configurable, interactive and fast open source desktop genome browser. Results: Here we describe multiple updates to i gb including all new capabilities to display and interact with data from high throughput sequencing experiments. To demonstrate, we describe example visualizations and analyses of datasets from rnase q chips eq and bisulfite sequencing experiments. Understanding results from genome scale experiments requires viewing the data in the context of reference genome annotations and other related datasets. To facilitate this, we enhanced i gbs ability to consume data from diverse sources, including Galaxy, Distributed Annotation and i gb specific quick load servers. To support future visualization needs as new genome scale assays enter wide use, we transformed the i gb codebase into a modular, extensible platform for developers to create and deploy all new visualizations of genomic data. Availability and implementation: i gb is open source and is freely available from http://bioviz.org/igb.

introduction genome browsers are visualization software tools that display genomic data in interactive, graphical formats. Since the 1990s, genome browsers have played an essential role in genomics, first as tools for building, inspecting, and annotating assemblies and later as tools for distributing data to the public (). Later, the rise of genome scale assays created the need for a new generation of genome browsers that could display user's experimental data alongside reference sequence data and annotations. Integrated Genome Browser i gb first developed in 2001 at Affymetrix, was among the first of this new breed of tools. i gb was first written to support Affymetrix scientists and collaborators who were using whole genome tiling arrays to probe gene expression and transcription factor binding sites as part of the ENCODE project (). As such, i gb was designed from the start to display what we would now call 'big data' in bioinformatics millions of probe intensity values per sample. i gb was one of the first genome browsers to support visual analytics, in which interactive visual interfaces augment our natural ability to notice patterns in data (). The 'thresholding' feature described below is an example. Because early i gb development was publicly funded, Affymetrix released i gb and its companion graphics library, the geno viz Software Development Kit (), as open source software in 2004. Since then, we have continued to develop i gb adding new features and incorporating libraries and code from many other open source projects, e.g. Cytoscape (). Our first article introducing i gb appeared in 2009 () and focused on visualization of tiling array data. Here, we describe new visual analytics and data integration features developed for high throughput sequencing data. We also introduce a new plug-in V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
