Motivation: argonaut e interacting wg gw proteins are characterized by the presence of repeated sequence motifs containing glycine (G) and tryptophan (W). The motifs seem to be remarkably adaptive to amino acid substitutions and their sequences show non contiguity. Our previous approach to the detection of GW domains, based on scoring their gross amino acid composition, allowed annotation of several novel proteins involved in gene silencing. The accumulation of new experimental data and more advanced applications revealed some deficiency of the algorithm in prediction selectivity. Additionally, w motifs though critical in gene regulation, have not yet been annotated in any available online resources. Results: We present an improved set of computational tools allowing efficient management and annotation of w based motifs involved in gene silencing. The new prediction algorithms provide novel function-alities by annotation of the w containing domains at the local sequence motif level rather than by overall compositional properties. This approach represents a significant improvement over the previous method in terms of prediction sensitivity and selectivity. Application of the algorithm allowed annotation of a comprehensive list of putative argonaut e interacting proteins across eukaryotes. An in depth characterization of the domains properties indicates its intrinsic disordered character. In addition, we created a knowledge based portal w hub that provides access to tools and information on rnai related tryptophan containing motifs. Availability and implementation: The web portal and tools are freely available at http://www.comgen.pl/whub.

introduction despite the fact that different classes of small RNAs are generated by largely different biogenesis pathways, in order to function they associate with argonaut e proteins (AGOs) and form the rna induced silencing complex (RISC) (). The 'guide strand' of the sRNA duplex directs the AGOs to specific targets on the DNA (transcriptional gene silencing) or RNA post transcription gene silencing) through base complementarity. On the target molecule, the AGO proteins interact with GW proteins, which are characterized by the presence of repeated sequence motifs containing two amino acids: glycine (G) and tryptophan (W). These motifs mediate direct interaction with various AGO protein family members throughout the eukaryotic kingdom (). Most recently, it has been shown that some viruses contain polypeptides that mimic host encoded proteins with wg gw motifs and act as bait for the argonaut e to hack into the host's essential effector of RNA silencing (). Over the years, our view of GW proteins has evolved from them being a static platform for clustering of AGO proteins to functional domains composed of short tryptophan containing modules that coordinate vital steps in gene silencing (). The extremely divergent sequence, variable lengths (ranging from 22 to up to 650 aa) and number of composing dipeptide wg gw repeats (from 1 to up to 40) make the WG/ GW domain difficult to identify using in silico methods (). Therefore, our previous approach () was based on scoring gross compositional amino acid properties of the sequence rather than plain linear similarity. However, the more advanced and detailed applications revealed some deficiency of the algorithm in prediction selectivity. Additionally, the initial method did not include identification of the recently described, new types of w based motifs (referred to here as w motifs which are involved in interactions with the ccr4 not complex and mRNA translational repression and de adenyl ation processes (). Deficiency of a comprehensive resource for functional GW/ GW proteins in any of the central protein [e.g. UniProt (), RefSeq (and/ or specialized domain databases [e.g. Pfam (), InterPro ()] as well as quickly accumulating knowledge about the properties of the w based agoccr4 not interacting proteins inspired us to develop new computational tools to facilitate efficient management and annotation of w motifs. The novel prediction approach addresses all the faults of the previous method and provides novel functionalities by annotation of the tryptophan containing domains involved in gene silencing at the local sequence motif level, rather than by searching for large regions of multiple wg gw motifs. We developed w hub a knowledge based portal that provides *To whom correspondence should be addressed. access to all available information on rnai related w containing motifs in order to address the need for a centralized source of information about this structurally and functionally unusual group of proteins.

discussion the most important aspect of to days digital biology is access to data. The increasing amount of information requires new tools and approaches that will allow for fast and accurate information retrieval and data mining. Very often the data are spread across many databases and publications. This is evident especially in the case of new and developing subjects of scientific research that have not yet been completely defined and have not been enclosed by mature tools and resources. Research on wg gw proteins represents one example of such research enterprises the proteins are investigated on local bases in which scientists concentrate on single proteins from particular organisms. However, the available accumulated knowledge would allow for a more global and synthetic view of this very interesting group of proteins. The w hub portal is a user oriented and comprehensive approach for collecting all available knowledge on the biology of agoccr4 not interacting w motifs. We have created an efficient and attractive interface that facilities exploration of up-to-date information, the discovery of new relationships between data records and drawing biologically relevant conclusions concerning highly specific w containing motifs. The implementation of new computational tools involving a position based approach instead of the composition based prediction method resulted in the annotation of new groups of proteins that may interact with argonaut es. These include, among others, rrm containing hnRNP proteins and dead box helicases. Many promising predictions are already the subject of experimental verification. Our methods use the modern information technologies of machine learning and move the ago protein identification process to a new level, i.e. where the user receives a clear functional classification of a tested sequence instead of a set of score numbers that is difficult to interpret. The annotation results show that the presented computational approach can distinguish ago binding sites from other functional w containing motifs (e.g. ccr4 not despite the high amino acid composition similarity between these two types of sequences (Supplementary). This supports the finding by about the distinct functions of these two w based domains. Unfortunately, the limited number of available ccr4 not binding motifs did not allow to build prediction models for this group of sequences. Nevertheless, we have already implemented all of the functionality into the w hub portal, but the quality of the predictions may vary. As soon as new data are available, they will be incorporated into the prediction procedure. An in depth analysis of the properties of experimentally verified and novel predicted proteins allowed for classification of the w based domains into the IDD class. A fast evolution rate, biased amino acid composition, single amino acid repetitions () and excessive length polymorphism conform well to the characteristics of i dds. This expands knowledge on this new and intensively investigated group of functional domains. On the other hand, it may help in further research on agoccr4 not interaction domains including computational and experimental approaches.
