Motivation: Storing, annotating and analyzing variants from next generation sequencing projects can be difficult due to the availability of a wide array of data formats, tools and annotation sources, as well as the sheer size of the data files. Useful tools, including the g atk an novar and bed tools can be integrated into custom pipelines for annotating and analyzing sequence variants. However, building flexible pipelines that support the tracking of variants alongside their samples, while enabling updated annotation and reanalyses, is not a simple task. Results: We have developed variant tools, a flexible annotation and analysis toolset that greatly simplifies the storage, annotation and filtering of variants and the analysis of the underlying samples. variant tools can be used to manage and analyze genetic variants obtained from sequence alignments, and the command line driven toolset could be used as a foundation for building more sophisticated analytical methods. Availability and implementation: variant tools consists of two command line driven programs v tools and v tools report. It is freely available at http://varianttools.sourceforge.net, distributed under a GPL license.

introduction tracking samples and predicted variants from next generation sequencing projects often requires building custom analysis pipelines. Data standards such as the Browser Extensible Data (BED) (), General Feature Format and Variant Call Format (VCF) () file specifications can be used to represent these variants in a common format, simplifying integration of tools and the construction of these analysis pipelines. Difficulties include the integration of diverse annotation sources and the management of many large intermediate files containing millions of predicted variants and millions more associated annotations for each sample. These annotation sources and intermediate files often have fundamental inconsistencies using either 0-or 1 based coordinates and potentially different genomic builds, which can complicate their management and integration. * To whom correspondence should be addressed for biologists or analysts who have familiarity with programming and running tools from the command line, there are many useful tools that can be integrated into custom pipelines to annotate and filter variants. These tools include an novar () and bed tools (). However, building effective pipelines that relate variants to their samples and sample attributes (such as cases and controls), while applying multiple annotation sources require a large customization effort. A framework for building pipelines that facilitate simple, reproducible and recurrent analyses is currently lacking. Therefore, we have developed variant tools, a flexible, open source toolset upon which custom pipelines can be easily constructed. This toolset facilitates the storage of variants (alongside their sample details) as well as the annotation, filtering and reporting of these variants at multiple levels starting with variant reports based on individual samples to project wide variant reports.

discussion despite an intuitive command line interface, some high level reports, such as calculating sample transition transversion ratios or reporting the number of variants per gene, involve several v tools commands. To simplify the use of variant tools, we provide a reporting command v tools report that generates example summary reports. These reports make the use of variant tools more practical, and the v tools report source code provides examples of how to combine and further customize v tools commands. Within variant tools, variants are linked to but stored separately from their annotations within a relational database, helping to conserve disk space by removing the need to store large and repetitive intermediate annotation files. Database indexes are automatically created to improve query performance during annotation and filtering, though these do add to the storage requirements of variant tools. For an example, we created a v tools project with 44 whole genome VCF files with 161 million predicted sample variants. This required 3.3GB of disk space to store the variants and indexes within an SQLite database compared to 2GB of disk space for the VCF files compressed or 9GB uncompressed. A benefit, however, of the v tools approach is that these variants were stored using both hg18 and hg19 genomic coordinates within SQLite. When using a mac pro workstation with two quad core Intel Xeon Processors at 2.26 GHz and 8GB of RAM, the project creation required 3.5 hours. This time can be reduced to an hour if variants are processed in parallel by v tools on a cluster system before they are merged to a larger project. The time required for subsequent annotation and filtering of these variants ranged from 1 to 10 min. Additional details and other examples can be found in the tutorials section of the software website. We have provided a preconfigured but customizable framework for the analysis of variants from next generation sequence data. Although our efforts were motivated by a desire to produce initial, non statistical analyses, we are currently expanding our software to include a suite of powerful tests for association studies. Our general framework will allow the implementation and comparison of a wide array of analytical methods. Funding: National Institutes of Health (grants R01AR044422, U01 GM 92666, 5R03CA143982 and 1R01HG005859); sc his sle r Foundation (to F.A.S.L.); Lyda Hill Foundation (to B.P.).
