Motivation: Histone modifications are a key epigenetic mechanism to activate or repress the transcription of genes. Datasets of matched transcription data and histone modification data obtained by chips eq exist, but methods for integrative analysis of both data types are still rare. Here, we present a novel bioinformatics approach to detect genes that show different transcript abundances between two conditions putatively caused by alterations in histone modification. Results: We introduce a correlation measure for integrative analysis of chips eq and gene transcription data measured by RNA sequencing or microarrays and demonstrate that a proper normalization of chips eq data is crucial. We suggest applying Bayesian mixture models of different types of distributions to further study the distribution of the correlation measure. The implicit classification of the mixture models is used to detect genes with differences between two conditions in both gene transcription and histone modification. The method is applied to different datasets, and its superiority to a naive separate analysis of both data types is demonstrated. Availability and implementation: r bioconductor package

introduction modifications of histone proteins are an epigenetic mechanism to regulate gene transcription and are fundamental to stem cell differentiation as well as to the genesis of cancer (). Histone modifications can be localized genome wide using chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing chips eq (). Recently, several studies used this technique to explore the role of different chromatin states in transcriptional regulation (), especially when chips eq data are restricted to genomic regions like genes. Mixture models have been used in many ways to cluster or classify genes. Recent applications include integrative analyses of various data types (), including gene transcription together with either DNA copy number (van wie ringen and van), DNA methylation () or transcription factor binding activity (), as well as assessing concordance between chip chip and chips eq platforms (). Models may consider a fixed number of components or allow for a flexible and even infinite number of components. The standard techniques for fitting such mixture models are EM algorithms in frequentist statistics (; van wie ringen and van) and Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC) algorithms for Bayesian mixture models implying a prior distribution on the mixture (). Input measures for mixture models are case specific such as different log ratio intensity measurements or transformed p values. In traditional clustering using mixture models, each cluster is represented by one Gaussian component. The number of clusters is determined by an external criterion or, especially in a Bayesian context, estimated within the model (). However, often clusters are poorly fitted by a single component; as a remedy, models involving a mixture of mixtures have been introduced in which each cluster is represented by a mixture itself (see, for frequentist and Bayesian approaches, respectively). In this work, we present a model involving a mixture of mixtures that circumvents overfitting and identifiability problems both by considering a fixed number of clusters suggested by the biological task and by fitting a fixed number of components corresponding to different types of distributions. The latter reduces the number of necessary mixture components and is beneficial for interpretation. Although a similar approach has been applied on chips eq data by, our innovation lies in using a Bayesian framework that compared with the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm holds several benefits, such as the possibility of assessing the uncertainty through credible intervals and less dependence on initial values. Furthermore, we apply our model on data obtained from integrating gene transcription and chips eq datasets. We demonstrate the advantages of our method over the EM approach and over a separate analysis of both datasets on simulated data as well as on actual biological data. In Section 2, we first describe our data matching and integration approach and subsequently present our Bayesian mixture model. Section 3 gives a description of results obtained on two different datasets and a simulation study. A discussion follows in Section 4 and final conclusions in Section 5.

discussion the presented results are consistent with the literature (with respect to the association between gene transcription and histone modifications. Results from the simulated dataset and from comparing two biological replicates from the ce bpa dataset give evidence for a high specificity when detecting transcripts with differences in both datasets. Furthermore, the simulation study indicates that a reasonable sensitivity may be achieved. This is substantiated by the good reproducibility of the classification results when splitting the ce bpa dataset into two datasets of sample size one. Using distributions of different types is beneficial for classifying transcripts in our Bayesian mixture model approach. In combination with a small fixed number of components, it helps to avoid label switching problems that often occur for mixture models with a large number of normal components, of which a considerable proportion often remains empty. In preliminary analyses, a mixture model using exclusively normal components had to use 15 components to achieve both a good overall fit and three contiguous classes where the proposed new model only needs six. one tail of the Z distribution to contain considerably more probability mass than the other one. When larger sample sizes are available, uncertainty could be modeled across samples for each locus, introducing an additional model layer. An adapted measure Z could be defined similarly as was done in schafer in a frequentist context, focusing on the summands in an externally centered correlation coefficient, which could be assigned an, e.g. normal distribution.

conclusion we propose quantile normalization for chips eq data and a novel Bayesian mixture approach involving a mixture of mixtures and distributions of different type (normal and exponential) to classify transcripts based on a new measure for the correlation between histone modifications and gene transcription. This integrative analysis was able to detect transcripts for which alterations in transcript abundances and histone modification exist between two different conditions in several datasets, including different histone modification and transcription data from either microarrays or rnase q. We assessed the sensitivity and specificity of our approach based on simulated data and on biological replicates and showed its superiority toward naive separate analyses. Given the fact that modern studies are often not limited to one type of 'omics' data, the presented method is a useful and important tool for the integrated analysis of epigenetic and transcription data.
