Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) play important roles in general biological processes and diseases pathogenesis. Identifying miRNA target genes is an essential step to fully understand the regulatory effects of miRNAs. Many computational methods based on the sequence complementary rules and the miRNA and mRNA expression profiles have been developed for this purpose. It is noted that there have been many sequence features of miRNA targets available, including the context features of the target sites, the thermodynamic stability and the accessibility energy for mirna mrna interaction. However, most of current computational methods that combine sequence and expression information do not effectively integrate full spectrum of these features; instead, they perceive putative mirna mrna interactions from sequence based prediction as equally meaningful. Therefore, these sequence features have not been fully utilized for improving miRNA target prediction. Results: We propose a novel regularized regression approach that is based on the adaptive Lasso procedure for detecting functional mirna mrna interactions. Our method fully takes into account the gene sequence features and the miRNA and mRNA expression profiles. Given a set of sequence features for each putative mirna mrna interaction and their expression values, our model quantifies the down-regulation effect of each miRNA on its targets while simultaneously estimating the contribution of each sequence feature to predicting functional mirna mrna interactions. By applying our model to the expression datasets from two cancer studies, we have demonstrated our prediction results have achieved better sensitivity and specificity and are more biologically meaningful compared with those based on other methods. Availability and implementation: The source code is available at: http://nba.uth.tmc.edu/homepage/ liu mirna lasso
introduction micrornas (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules (containing about 22 nucleotides) that play important gene regulatory roles in plants and animals (). These small RNA molecules exert their function through interacting with their mRNA targets. The base paring of the miRNA with the 3 0 untranslated region (3 0-UTR) of their targets triggers the mRNA degradation and/ or protein translational inhibition (). Since their initial discovery, miRNAs have emerged as key gene regulators in a variety of fundamentally important biological processes, including cell proliferation and apoptosis (). Dysregulation of miRNA function has played a role in the pathophysiology of many human diseases, particularly in cancer (). MiRNAs represent one of the most abundant classes of gene regulatory molecules in mammals. There are more than 2000 distinct miRNAs identified in human (). It is also demonstrated that 60% of human mRNAs are subject to mirna mediated post-transcriptional regulation (). Among the mirna mrna regulatory relationships, multiple miRNAs are often required to act cooperatively to target the same gene. On the other hand, a given miRNA is able to pair with up to hundreds of genes (). This multiplicity effect poses a great challenge to comprehensively depict a functional mirna mrna regulatory network. Over the past decade, many miRNA algorithms and tools have been independently developed to study the mirna mrna interactions, including targets can (), pic tar (), micro tcds (), miRanda (), rna hybrid (), and TargetS (). The majority of these algorithms are based on several well known rules derived from important sequence features of target recognition, including sequence complementarity (seed matching), thermodynamic stability, target site context, target site accessibility and the degree of site conservation (). Despite these efforts, the number of false predictions obtained from these computational methods is still high, and more importantly, these predictions only represent static mirna mrna interactions. Therefore, expression profiling has been proposed as a complementary information resource to study dynamic mirna mrna regulatory relationship. As a result, many approaches tend to integrate this expression information into sequence based target predictions to obtain more reliable miRNA targets. These methods assume that the expression levels of a given miRNA and its targets are inversely correlated due to the down-regulation effect of miRNAs on its targets. For example, gen mir computes the probabilities of having an interaction between a miRNA and its putative targets in a Bayesian framework (). A lasso based method enforces a sparseness solution and combines the RISC availability with sequenced based prediction and expression data (). Another related method named talas so includes non-positive constraints in their regularized least squares (). However, when integrating the sequence based predictions on mirna mrna interactions with the expression data, these approaches perceive these putative interactions as equally meaningful, as long as they meet certain criteria defined by the sequence based prediction rules. Therefore, these approaches neglect the full spectrum of available sequence features of miRNA targets. A recent study addresses this problem to some degree by combining sequence context scores and conservation information with expression profiles. This model is specifically designed for mirna overexpression experiments to identify targets of a particular miRNA in different cell conditions (). In this article, we propose a novel regularized regression approach for detecting mirna mrna interactions. Our approach takes into account the miRNA and mRNA expression profiles from matched samples while incorporating sequence features of putative targets beside the seed match rule between a miRNA and its targets, we use three additional features: (i) Thermodynamic stability, measured by the hybridization energy between a miRNA and its candidate target sites. For a successful hybridization, the binding energy DG hybrid must be thermodynamically favorable, i.e. negatively valued (); (ii) Target site accessibility, which is energetically measured by DDG, the free energy required to un pair the nucleotides on the target site to make the target accessible. It includes two components: DG hybrid and DG disruption. The latter is the cost of altering the local structure of the mRNAs, which also prefers to be negatively valued (); (iii) Target site context. Several context features are related to miRNA targeting and have been found to boost the target site efficacy (). Among these features, the local AU content near the target site, the target position within 3' UTR, the residue pairing at 3' end of miRNA, the target site abundance, and the seed pairing stability are used as the determinants to generate the target site context score by the targets can algorithm (). For different types of target sites, the contribution of these context features are calculated using different sets of regression parameters deduced by the algorithm. The combined context value, named the Context Score is then calculated as the sum of the contribution of these context features, plus the mean repression level of the targets with the corresponding seed match type. To ease the implementation of our method, we use the context score directly as an additional sequence feature. Our algorithm only quantifies the mirna mrna interactions from an initial set of putative mirna mrna pairs that were obtained from targets can human. Therefore, it works as a filter to the targets can human prediction results, and is expected to achieve a better accuracy by combining these sequence features and the expression data of miRNAs and mRNAs together. Through real data application, we have demonstrated that our method has achieved better sensitivity and specificity in predicting mirna target interactions, and the predicted targets are more biologically meaningful than other methods we compared.
