Motivation: Cytochrome P450 (CYP) is a superfamily of enzymes responsible for the metabolism of drugs, xenobiotics and endogenous compounds. CYP2D6 metabolizes about 30% of drugs and predicting potential CYP2D6 inhibition is important in early stage drug discovery. Results: We developed an original in silico approach for the prediction of CYP2D6 inhibition combining the knowledge of the protein structure and its dynamic behavior in response to the binding of various ligands and machine learning modeling. This approach includes structural information for CYP2D6 based on the available crystal structures and molecular dynamic simulations (MD) that we performed to take into account conformational changes of the binding site. We performed mod-eling using three learning algorithms –support vector machine, random forest and naive bayesian –and we constructed combined models based on topological information of known CYP2D6 inhibi-tors and predicted binding energies computed by docking on both X-ray and MD protein conforma-tions. In addition, we identified three md derived structures that are capable all together to better discriminate inhibitors and non inhibitors compared with individual CYP2D6 conformations, thus ensuring complementary ligand profiles. Inhibition models based on classical molecular descrip-tors and predicted binding energies were able to predict CYP2D6 inhibition with an accuracy of 78% on the training set and 75% on the external validation set.

introduction cytochrome P450 (CYP) is a superfamily of enzymes responsible for the metabolism of drugs, xenobiotic substances and endogenous compounds (). It has been estimated that about 75% of the marketed drugs are metabolized by cyp s the major CYP isoforms being 1A2, 2C8, 2C9, 2C19, 2D6 and 3A4 (). These enzymes detoxify the organism from various xenobiotics and activate some prodrugs by oxidation. Yet, oxidation sometimes leads to metabolites that are more active than the administrated drugs or activates pro carcinogens by creating highly reactive metabolite species. Inhibition of CYP is a complex process because it can correspond to a competitive inhibition in the active site, a modification of the substrate or metabolite flux between the active site and outside of the enzyme or an inhibition by a drug itself or by its metabolites time dependent inhibition) leading then to adverse drug drug interactions (). Thus, predicting potential CYP inhibition is important in early stage drug discovery. CYP2D6 metabolizes about 30% of drugs although it represents only 2% of hepatic cyp s (). Besides liver, intestine and kidney, CYP2D6 is also expressed in brain cells where it may be involved in metabolism of neurotransmitters such as serotonin (). CYP2D6 interacts with many drugs used for regulation of the central nervous system (psychotropics) or the cardiovascular system anti rhythmic drugs) (). This isoform is of particular interest as a large amount of drugs can be metabolized only by CYP2D6 (). Moreover, CYP2D6 is highly polymorphic () with more than a hundred of allelic variants () leading to poor, intermediate, extensive or ultra rapid metabolism that can render the administrated drug toxic or inefficient (). A number of modeling studies have been undertaken to understand the molecular basis of CYP2D6drug interactions and cyp2d6 related metabolism or inhibition (). Most of these analyses have been executed on homology models as the first X-ray structure of human CYP2D6 was solved in 2006 (). CYP inhibition is considered to be more difficult to predict than sites of metabolism (SOM) due to the lack of reactive sites (). Recently, a new approach for prediction of CYP inhibition, cyp rules using decision tree algorithm based on compound structural rules has been reported (). However, the extensive flexibility of the CYP2D6 structure, which represents its natural mechanism to accommodate diverse ligands into the active site (), can strongly affect the prediction of CYP inhibition when one uses traditional ligand based Quantitative structure property Relationships (QSAR) modeling (, ve dani and co-authors () adopted a mixed model protocol in which ligand based pre alignment was followed by ligand docking to the CYP2D6 protein structure with flexible side chains which allowed a quantification of ligand binding through multi-dimensional QSAR modeling validated on 56 CYP2D6 binders. The recently reported CYP2D6 structures in complex with different inhibitors () as well as the large number of experimentally validated CYP2D6 binders available in the PubChem BioAssay database (, b) permit to carry out a comprehensive analysis of CYP2D6 inhibition. In this study, we developed a new integrated in silico approach to predict inhibition of CYP2D6. The performed molecular dynamic simulations (MD) provided new insights about the conformational changes in the active site architecture of CYP due to the accommodation of different ligands. We found a set of modeled CYP2D6 conformations, which all together are able to correctly retrieve, after docking, 70% of the known CYP binders in 35% of the screened compound library. The computational protocol integrating docking into this pool and machine learning based modeling can be successfully applied to predict CYP2D6 inhibitors with 75% of success.

conclusion we report an original in silico approach for CYP2D6 inhibition based on the knowledge of the protein structure and dynamic behavior due to various ligand binding combined with machine learning modeling validated on a large number of active and inactive compounds. We explored a large portion of the conformational space of CYP2D6 using MD simulations with three different substrates that do not have an experimentally known bioactive conformation and identified MD structures displaying better performance than the X-ray apo and holo structures with regard to distinguishing between active and inactive compounds. In addition, we identified three md derived structures that are capable all together to better retrieve the active compounds compared with individual CYP2D6 conformations, confirming that these three binding site conformations have different and complementary substrate profiles. Our models predicting CYP2D6 inhibition showed an accuracy of 75% on the external validation set, results competitive with other recently reported prediction models note The performance of cyp rules a method that uses compound structural information (), is shown for the same external sets.
