Motivation: phenom ics is the study of the properties and behaviors of organisms (i.e. their phenotypes) on a high throughput scale. New computational tools are needed to analyze complex phenom ics data, which consists of multiple traits behaviors that interact with each other and are dependent on external factors, such as genotype and environmental conditions, in a way that has not been well studied. Results: We deployed an efficient framework for partitioning complex and high dimensional phenotype data into distinct functional groups. To achieve this, we represented measured phenotype data from each genotype as a cloud of points and developed a novel non-parametric clustering algorithm to cluster all the genotypes. When compared with conventional clustering approaches, the new method is advantageous in that it makes no assumption about the parametric form of the underlying data distribution and is thus particularly suitable for phenotype data analysis. We demonstrated the utility of the new clustering technique by distinguishing novel phenotypic patterns in both synthetic data and a high throughput plant photosynthetic phenotype dataset. We biologically verified the clustering results using four Arabidopsis chloroplast mutant lines.

introduction the plummeting cost of genome sequencing has ushered genomics into a new era. However, using genomics data alone is insufficient to answer most major questions in biology, because genomics data can not explain how genes control complex behaviors (). The next wave in biology will be to phenotype organisms and then integrate genomes with phenome s to identify genes that may govern phenotype and responses to the varying environment (). Especially, progress in phenotyping technologies is required to accelerate genetic mapping and gene discovery in genome wide association studies for dissecting the genetic architecture of important traits underlying phenotypes (). It thus is important to develop computational methods to examine potentially interacting phenotypes (i.e. measurable traits behaviors of a genetically diverse population for a given species in order to identify meaningful differences in biological function. The database phenom i cdb has been built to collect phenotypes of multiple species in free-text format with the goal to gain insights into the genetic origin of diseases (). pheno clustering was then V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com proposed to perform meta analysis on phenom i cdb using advanced natural language processing methods, resulting in clusters of genes by the similarity of their phenotypes that can be further explored for genotype phenotype interaction analysis (). However, since high throughput phenotyping quantitatively assesses multiple phenotypes of many traits simultaneously, it often generates a large amount of data rather than qualitative descriptions. New approaches to analyze quantitative phenom ics data are needed. One application is in bioenergy research, where computational techniques have been developed to detect, collect and study photosynthesis and related traits, such as growth, under non laboratory conditions and in high throughput (). In general, photosynthesis phenotypes can be altered in two ways, either through the changes of peripheral processes of the photosynthesis regulatory network or the modification of central components of the network (). Changes in peripheral processes tend to preserve regulatory relationships within the network. In contrast, altering the central components of photosynthesis is likely to perturb the relationships between key regulatory processes, leading to a different correlation among photosynthesis phenotypes. In this study, we focus on data analysis for the second case, to which we refer as inter functional analysis for photosynthesis phenotypes data. By taking advantage of the systematic knockout of genes encoding chloroplast targeted proteins in Arabidopsis thaliana, a model plant, we have conducted a large scale phenotype screen on the single knockouts and the references to understand the underlying molecular functions of the knockout genes in plant photosynthesis (). In our experiment, plants with single gene knockouts have been profiled by non-invasively measuring three key photosynthetic parameters, i.e. / II , q E and q I (that reflect photosynthesis efficiency in photosystem II, active energy dissipation, and photoinhibition, respectively), in response to fluctuating light conditions, resulting in a large volume of plant phenotyping data that allow us to determine the downstream effects of the knockout genes on photosynthesis in dynamic conditions (). More specifically, multiple fluorescence images () are taken for every plant as the light intensity is varied over time and the photosynthesis parameters () are derived from each image. As a result, each plant is characterized by a sequence of three dimensional vectors with each dimension corresponding to a different photosynthesis parameter. The objective of this study is to automatically identify gene groups with their photosynthesis phenotypes significantly different from reference based on the collected data. A natural first step is to examine the extremes, i.e. mutant lines that exhibit significantly different photosynthesis characters from the wild type in all of the three photosynthesis parameters. Although this simple technique has been shown to be effective for identifying potential biomarkers and drug targets, it is not an effective approach for exploiting the full potential of experimental results (). In this work, we take a holistic approach for inter functional photosynthesis data analysis. We develop an efficient workflow to effectively identify novel phenotypes based on mutant lines sharing similar measurements of photosynthesis parameters. The identified gene groups and their associated phenotypes are used to derive insight into the functions of and interactions between related genes. Based on existing annotations and literature for the well studied genes, we can associate biological processes with each phenotype pattern, which in turn can be used to reveal the functions for the poorly characterized genes (). Although numerous clustering algorithms have been developed, most of them require vector representation of data and thus can not be applied directly to our problem where each plant is represented by a sequence of vectors (). One simple way to handle the challenge is to run standard clustering algorithms (e.g. k means and hierarchical clustering) against all the vectors measured for different plants, and determine the cluster member for each plant by taking the major vote among the measured vectors. Another approach is to concatenate the sequence of vectors measured for each plant into a single vector, and apply standard clustering algorithms to the derived vectors. The main problem with these two approaches is that they are unable to effectively explore the correlation among different photosynthesis parameters revealed by the set of vectors measured for each plant. This is particularly important for photosynthesis data analysis because it is the correlation between photosynthesis parameters that helps understand the regulatory role of the mutated genes on the photosynthesis processes. We propose to address the above challenges of phenotype data analysis by developing a novel clustering technique named Non-parametric modeling, or n pm for short. We introduce a. The process of extracting data from photosynthesis phenotype experiment. (a) a series of fluorescence images, (b) the derived photosynthesis parameters (/ II  light, q E , q I ) for two genotypes, i.e. mutant line AT3G17830 and the wild type (used as reference) under dynamic environmental conditions, (c) the photosynthesis parameters of the same plants in 3D space. / II  light refers to a more advanced photosynthesis parameter named Linear Electron Flux cloud of points representation for each mutant line, with each point corresponding to a vector in the sequential phenotype measurements taken for the mutant line, where the correlation among photosynthesis parameters is captured by the 'shapes' of clouds. Based on the theory of kernel density estimation (KDE), we then apply a nonparametric clustering technique to group plants into the same cluster if their clouds share similar shapes (). When compared with the existing clustering algorithms, the key advantage of n pm is that it does not make any assumption about the underlying data distribution and thus is particularly suitable for phenotype data analysis. Our empirical study shows promising results of the proposed clustering technique on both synthetic and real photosynthesis datasets. We have biologically verified the clustering results using four Arabidopsis mutant lines for nuclear encoded chloroplast proteins. The experimental results demonstrate that n pm is able to generate testable hypotheses, which lead to new biological discoveries. We emphasize that although our empirical study is limited to photosynthesis data, the non-parametric clustering algorithm developed in this work is general and can be applied to other domains (e.g. gene expression data analysis).

conclusion sophisticated phenom ics measurements are becoming increasingly important for the discovery of important biological functions and genes (). Due to the complexity of phenom ics datasets, the conventional clustering approaches often fail to identify genes of distinguished functions because they have to make parametric assumptions about the underlying data distribution. There is thus an urgent need for new tools to analyze large and complex phenom ics datasets. The n pm method presented here represents an important advance over existing clustering algorithms because it avoids the parametric assumption of data distribution. A demonstration of our method on plant photosynthesis data shows that the proposed technique is effective in capturing mutant lines with similar photosynthesis profiles in comparison to the conventional clustering algorithms such as k means and hierarchical clustering. In the future, we plan to further improve our analysis by (i) conducting biochemical experiments to validate novel genes with the new phenotypes, and. Experimental verification of the gene groups identified by n pm. The proton flux vH  and the voltage gated proton conductance gH  was determined for the four selected t dna insertion mutant lines compared with wild type (Col-0). S ALK 106162 and SALK 072581 are from the qe sensitive cluster, SALK 044616 is from the wild type like cluster, and SALK 114469 is from the low qe cluster verification of the photosynthetic parameters for wild type (Col-0, used as the reference) and four t dna insertion mutant lines selected from the n pm clustering results. Measurement of q E and LEF was repeated (proportional to U II  light) using an IDEA spectrophotometer. SALK 106162 and SAL K 072581 are from the qe sensitive cluster. SALK 044616 is from the wild type like cluster. SALK 114469 is from the low qe cluster ii developing new clustering algorithms that also take into account the sequential order among photosynthesis measurements.
