Motivation: Gene regulatory network (GRN) inference based on genomic data is one of the most actively pursued computational biological problems. Because different types of biological data usually provide complementary information regarding the underlying GRN, a model that integrates big data of diverse types is expected to increase both the power and accuracy of GRN inference. Towards this goal, we propose a novel algorithm named iraf net integrative random forest for gene regulatory network inference. Results: iraf net is a flexible, unified integrative framework that allows information from heterogeneous data, such as protein protein interactions, transcription factor tf dna binding gene knock-down, to be jointly considered for GRN inference. Using test data from the dream 4 and dream 5 challenges, we demonstrate that iraf net outperforms the original random forest based network inference algorithm (GENIE3), and is highly comparable to the community learning approach. We apply iraf net to construct GRN in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and demonstrate that it improves the performance in predicting tf target gene regulations and provides additional functional insights to the predicted gene regulations. Availability and implementation: The R code of iraf net implementation and a tutorial are available at

introduction understanding the complex gene regulatory network (GRN) has an important role in current biomedical research. With the advent of high throughput technologies such as transcript omic and proteomic profiling, computational inference of GRN at genome scale are feasible and a large number of models have emerged (). Common challenges exist for inferring grn s including the non-linearity of regulatory relationships among genes, the incompleteness and no is iness characterizing genomic data, the presence of relatively fewer samples compared with the number of genes (the 'large p small n problem'). Therefore, successful GRN inference algorithms need to be sensitive to capture the non-linearity among genes, robust to avoid over-fitting and resilient to the limited number of samples. Among the various approaches developed so far, random forest has emerged as a strong player. As an ensemble learning algorithm, random forest performs extensive bootstrap sampling and random feature selection and relies on combining the outputs from a collection of non-linear learners to derive the final model. Such practice allows the delivery of excellent performance with moderate sample size requirement. Random forest has been used as an efficient and flexible tool to predict disease phenotypes () and its utility has been demonstrated in a variety of biological applications (introduced GENIE3, a random forest based algorithm for the construction of GRN. The performance of GENIE3 was evaluated on the DREAM 4 in silico size 100 challenge, the DREAM 4 in silico multifactorial challenge, and the DREAM 5 network inference challenge. In particular, GENIE3 was the best performer in both the DREAM 4 in silico multifactorial challenge () and DREAM 5 network inference challenge (). In order to better capture the direction of regulatory relationships proposed a random forest based algorithm which infers GRN from time series data. In particular, they demonstrated the superior performance of their algorithm over other existing methods such as dynamic Bayesian network and ordinary differential equations models. Although being very successful, these random forest based models derive GRN from a single data type, namely, the gene expression data. There is no direct way to integrate multiple genomics data such as protein protein interactions and expression from perturbation experiments in current implementations the importance of integrating multiple genomics information has been well recognized by the research community. One reason of doing so is that different data types usually provide non-redundant information about regulatory relationships; e.g. protein protein interactions are particularly informative for the topological structure of the network and the functions of neighboring genes (); while gene expressions from perturbation and time series experiments often provide more insights on the directionality or the causality of regulatory relationships. Multiple integrative models have been developed so far, such as Bayesian networks models (), sparse structural equation models (), and consensus techniques (). The limitations of many existing methods are the linearity and normality assumptions often made on gene regulations. For example, due to the computational complexity of the models, gene dependence structure is often approximated via a linear regression, which may not perform well under the presence of higher order interactions in the data. On the other hand, algorithms making no assumption on the linearity or normality can easily become computationally intractable when the number of genes significantly increases and, therefore, their applicability is limited to the construction of relatively small networks (). In this article, we propose iraf net a new algorithm in which different data types are integrated under a unified random forest framework. The key idea of iraf net is to introduce a weighted sampling scheme within random forest to incorporate information from other source of data. Specifically, the model considers the expression of each gene as a function of the expression of other genes. For each node in the tree ensemble, instead of randomly sampling N genes from the entire gene set as done by GENIE3 (), iraf net samples genes (the potential regulators) according to the information provided by other data such as protein protein interactions or expression data from perturbation experiments, so that genes supported by other data as potential regulators will be favorably sampled. By doing so, information embedded in other datasets is integrated into the network construction, while the effective search space of potential regulators is significantly reduced. To demonstrate the advantage of integrating multiple data in the construction of GRN, we consider synthetic data from the DREAM 4 () and the DREAM 5 () challenges, which have been used as gold test data sets for objectively comparing the performance of various GRN inference models. We show that iraf net performs better than previous models in most considerations. As a real data application, we apply iraf net to the inference of yeast GRN by integrating multiple public data sets. We show that our new approach has an improved performance in predicting transcription factor (TF) regulations and it also provides additional functional insights to the predicted gene regulations.

discussion in this article, we develop iraf net a unified framework based on random forest which constructs grn s by integrating information from multiple data types. Specifically, information from different data sources is used to derive a series of weights, which, then, are utilized for sampling potential regulators during the tree construction. This weighting scheme provides multiple benefits compared with the sampling procedure adopted by the standard random for both GENIE3 and iraf net we consider the set of 200 000 highest scored directed edges, referred to as D. As shown, the number of unique undirected edges a  b was 156 359 and 163 886 for GENIE3 and iraf net respectively. For each method, we show the number of GO categories with significant enrichment for different p value thresholds (0.05 and 001 for each model, the AUC and the a up r and corresponding 95% confidence intervals are reported. i202 f forest. In the original random forest algorithm, at each node, sampling is done by randomly selecting N potential regulators and, among them, the predictor maximizing the decrease in node impurity is chosen for the splitting rule. This strategy may be less effective when the number of informative predictors is small compared with the total number of genes; in such case, informative predictors have small chance of being chosen as candidates for the splitting rules. This will cause the importance scores of informative predictors to be lower compared to the cases when they have larger chance of being chosen as potential regulators. Simply increasing the number of trees may not resolve the aforementioned problem. In order to better illustrate this point, we applied GENIE3 to infer Network 1 from the DREAM 5 challenge using different tree numbers. As shown in, the predictive performance is relatively unchanged when we increase the tree number from 500 to 5000. This result is not surprising since a larger tree number is not going to significantly change the average score of a feature across all trees when T is already large. Our approach of weighted sampling allows potential regulators identified as informative by other genomic data to be more favorably selected. As a result, the corresponding importance score will be more favorably measured compared with other regulators with no prior support. The importance of appropriate prioritizing relevant features in high dimensional learning has been recognized by multiple works. For example, a recent work showed that using a bootstrap ranking to derive a robust prioritization of SNPs could significantly increase the performance of disease risk prediction (). Our work provides another demonstration on this concept and points out a direction to further improve the prediction performance under random forest framework. Besides reducing the curse of dimensionality, iraf net is expected to increase accuracy and coverage of GRN inference through integrating diverse information using its weighting scheme. Of course, this may not always be the case, as we have seen that when datasets of different quality and different origin are combined, the overall performance may actually reduce. In this work, we only illustrate the integration of limited types of genomic data. However, iraf net can be utilized to integrate almost any data type as long as its information can be transformed into prior knowledge regarding potential regulatory relationships. When compared with other integrative models like Bayesian network, the advantage of iraf net relies on its computational efficiency and the robust predictive performance resulting from its nonparametric nature. In fact, a limitation of many existing methods such as Bayesian networks are the linearity and normality assumptions often made to reduce the computational complexity of the algorithm. Although non-parametric Bayesian networks have been proposed in literature (), they are computationally intensive and generally require very large sample size. The computational complexity of Bayesian networks is amplified by the difficulties encountered in parallelizing the algorithm. In contrast to Bayesian networks, iraf net can flexibly model non-linearity and higher order interactions while being efficient on large scale applications as it can be easily executed with parallelization. Moreover, the performance of iraf net is in general robust to the number of trees in the random forest model upon our investigation. One open question in the estimation of GRN is whether the best performance is achieved by single models or by COMMUNITY methods which derive a consensus network combining results from different models (). recently claimed that COMMUNITY methods perform better than single methods. Despite their predictive performance, COMMUNITY methods remain computationally demanding algorithms which require the estimation of many different models followed by the estimation of the consensus network. For the dream 5 challenge, our algorithm was compared to COMMUNITY, which integrated the predictions of 35 teams participating in the challenge (). As we showed in the manuscript, iraf net is comparable to if not better than the COMMUNITY and, therefore, represents an efficient alternative (for the datasets used in this work, iraf net can finish in less than an hour on a cluster running in parallel). In our implementation of iraf net we treated time series and steady state gene expression data separately, one for deriving prior information regarding potential regulators, while the other as main input for random forest construction. Alternatively, they could be combined as a single dataset and be used as input for a single source based random forest algorithm. Although combining the two datasets would increase the sample size and generally provide greater power in detecting regulations; problems may arise when the sample sizes of the two data sets are imbalanced. In such situation, the construction of tree ensemble may be largely driven by the dataset with more samples while the signals embedded in the smaller dataset may be concealed. This would be less an issue when the two datasets are used separately to train different models. For this reason, we decided to integrate time series and steady state gene expression in two stages. A rigorous test should be considered to evaluate and compare the performance of either combining datasets or treating them separately in a two stage learning procedure. It is also worth noting that prior weights may be computed using alternative methods. For example, in Section 2.3.3, instead of using the Jaccard index, other methods may be utilized to measure the similarity between genes. Because the 'best' methods for prior weights calculation may depend on the data inputs, users are encouraged to explore different options when calculating the prior information. Additional work is needed to improve the way that different data types are integrated. In its current implementation, prior biological data, such as protein protein interactions and expression from network 1 from the DREAM 5 challenge is considered and performance measured in terms of AUC and the a up r cardinality (n e , n d ) of sets (R e , R d ). Let R tk be the set of the first t h directed edges with highest scores, with t h  {60 000; 80 000; 100 000}. Then, R e R th is defined as the set of directed edges found to be significant (P  0.01) by, while R d R e is defined as the set of directed edges in R e for which the opposite direction is not included in set R tk .
