in termine is an open source data warehouse system that facilitates the building of databases with complex data integration requirements and a need for a fast customizable query facility. Using in termine large biological databases can be created from a range of heterogeneous data sources, and the extensible data model allows for easy integration of new data types. The analysis tools include a flexible query builder, genomic region search and a library of widgets performing various statistical analyses. The results can be exported in many commonly used formats. in termine is a fully extensible framework where developers can add new tools and functionality. Additionally, there is a comprehensive set of web services, for which client libraries are provided in five commonly used programming languages.

introduction integrative analysis exploiting diverse datasets is a powerful approach in modern biology, but it can also be complex and time consuming. There are huge quantities of data available in a range of different formats, and a high level of computational expertise is often required for performing analysis, even once the data have been successfully integrated into a single database [for a general review of biological data integration, see Triplet and. in termine is a data warehouse framework initially developed for fly mine to address these issues for the Drosophila community (). It is being adopted by a number of major model organism databases including budding yeast, rat, zebrafish, mouse and nematode worm (), and is in use by the mod encode project a large scale international initiative to characterize functional elements in the fly and worm genomes (), as well as for drug target discovery (), Drosophila transcription factors () and mitochondrial proteomics (). Many features of the in termine system have been designed to lower the effort required for the setup and maintenance of large scale biological databases, and these are outlined later in the text and discussed in more detail in the Supplementary Material.
