Motivation: high throughput gene expression profiling yields genomic signatures that allow the prediction of clinical conditions including patient outcome. However, these signatures have limitations, such as dependency on the training set, and worse, lack of generalization. Results: We propose a novel algorithm called ITI (interactome– transcriptome integration), to extract a genomic signature predicting distant metastasis in breast cancer by superimposition of large scale protein protein interaction data over a compendium of several gene expression datasets. Training on two different compendia showed that the estrogen receptor specific signatures obtained are more stable (11–35% stability), can be generalized on independent data and performs better than previously published methods (53–74% accuracy). Availability: The ITI algorithm source code from analysis are available under CeCILL from the ITI companion website: http://

introduction the advent of post genomic technologies provided the opportunity to potentially decipher the genomic origin of human diseases, including cancer. Thus, gene expression analysis using DNA microarrays allowed improving the classification and prognostication of several types of cancer, including breast cancer (). This approach can also help predict the metastatic recurrence and outcome (). In breast cancer (BC), the current prognostic features poorly reflect the heterogeneous clinical outcome. The consequence is that many patients (7080%) receive unnecessary adjuvant systemic chemotherapy. Genomic tools could provide an opportunity to refine prognosis and improve treatment strategy and lay down foundation of personalized medicine in BC. Several studies have produced signatures linked to BC distant metastasis (). The mamma print 70-gene * To whom correspondence should be addressed. signature (van de) classified BC patients in either good or poor prognosis groups reported a 76 gene signature specific to estrogen receptor (ER) status (60 genes for ER+ patients, and 16 for ER). These two signatures have an overlap of only three genes, which raised concerns about their reliability reanalyzed the van de Vijver dataset and concluded that the signatures obtained in such studies are unstable and dependent on the patients training set. From a classification standpoint, any gene classifier can be a good one as long as it performs and generalizes well (). However, from either a scientific or clinical standpoint, both the content and stability of signatures are of primary importance, so as to decipher their molecular basis, to reinforce their robustness and widespread acceptance of their routine clinical use and eventually to lead to new therapeutic targets. Reasons for inherent instability of gene based signatures have been previously enumerated (). Besides experimental variability, variation in patient sampling and microarray platform bias, other reasons explain the lack of stability of signatures (). Reasons best explaining this instability are (i) the curse of dimensionality and (ii) the biological nature of gene expression measurements. The curse of dimensionality is well known of statisticians and is due to the inherent microarray data topology (too few samples for too many variables). The biological nature of instability is the following. Microarrays measure messenger RNA transcript abundance. To the extent that perturbations linked to a particular phenotype are reflected by changes in messenger RNA transcript levels, microarrays may be useful for measuring perturbations linked to a particular phenotype. Genes, however, are not independent but their products act in concert through protein protein interaction (PPI) network(s). Our hypothesis is that phenotypes such as cancer result from isolated and subtle molecular perturbations (changes in gene expression and or mutations for example) in driver genes that may provoke expression changes of greater amplitude in downstream genes (). Statistics for differential expression detect changes of greater amplitude and reveal only these downstream genes. Superimposing an interaction network to expression changes can detect driver genes associated with more subtle expression changes (). Factors cited previously may be more problematic for markers for subtle changes in differential expression, but we expect their effect to be attenuated by combination of several datasets. Such genes page 673 672678

discussion we conceived a network based algorithm (ITI) to identify prognostic genomic signatures generalizable over multiple and heterogeneous microarray datasets. This algorithm works in two steps: first it integrates data from a compendium of BC microarray datasets, and second it finds subnetworks, i.e. interacting gene complexes, whose). This illustrates a discriminative subnetwork from the Sabatier and coworkers dataset. Nodes and edges correspond to genes encoding proteins and pp is respectively. Yellow and blue nodes denote an overexpression and an under expression respectively, among patients with distant metastasis compared with the other ones. expression discriminates two conditions of interest. Subnetworks are filtered by statistical validation. We applied the ITI algorithm to the particularly important but still unresolved question of finding markers for BC distant metastasis for which a large body of public data is available. Our approach illustrates the feasibility of integrating gene expression data compendia (930 BC tumor samples were integrated) and large scale PPI data; it represents a potential data mining tool for gene expression repositories. It features inclusion of prior data under the form of pp is and clinical annotations. We produced two ER status specific signatures that were validated on independent datasets held out from training. Repeating the experiments for two datasets (Desmedt and van de Vijver) yielded higher classification performance than previously published classifiers in both cases [74% for Desmedt (ER+) and 53% for van de Vijver (ER+)]. Our subnetwork based signatures reflect the large biological footprint of metastasis and is consequently larger that previously published signatures. The classifier obtained with ITI subnetworks was less sensitive to platform bias than previously
