Motivation: Limited cohort of transcription factors is capable to structure various gene expression patterns. Transcriptional cooperativity (TC) is deemed to be the main mechanism of complexity and precision in regulatory programs. Although many data types generated from numerous experimental technologies are utilized in an attempt to understand combinational transcriptional regulation, complementary computational approach that can integrate diverse data resources and assimilate them into biological model is still under development. Results: We developed a novel Bayesian approach for integrative analysis of proteomic, transcript omic and genomic data to identify specific TC. The model evaluation demonstrated distinguishable power of features derived from distinct data sources and their essen-tiality to model performance. Our model outperformed other classifiers and alternative methods. The application that contextualized TC within hepatocarcinogenesis revealed carcinoma associated alterations. Derived TC networks were highly significant in capturing validated cooperativity as well as revealing novel ones. Our methodology is the first multiple data integration approach to predict dynamic nature of TC. It is promising in identifying tissue or disease specific TC and can further facilitate the interpretation of underlying mechanisms for various physiological conditions. Contact:

introduction in the human genome, genes manifest dramatic diversity in terms of expression levels and tissue or condition specific expression patterns. Despite this tremendous diversity, all genes are controlled by numbered transcription factors (TFs). TFs can work as monomers, homodimers and heterodimers to facilitate (as an activator) or inhibit (as a repressor) the recruitment of RNA polymerase and display high specificity in ligand activation thereby precisely controlling the condition dependent expression of target genes (TGs) (). TF activity and interaction is characterized of condition dependence and transience. Such mutual regulation among TFs underlies major features of cellular identity and complex functions such as plur i potency (), development () and differentiation () even diseases (), which makes the study of transcriptional cooperativity (TC) of paramount important ance. The development of numerous experimental technologies including whole genome sequencing, large scale expression profiling, yeast two hybrid experiments and emerging chromatin immunoprecipitation makes it possible to understand the combinational transcriptional regulation from various perspectives. Biologically relevant synergistic interactions between different TFs are discovered in yeast by insight into gene expression data (). protein protein interaction (PPI) data is also used to infer synergistic binding of cooperative TFs (). Another study that can indicate the interactions between TFs is based on the genome sequence (. b). More recently, the ENCODE Consortium provides comprehensive Chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with high throughput sequencing data for reliable view of tf binding site interaction (). Previous studies on the investigation of TC are reasonable in assumptions or biology. Many TFs bind DNA preferentially at characteristic sequence motifs, thereby providing the sequence specificity required to reflect the possible spatial relationships between TFs in terms of preferences in distance and orientation (). The interaction between two proteins indicates they contribute to the same or similar biological processes (). The gene profiles reveal the similarity between gene expressions, which could be used to infer synergistic relationships between TFs when their common TGs show highly correlated expression patterns (). Although previous studies have made encouraging progress, the investigation of TC encounters four major challenges: (i) the time consumption and high costs of valid experiments; (ii) the vast majority of TFs not being experimentally profiled genome wide; (iii) the difficulty of interrogating the activities of multiple TFs within the same cellular environment; (iv) mainly focusing on static or global interaction but ignoring the dynamic nature of TC. All of these have underscored the need to integrate various data and construct a complementary computational approach that can assimilate them into biological models. The TC defined in this article broadly means the functional interaction between different dna binding TFs in regulation of gene expression. It could be physical, genetic or regulatory interaction between TFs, competitive or synergetic co regulation. Furthermore, TF homodimer interactions and interactions *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com between TFs and non dna binding cofactors as well as cooperativity among multiple TFs are not within our research emphasis. In this article, we proposed a novel algorithm based on Bayesian theory for integrative analysis of diverse large scale biological data to identify TC. Our strategy is based on hypothesis that cooperative TF pairs share shorter distance in PPI network, closer spatial relationship on promoter regions, stronger distance constraint among binding sites and higher correlation on gene expression pattern. We derived four features and tested their discrimination based on HepG2 golden standard dataset. Benchmark analyses were implemented for the assessment of model performance compared with individual feature and straight Logistic regression as well as one feature removed Bayesian model. Furthermore, we performed comparison with other existing methods. Bayesian approach was then applied to contextualize TC within hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) progression.
