Motivation: Genome and transcriptome analyses can be used to explore cancers comprehensively, and it is increasingly common to have multiple omics data measured from each individual. Furthermore, there are rich functional data such as predicted impact of mutations on protein coding and gene protein networks. However, integration of the complex information across the different omics and functional data is still challenging. Clinical validation, particularly based on patient outcomes such as survival, is important for assessing the relevance of the integrated information and for comparing different procedures. Results: An analysis pipeline is built for integrating genomic and transcript omic alterations from whole exo me and RNA sequence data and functional data from protein function prediction and gene interaction networks. The method accumulates evidence for the functional implications of mutated potential driver genes found within and across patients. A driver gene score dg score is developed to capture the cumulative effect of such genes. To contribute to the score, a gene has to be frequently mutated, with high or moderate mutational impact at protein level, exhibiting an extreme expression and functionally linked to many differentially expressed neighbors in the functional gene network. The pipeline is applied to 60 matched tumor and normal samples of the same patient from The Cancer Genome Atlas breast cancer project. In clinical validation, patients with high dg scores have worse survival than those with low scores (P ¼ 0.001). Furthermore, the dg score outperforms the established expression based signatures mamma print and PAM50 in predicting patient survival. In conclusion, integration of mutation, expression and functional data allows identification of clinically relevant potential driver genes in cancer. Availability and implementation: The documented pipeline including annotated sample scripts can be found in

introduction analysis of genome and transcriptome sequencing experiments provides a comprehensive tool for molecular studies of cancers. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) breast cancer project () presents a rich dataset of whole exo me and RNA sequence data of matched tumor and normal samples of the same patient; these allow us to accurately infer tumor specific alterations including somatic mutations and isoform level differential expression. However, it is still a challenge how to subsequently integrate the complex information across the different omics data, while also exploiting the rich functional data such as protein prediction and gene protein interaction networks. Most carcinomas are driven to develop by a few genetic alterations, whereas the majority of the remaining genetic changes have neutral or less deleterious effect in cancer development (). To date, potential driver genes are identified largely based on finding recurrent copy number alteration or mutations in a specific region across multiple samples () but not on patient specific genomic alterations. In this article, we develop a full analysis pipeline to combine DNA and RNA sequencing data together with functional data, starting from the preprocessing of raw aligned sequencing reads, to search for potential driver genes and eventually to summarize the effects of these genes into a single driver gene score dg score. In addition to using existing bioinformatics tools, including g atk (), snp eff () and seq u gio (), we suggest a novel method based on the network enrichment analysis (NEA;) to integrate the genomic and transcript omic profiles. There is a growing literature on searching for driver genes based on data integration. We can state at least two novel aspects in this study: (i) isoform level analysis: because exon lengths are not multiples of three, the potential protein coding impact of one mutation is different for different isoforms. Hence isoform level assessment is necessary. (ii) Clinical validation: we assess the clinical relevance of the potential drivers in terms of correlation with patient outcomes such as survival. Most current integrative methods in identifying cancer driver genes are based on whole genes and are primarily validated based on previously reported drivers and pathway analysis, but not clinically identified some known drivers of melanoma, and two of the predicted drivers were demonstrated to be critical for tumor growth with knockdown experiments. you n and proposed a method that accounts for the functional impact of mutations on protein coding, a sample variation in background mutation rate and the redundancy of the genetic code. They analyzed a dataset of non small cell lung tumors to show that the identified driver genes were also deemed important previously developed the so called MEMo algorithm and showed that it was able to recapitulate previously identified pathways in glioblastoma and ovarian cancer. Potential driver genes were used for histological subtyping in lung cancer () or to reveal intrinsic subtype specific mutations in breast cancer (). caer us focuses on investigation of biological network disruptions linked to cancer outcomes at the protein domain level, but it does not take into account the impact of mutations on RNA expression and protein coding (). dawn rank a recently published algorithm, directly prioritizes altered genes on a single patient scope regardless of mutation frequency (). dawn rank requires information of a gene interaction network, somatic genomic alterations and the differential gene expression profile, but it does not consider the predicted biological impact of a mutation on protein. Helios incorporates somatic copy number alterations, point mutations, gene expression and RNAi screens to pinpoint driver genes with large re currently amplified regions of DNA (). In summary, these methods do not utilize isoform level information and the potential drivers are generally not validated in terms of patients' clinical outcomes such as survival. As genetic instability caused by mutations in multiple critical genes may be central to tumor progression (), we summarize the effects of potential driver genes into a single value dg score and assess its clinical value as prognostic biomarker. In our analysis of the TCGA breast cancer data, there is a strong evidence that patients carrying more mutated genes with functional implications and extreme expression pattern have worse survival rates than those with less mutated potential driver genes. Over the last decade, a number of studies have developed gene signatures for prognostic classification of breast cancer. Among the most well known, mamma print (van 't) captures the expression profile of 70-gene associated with prognosis and has been shown to be a better predictor for distant metastasis than the clinical parameters. The so called PAM50 signature () classifies breast cancer into intrinsic molecular subtypes and has been shown to add significant prognostic value. For the TCGA breast cancer data, as predictor of patient survival, the dg score based on the potential driver genes outperforms the 70-gene mamma print and the 50-gene PAM50 signatures. In summary, integration of omics and functional data have the potential to produce clinically valuable information.

conclusion we develop a practical analysis pipeline to perform somatic variant calling, gene and isoform expression quantification and the integration of genomic and transcript omic profiles based on known biological network and the functional impact on protein coding. Using this methodology, we show that breast cancer patients who carry more mutated genes with functional implications and extreme expression pattern have worse survival than those with less potential driver genes.
