Motivation: Novel technologies brought in unprecedented amounts of high throughput sequencing data along with great challenges in their analysis and interpretation. The percent spliced in (PSI, É) metric estimates the incidence of single exon skipping events and can be computed directly by counting reads that align to known or predicted splice junctions. However, the majority of human splicing events are more complex than single exon skipping. Results: In this short report, we present a framework that generalizes the É metric to arbitrary classes of splicing events. We change the view from exon centric to intron centric and split the value of É into two indices, 5 and 3 , measuring the rate of splicing at the 5 0 and 3 0 end of the intron, respectively. The advantage of having two separate indices is that they de convolute two distinct elementary acts of the splicing reaction. The completeness of splicing index is decomposed in a similar way. This framework is implemented as bam2ssj, a bam file processing pipeline for strand specific counting of reads that align to splice junctions or overlap with splice sites. It can be used as a consistent protocol for quantifying splice junctions from rnase q data because no such standard procedure currently exists. Availability: The C þþ code of bam2ssj is open source and is available at https://

introduction one major challenge in the analysis of high throughput RNA sequencing data is to disentangle relative abundances of alternatively spliced transcripts. Many existing quantification methods do so by using considerations of likelihood, parsimony and optimality to obtain a consolidated view of cDNA fragments that map to a given transcriptional unit (). The advantage of such integrative approaches is that they provide robust estimators for transcript abundance by reducing sampling errors, as they effectively consider samples of larger size. In contrast, because all the reads from the same transcriptional unit are combined into one master model, there is no guarantee that the inclusion or exclusion of a specific exon is estimated independently of co occurring splicing events (). The quantification of alternatively spliced isoforms based on the  metric captures more accurately the local information related to splicing of each particular exon (). We follow in considering only the reads that align to splice junctions () and ignoring the reads that align to exon bodies position specific read counts are not considered).  is defined as where the factor of two in the denominator accounts for the fact that there are twice as many mappable positions for reads supporting exon inclusion as exon exclusion. Equation (1) defines an unbiased estimator for the fraction of mRNAs that represent the inclusion isoform under the assumption that splice junction reads are distributed evenly.  can also be derived from the expression values of whole isoforms, for instance, as the abundance of the inclusion isoform as the fraction of the total abundance. However, the non-uniform read coverage not only between but also within transcripts makes such estimates generally detrimental (). The  metric can be generalized beyond the class of single exon skipping events by counting inclusion and exclusion reads regardless of exon adjacency (, dashed arcs). Although this definition helps to reduce the undercoverage bias by taking into account splice junctions that are not present in the reference annotation, it often assigns misleading values to  metric, for instance, in the case of multiple exon skipping, where the amount of support for exon exclusion does not reflect the true splicing rate of each individual intron.
