Drug side effects are one of the main health threats worldwide , and an important obstacle in drug development. Understanding how adverse reactions occur requires knowledge on drug mechanisms at the molecular level. Despite recent advances, the need for tools and methods that facilitate side effect anticipation still remains. Here, we present int side a web server that integrates chemical and biological information to elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying drug side effects. int side currently catalogs 1175 side effects caused by 996 drugs, associated with drug features divided into eight categories, belonging to either biology or chemistry. On the biological side, int side reports drug targets and off targets pathways, molecular functions and biological processes. From a chemical viewpoint , it includes molecular fingerprints, scaffolds and chemical entities. Finally, we also integrate additional biological data, such as protein interactions and disease related genes, to facilitate mechanis-tic interpretations. Availability and implementation: Our data and web resource are available online (http://intside.irbbarcelona.org/).

introduction side effects (SEs) are defined as non therapeutic generally undesired, phenotypic responses to drug treatment. They affect around 2 million patients per year in the USA, ranking the fourth cause of death (). Anticipating SEs before launching a drug to the market is crucial for reducing health risks, as well as costs and time during drug development. To address this issue, many databases and tools have flourished. For instance, the Food and Drug Administration developed the Adverse Event Reporting System fa ers that contains adverse reactions and medication error reports. Another major SEs repository is Side Effect Resource (SIDER) (), which collects information on marketed medicines and their SEs recorded in package labels. The wealth of information in these repositories has enabled systematic studies on SEs permitting, for instance, the computational inference of unknown drug targets (). However, most studies are not able to capture complex or unspecific events, which are often directly related to the drug structure and reactivity (). The association between drug structure and its activity has indeed been used in predictive toxicology (). Yet, available resources offer very broad phenotypic categories and are not able to discriminate among the great variety of SEs. The emerging picture is that drug SEs are the result of the interaction of small molecules with complex biological systems (), requiring an integration of chemical and biological details that, unfortunately, is not conducted in most studies. Very recently, we presented a top down approach to identify chemical and biological drug features that might be involved in the development of adverse drug reactions (Duran). We delimited the chemical and biological space for each compound by gathering molecular properties from major biomedical resources, and carried out an enrichment analysis associating more than 1000 SEs with molecular features. Here, we present a web server, named int side which automates this analysis and enables a quick and easy access to our findings. Moreover, we further integrate additional biological information, such as protein interactions and disease related genes, to facilitate mechanistic interpretations. As a result, int side provides a complete catalog of proteins, cellular processes and chemical structures that may lead to undesired responses to drug treatments.
