Motivation: Most of the previous data mining studies based on the NCI-60 dataset, due to its intrinsic cell based nature, can hardly provide insights into the molecular targets for screened compounds. On the other hand, the abundant information of the compound– target associations in PubChem can offer extensive experimental evidence of molecular targets for tested compounds. Therefore, by taking advantages of the data from both public repositories, one may investigate the correlations between the bioactivity profiles of small molecules from the NCI-60 dataset (cellular level) and their patterns of interactions with relevant protein targets from PubChem (molecular level) simultaneously. Results: We investigated a set of 37 small molecules by providing links among their bioactivity profiles, protein targets and chemical structures. Hierarchical clustering of compounds was carried out based on their bioactivity profiles. We found that compounds were clustered into groups with similar mode of actions, which strongly correlated with chemical structures. Furthermore, we observed that compounds similar in bioactivity profiles also shared similar patterns of interactions with relevant protein targets, especially when chemical structures were related. The current work presents a new strategy for combining and data mining the NCI-60 dataset and PubChem. This analysis shows that bioactivity profile comparison can provide insights into the mode of actions at the molecular level, thus will facilitate the knowledge based discovery of novel compounds with desired pharmacological properties.

introduction understanding the mechanism of interaction of small molecules with their macromolecular targets is critical for drug and chemical probe development. The innovation of drug has long been recognized as time consuming and labor intensive costing on * To whom correspondence should be addressed. average about $800 million as well as 1012 years to bring a new drug to market (). Apart from the challenges in optimizing pharmacokinetic properties and minimizing toxicities of lead compounds, the lack of publicly available accessible biomedical assay data may represent another barrier for the success of drug discovery. Fortunately, this is changing since more public resources are emerging, offering new opportunities to chemical biology researchers for drug development. open access information rich resources include the Protein Data Bank (PDB;), drug bank () and KEGG (), to name only a few. Without a doubt, existing public resources, as well as new ones, will evolve in future with both speed and capacity. PubChem is a public repository for the chemical structures of small molecules and information of their biological properties (). It was launched as a component of the NIH Molecular Libraries Roadmap Initiative (), with the aim to discover chemical probes via high throughput screening (HTS) of small molecules. It also receives biological property contributions from many other organizations. As of March 17, 2010, PubChem contains more than 26 million unique compounds, among which over 870 000 have biological assay data for more than 3000 molecular targets, including proteins and genes. The public accessibility to such assay data is particularly valuable to the community, since this kind of critical information needed by drug research is typically held by pharmaceutical companies. The public availability and information rich features altogether make PubChem an extremely valuable resource for biomedical research, as well as data mining studies (). Launched by the National Cancer Institute (NCI), the Developmental Therapeutics Program (DTP) provides in vitro screening for new anticancer drugs that tested in 60 human tumor cancer cell lines (often known as the NCI-60 dataset;). This well curated publicly available dataset has been recognized as a rich resource for studying the mechanism of growth inhibition for tumor cells (). It has also inspired interests for developing and validating data mining tools (). Bioactivity profiles derived from the NCI-60 cell lines can provide insights into the mode of actions for tested compounds (). structure activity relationships (SARs) studies have also been reported for predicting or characterizing the cytotoxicity of the page 2882 28812888
