We introduce ion gap a publicly available Web platform designed for the analysis of whole bacterial genomes using Ion Torrent sequence data. Besides assembly, it integrates a variety of comparative genomics, annotation and bacterial classification routines, based on the widely used fast q BAM and SRA file formats. Benchmarking with different datasets evidenced that ion gap is a fast, powerful and simple to use bioinformatics tool. By releasing this platform, we aim to translate low cost bacterial genome analysis for microbiological prevention and control in healthcare, agro alimentary and pharmaceutical industry applications. Availability and implementation: ion gap is hosted by the ITERs teide hpc supercomputer and is freely available on the Web for non-commercial use at http://iongap.

introduction the application of next generation DNA Sequencing (NGS) to bacterial genomic studies has a great impact in clinical microbiology diagnosis and epidemiology, as well as in the management of infectious disease outbreaks. Given the abundance of information produced by the NGS platforms, affordable and fast access to whole genome sequence by means of intuitive bioinformatics tools demanding minimal training is mandatory to translate this technology into the clinical settings routine (). Ion Torrent semiconductor sequencing technology (Thermo Fisher Scientific, Inc.) benefits from high sequencing speed at low cost, constituting one of the preferred choices in settings demanding fast turnaround NGS routine analysis (). Nevertheless, a comprehensive bacterial genomic data analysis demands a number of software packages, which often have cumbersome installation and use, and lack a graphical interface. Existing Web platforms such as orion e () aim to solve this issue albeit the user still must configure many genome assembly and analysis options. Alternatives for local execution of analyses, often requiring expert installation, are also available for genome assembly annotation () or variant calling (). However, they were designed for Illumina and Roche/454 sequencing data. Therefore, there is no specific package providing an integrated collection of microbial genomic applications, specially configured for rapid handling of data generated by Ion Torrent sequencing. For this reason, we have developed ion gap a web based genome analysis platform to straightforwardly perform both the assembly process and subsequent comparative analysis, variant calling, functional annotation and bacterial typing routines in a seamless, user friendly way. Therefore, ion gap offers a first line solution, making data analysis accessible to non specialists but compatible with downstream advanced applications.
