MicroRNAs (miRNAs) have been extensively studied owing to their important regulatory roles in genic expression. An increasingly number of reports are performing extensive data mining in small RNA sequencing libraries to detect miRNAs isoforms and also 5 0 and 3 0 post-transcriptional nucleotide additions, as well as edited miRNAs sequences. A ready to use pipeline, is omi rid was developed to standardize and automati ze the search for miRNAs isoforms in high throughput small RNA sequencing libraries. Availability: is omi rid is a command line Python script available at

introduction several high throughput small RNA (sRNA) sequencing projects have increased the discovery and number of small non-coding RNAs related to gene expression regulation. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous srn as with 1924 nt in length (). To regulate protein coding genes, mature miRNA binds in the mRNA target sites leading to their degradation or repression of translation (). Recently, reports have demonstrated the existence of isom irs (). The iso mir classification relies in three major categories: 5 0 , 3 0 and polymorphic isom irs with the sub classification of 5 0 and 3 0 isom irs into templated or non templated modifications, according to the miRNA precursor sequence (). Furthermore, efforts have been made to identify and understand the biological processes where non templated nucleotides are added in the 3 0 end of mature miRNAs, altering the miRNA stability and efficiency (). Nucleotide additions at the 5 0 end have also been reported altering the miRNA seed region and consequently its functionality (). Several iso mir variants have been discovered with deep sequencing technologies. Some of these variations may have biological origin and functions, once the modifications were seen repeatedly at the same sites with higher frequencies than random errors (). To improve and automate the search for isom irs in sRNA sequenced libraries, we developed a simplified workflow. is omi rid allows the identification of 5 0 , 3 0 and polymorphic isom irs based on the canonical miRNA known sequence and also from other regions on the same miRNA precursor. Additionally, the program can also identify non templated 5 0 or 3 0 end variations by mapping the srn as in the known pre mirnas. This framework is a simple method to identify and compare isom irs abundance in different sequencing libraries, providing an initial view for biological relevant isom irs. We also highlight that this pipeline could be applied to study isom irs from plants, animals or any other living organisms. was tested on Linux and Mac OSX environment and settled in a simple and standardized text file (see Supplementary File 1). With the use of this configuration file, it is possible to set more than one input sRNA sequencing file to be analyzed and compared. Sequence files can be in fast q or fast a format. The filtering process using reference genome or transcriptome is optional, as well as the abundance cut off which can be applied for more than one value (e.g. 10, 50 and 100) corresponding to the reads sum in all libraries analyzed.
