next generation Sequencing (NGS) technology has revealed that microRNAs (miRNAs) are capable of exhibiting frequent differences from their corresponding mature reference sequences , generating multiple variants: the isoforms of miRNAs isom irs. These isom irs mainly originate via the imprecise and alternative cleavage during the pre mirna processing and post-transcriptional modifications that influence miRNA stability, their sub-cellular localization and target selection. Although several tools for the identification of iso mir have been reported, no bio-informatics resource dedicated to gather isom irs from public NGS data and to provide functional analysis of these isom irs is available to date. Thus, a free online database, iso mir Bank has been created to integrate isom irs detected by our previously published algorithm CPSS. In total, 2727 samples (Small RNA NGS data downloaded from array express from eight species (Arabidopsis thaliana, Drosophila melanogaster, Danio rerio, Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Oryza sativa, Solanum lycopersicum and Zea mays) are analyzed. At present, 308 919 isom irs from 4706 mature miRNAs are collected into iso mir Bank. In addition, iso mir Bank provides target prediction and enrichment analysis to evaluate the effects of isom irs on target selection. Availability and implementation: iso mir Bank is implemented in php perl þ MySQL þ R format and can be freely accessed at

introduction micrornas (miRNAs), with average length of 22 nucleotides, are ubiquitously expressed and regulate many essential biological processes mainly via post-transcriptional silencing of genes through mRNA decay and or translational repression (). During this process, the primary miRNA transcripts pri mirnas are mainly cleaved by). Previously, miRNAs were only annotated as the canonical sequences. However, extensive application of high throughput sequencing technology to detect expression profile of miRNA has revealed that miRNAs can frequently exhibit differences from their corresponding canonical mature sequences, generating multiple variants known as isoforms of miRNAs isom irs (). Generally, the reference mir base miRNA (having the canonical sequence) often differs from the most abundant iso mir (). There are two main processes that lead to the production of isom irs. These isom irs mainly originate via the imprecise and alternative cleavage (not completely random) during the pre mirna processing and post-transcriptional modifications that have influence on miRNA stability, their sub-cellular localization and target selection (). On the other hand, miRNA editing is the process that generates isom irs by post-transcriptional enzymatic editing of the miRNA genome (). It has also been reported recently that isom irs can significantly affect the half life of miRNA, as well as their sub-cellular localization and their target specification (). Here, we have established a database, iso mir Bank, to support and facilitate the ongoing isom irs research. Our database contains 308 919 isom irs detected from 2727 samples (Small RNA NGS data downloaded from array express database) of eight species (Arabidopsis thaliana, Drosophila melanogaster, Danio rerio, Homo sapiens, Mus musculus, Oryza sativa, Solanum lycopersicum and Zea mays) with manually curated metadata for each sample (organism, sex, tissue, development stage, age, experiment condition, treatment and sequencing platform). iso mir Bank also has a user friendly web interface allowing researchers to quickly find and navigate the isom irs of their interest and related annotation along with the functional analysis that can help in evaluating the effects of iso mir on target selection and downstream pathways. Our database is not only a collection of isom irs from NGS data but also a tool to find out the candidate functional isom irs for further experimental studies. range from 1 to 1850, and other statistical analysis for isom irs in iso mir Bank are provided in Supplementary Information). We analyzed a number of isom irs shared between any two species among the eight species in the database. Interestingly, many isom irs are conserved in animals or plants, but a specific iso mir of animals could not be found in plants and vice versa (Supplementary). This observation is consistent with previous studies showing few miRNAs were known to be structurally or functionally conserved between plants and animals (). Moreover, we observed that more conserved isom irs could be found within two species having closer genetic evolutionary relationship (Supplementary
