Motivation: Individual research groups now analyze thousands of samples per year at synchrotron macromolecular crystallography (MX) resources. The efficient management of experimental data is thus essential if the best possible experiments are to be performed and the best possible data used in downstream processes in structure determination pipelines. Information System for Protein crystallography Beamlines i spy b a Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS) with an underlying data model allowing for the integration of analyses downstream of the data collection experiment was developed to facilitate such data management. Results: i spy b is now a multisite, generic LIMS for synchrotron based MX experiments. Its initial functionality has been enhanced to include improved sample tracking and reporting of experimental protocols, the direct ranking of the diffraction characteristics of individual samples and the archiving of raw data and results from ancillary experiments and post experiment data processing protocols. This latter feature paves the way for i spy b to play a central role in future macromolecular structure solution pipelines and validates the application of the approach used in i spy b to other experimental techniques, such as biological solution Small Angle X-ray Scattering and spectroscopy, which have similar sample tracking and data handling requirements.

introduction the advances made in bioinformatics, protein production, purification and crystallization techniques when the era of structural genomics was at its height led to a greatly increased demand for the collection of X-ray diffraction data at synchrotron based macromolecular crystallography (MX) beamlines. This, coupled * To whom correspondence should be addressed with the advent of user friendly synchrotron beamline control interfaces (), the increased use of robotic sample changers () and the ability to automatically screen and rank the diffraction properties of crystals using software such as DNA () and web ice () ushered in the age of high throughput crystallography (HTX). The most evident effect of HTX is that in the period 2000 2009, there was a 3-fold increase in the annual rate of deposition of macromolecular crystal structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB; http://www.pdb.org) (). The overwhelming majority (85%) of these depositions are based on diffraction data collected at synchrotron facilities (see http://biosync.sbkb.org/ for details). However, the increase in PDB depositions tells us only half of the story. During the same time period, the number of individual samples being analyzed per year at the MX facilities of the European Synchrotron Radiation Facility (ESRF) rose by more than an order of magnitude (currently 100 000 year at the ESRF) (), an increase significantly boosted by the emergence of fragment based drug design as a tool for drug discovery in the pharmaceutical industry (see Murray and Blundell, 2010 for a review). Increased automation has also meant that many more samples are being tested for diffraction quality before any full data collections are carried out (). Given the huge increase in the numbers of samples analyzed and the increased importance of the pre-screening of the samples, the need for a Laboratory Information Management System (LIMS) combining sample tracking and experiment reporting during synchrotron based MX experiments was clear. In 2001, a prototype LIMS, px web was developed and deployed at the ESRF (). The scope of px web was rather limited and functionality was confined mainly to basic experiment recording and reporting. In particular, no exchange of information between px web and other LIMS [i.e. for protein production (), crystallization (), X-ray

discussion i spy b was designed to optimize information transfer between home laboratories and synchrotron based MX beamlines before, during and after experimental sessions. The particular strength of i spy b relates to sample management and the recording of information during an experiment. However, when properly used, the functionality of i spy b should also allow for more successful Page: 3190 31863192 of the i spy b web interface provides a top level summary for each data collection, as well as access to raw data and results for absorption edge scans (top panel) and XFE spectra (bottom left). Clicking on the relevant 'image prefix' directs the user to a full reporting of the experimental protocols used, the results of sample evaluations by EDNA () and the results of automatic data processing (bottom right). mouse over tool-tips are integrated into the HTML interface. In the examples above the tool-tip in the 'Data Collection' tab shows a summary of the data collection parameters for a selected experiment while that for the data processing results gives information concerning both the format and data content of downloadable files containing the reduced data. and efficient experimental sessions. The possibility to rank the diffraction characteristics of samples means that, in principle, full data collections should only be carried out on the samples best suited to the experiment in hand. Moreover, the accessibility of results and output files from the automatic, on-line data processing protocols means that experimenters can also monitor the success of data collection experiments in real time (i.e. while still at the beamline) and decide whether or not more data need to be collected for a specific project. i spy b is a useful tool for those who operate synchrotron based MX facilities. It allows the generation of statistics on what type of experiments are being carried out and, thus, the elucidation of new trends that may drive improvements in beamline functionality. A specific example of this is the trend that many more samples are tested for diffraction quality before any full data collections are carried out. This observation has lead to the design of new beamlines and workflows for MX that will be implemented as part of the ESRF Upgrade Page: 3191 31863192) showing a summary of both the experimental protocol to be used and the results that the execution of the protocol should produce.. Sample ranking in i spy b. Samples can be selected and ranked either on individual criteria or using a combination of criteria that can be given different weights. Results can be visualized either as a table (top) or as a radar chart. Tool-tips provide guides for ease of use. Program (see http://www.esrf.eu/UsersAndScience/Experiments/ mx beamline portfolio cdrupbl10futureid30bm29 pdf. At DLS this observation has helped drive the deployment of faster sample changers. While i spy b is currently exclusively exploited during MX experiments, its data model hierarchy can also be applied to other techniques with analogous workflows. Examples of such techniques include Small Angle X-ray Scattering (SAXS), particularly when applied to solutions of biological macromolecules bios axs small molecule X-ray crystallography and powder diffraction. In each of these cases, the development of i spy b like resources for use at synchrotron facilities is under serious consideration.
