Motivation: Determining the functional impact of non-coding disease associated single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) identified by genome wide association studies g was is challenging. Many of these SNPs are likely to be regulatory SNPs r snps variations which affect the ability of a transcription factor (TF) to bind to DNA. However, experimental procedures for identifying r snps are expensive and labour intensive. Therefore, in silico methods are required for r snp prediction. By scoring two alleles with a TF position weight matrix (PWM), it can be determined which SNPs are likely r snps. However, predictions in this manner are noisy and no method exists that determines the statistical significance of a nucleotide variation on a PWM score. Results: We have designed an algorithm for in silico r snp detection called is r snp. We employ novel convolution methods to determine the complete distributions of PWM scores and ratios between allele scores, facilitating assignment of statistical significance to r snp effects. We have tested our method on 41 experimentally verified r snps correctly predicting the disrupted TF in 28 cases. We also analysed 146 disease associated SNPs with no known functional impact in an attempt to identify candidate r snps. Of the 11 significantly predicted disrupted TFs, 9 had previous evidence of being associated with the disease in the literature. These results demonstrate that is r snp is suitable for high throughput screening of SNPs for potential regulatory function. This is a useful and important tool in the interpretation of g was. Availability: is r snp software is available for use at: www genomics .

introduction genome wide association studies g was aim to find single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are linked to a particular disease or trait phenotype. disease associated SNPs residing in coding regions, specifically non-synonymous mutations, are generally easy to interpret in terms of their likely functional impact. However, unravelling the functional impact of SNPs residing outside coding regions is more challenging. One appealing functional role for non-coding disease associated SNPs is that they are regulatory SNPs r snps. That is, they alter the binding affinity of a transcription factor (TF) to the DNA, which in turn alters the expression of certain genes, consequently contributing to the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. disease phenotype. Finding these r snps is difficult, since they can be obscured by the potentially large number of SNPs present in a linkage disequilibrium block, and the experimental procedures involved can be expensive and labour intensive. Therefore, in silico approaches for identifying candidate r snps are required to improve the efficiency of interpretation of non-coding disease associated SNPs. Previous attempts at finding r snps have relied largely on prediction of TF binding sites that overlap SNPs (). This approach typically produces large numbers of false positives, as many SNPs will not significantly alter the binding affinity of a TF given the degenerate nature of TF binding sites. An improvement to this approach looked at the difference in binding site score between two alleles using a position weight matrix (PWM;). The reasoning here is that SNPs generating 'larger' PWM score differences are considered more likely to be r snps than those generating 'smaller' differences. However, the paper presenting this method demonstrated that without the use of additional information such as phylogenetic footprinting, discovery of r snps was not possible considering only differences in binding score affinities using pwm s (). More recently, however, a method which looks at normalizing the score distributions of pwm s was used so that observed changes were comparable between pwm s (). In this case the PWM scores are not used directly, but a modified affinity score is used to represent the binding affinity. A Fourier transform is used to calculate the complete distribution of affinity scores, consequently allowing the computation of a p value for observed scores. The ratio of p values of affinity scores between two alleles can then be used to determine if the TF binding site is likely to be disrupted. This approach is shown to be successful through comparison against a set of known r snps. The output of this approach, however, is a large list of pwm s ranked by the log ratio of the score p values. Unfortunately in this case, there is no clear way of an appropriate cut off point to distinguish true and false prediction. This makes interpretation of results difficult, especially when screening large numbers of SNPs. In this article, we propose a new technique for in silico r snp detection (called is r snp. While our approach is similar to that of, there are some essential differences. Notably, our approach yields predictions with statistical significance, facilitating interpretable screening across and comparison between large numbers of SNPs. Rather than an affinity score (), we use scores generated from the PWM directly. This facilitates a simple and efficient approach for calculating the distribution PWM scores via direct computation of convolution. This method also allows the computation of distributions of p value page i525 i524i530

discussion personalized medicine aspires to develop a panel of targeted drugs that can correct imbalances in biochemical and cell biological processes that lead to disease states. For example, cancers that arise from BRCA1 mutations are specifically prone to PARP inhibitors. To exploit disease associated SNPs to derive novel drug targets, insight to the mechanistic link between the allelic variation and the disease is required. This link is particularly difficult to derive when a SNP is positioned between genes. Also attenuating progress in the field is the immense difficulty to functionally validate the biological impact of single base substitution in a regulatory element in the genome, as knock-in experiments are very expensive and labour intensive. Thus, identifying in silico means to assess the likelihood of allelic variation to impact the function of a given TF on a specific target gene could accelerate the progress from g was to personalized medicine. This work offers to capitalize on the central dogma of transcription regulation, and identify novel links between target able TFs and disease states, if their cognate binding to critical targets in the genome is affected by the DNA sequence variation. We show here that it is possible with high degree of confidence to identify novel tf disease links through the comparison of the allelic variation with the sequence constraints of all known TFs. Beyond reproducing 28 validated cases, we further identify 11 such links (there are multiple matrices for a single TF, the same TF may be reported for the same SNP. These SNPs show particularly strong evidence for altering the TFBS. b When the risk is allele is not known, the variation is ordered by frequency: common rare only results that show a significant (BH corrected P  0.01) change in TF binding affinity between the alleles are included. Columns 1 and 2 provide information about the disease and associated SNP. Columns 3 and 4 state the base change between normal and disease state and whether this results in a loss or gain in binding site. Columns 57 outline the TF predicted to be disrupted by the allele and the p value associated with the change. Column 8, if present, contains a reference to prior evidence that the predicted TF is known to be associated with the disease. The final column provides the p value of the enrichment of TF binding sites around genes shown to be differentially expressed in the disease, significant values (BH corrected P  0.05) are highlighted in bold. 146 published disease associated SNPs, 8 for which the disrupted TF is reported to be associated with the disease in the literature. Following on from these significant predictions, further r snps for the same disease and same TF can be identified (YY1:AIDS/HIV, oct1 asthma Supplementary, threshold P  0.05). This is a proof of principle that the aim of is r snp is achievable, however, we envisage a few improvements to is r snp that would increase its value significantly. Only 5 of the 11 SNPs in showed both forms of evidence of the predicted disrupted TF being associated with the disease. This is not unexpected as most of the g was studies use bulk
