circo s plots are graphical outputs that display three dimensional chromosomal interactions and fusion transcripts. However, the circo s plot tool is not an interactive visualization tool, but rather a figure generator. For example, it does not enable data to be added dynamically nor does it provide information for specific data points interactively. Recently, an r based circo s tool r circo s has been developed to integrate circo s to R, but similarly, r circo s can only be used to generate plots. Thus, we have developed a circo s plot tool j circo s that is an interactive visualiza-tion tool that can plot circo s figures, as well as being able to dynamically add data to the figure, and providing information for specific data points using mouse hover display and zoom in out functions. j circo s uses the Java computer language to enable, it to be used on most operating systems (Windows, MacOS, Linux). Users can input data into j circo s using flat data formats, as well as from the Graphical user interface (GUI). j circo s will enable biologists to better study more complex chromosomal interactions and fusion transcripts that are otherwise difficult to visualize from next generation sequencing data. Availability and implementation: j circo s and its manual are freely available at http://www.austral-ianprostatecentre.org/research/software/jcircos

introduction circo s plot () has been widely used in genomics research, especially in conjunction with next generation sequencing to detect genomic rearrangements and gene fusions (). circo s is a plotting tool that was developed in the Perl language. However, there are limitations to circo s some of which are inherent in Perl computer language, such as the complexity of installation, i.e. many Perl packages have to be installed. Furthermore, some packages are version sensitive, making it difficult even for bioinformatic ians to install. Because circo s plot has the difficult task of representing the whole genome length as a circular diagram (e.g. $3 billion nucleotides in the human genome), there is no way to accurately determine the genes and or loci that each line represents in the circo s plot. Thus, it is advantageous to have a circo s plot with mouse hover function that provides information for specific data points. The recently developed circ lize (), omic circo s (), gg bio () and r circo s () are R language versions of circo s. They are much easier to import r generated data into circo s but it has the same limitations, such as lack of interactive functionality. In this article, we provide an interactive visualization circo s plot tool that only requires Java installation, which is typically installed on most computers. The input data are in tab delimited format users can either import data through text files or copy paste in the interface from MS Excel sheets.
