Motivation: Gene expression is influenced by variants commonly known as expression quantitative trait loci e qtl. On the basis of this fact, researchers proposed to use e qtl functional information univariate ly for prioritizing single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) signals from genome wide association studies g was. However, most genes are influenced by multiple e qtls which, thus, jointly affect any downstream phenotype. Therefore, when compared with the univariate prioritization approach , a joint modeling of e qtl action on phenotypes has the potential to substantially increase signal detection power. Nonetheless, a joint e qtl analysis is impeded by (i) not measuring all e qtls in a gene and or (ii) lack of access to individual genotypes. Results: We propose joint effect on phenotype of e qtl functional SNPs associated with a gene je peg a novel software tool which uses only g was summary statistics to (i) impute the summary statistics at unmeasured e qtls and (ii) test for the joint effect of all measured and imputed e qtls in a gene. We illustrate the behavior performance of the developed tool by analysing the g was meta analysis summary statistics from the Psychiatric Genomics Consortium Stage 1 and the Genetic Consortium for Anorexia Nervosa. Conclusions: Applied analyses results suggest that je peg complements commonly used univari-ate g was tools by: (i) increasing signal detection power via uncovering (a) novel genes or (b) known associated genes in smaller cohorts and (ii) assisting in fine mapping of challenging regions, e.g. major histocompatibility complex for schizophrenia. Availability and implementation: je peg its associated database of e qtl SNPs and usage examples are publicly available at

introduction univariate analysis of genome wide association studies g was has emerged as the main tool for identifying trait disease associated genetic variants (). However, against initial expectations, most variants reported by complex trait g was are common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with weak or moderate effect sizes, which account for only a small fraction of the overall phenotypic variation (). Presumably, most common causal variants are not detected in g was due to their small effect sizes (). Therefore, to identify a greater V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
