Biologists produce large data sets and are in demand of rich and simple web portals in which they can upload and analyze their files. Providing such tools requires to mask the complexity induced by the needed High Performance Computing (HPC) environment. The connection between interface and computing infrastructure is usually specific to each portal. With j flow we introduce a Workflow Management System (WMS), composed of j query plug-ins which can easily be embedded in any web application and a Python library providing all requested features to setup, run and monitor workflows.

introduction building rich web environments aimed at helping scientists analyze their data is a common trend in bioinformatics. Specialized web portals such as mgr ast (), meta vir () or NG6 () provide multiple services and analysis tools in an integrated manner for specific experiments or data types. These applications require WMS features to manage and execute their computational pipelines. Generic WMS, such as Galaxy (), er gatis () or moby le () provide a user friendly graphical interface easing workflow creation and execution. Unfortunately, such environments come with their own interface, complicating their integration within already existing web tools. Other WMS such as weaver (), snake make (), ruff us () or Cosmos () provide a framework or a domain specific language to developers wanting to build and run workflows. These software packages offer the flexibility and power of a high level programming language, but they do not provide a user interface, enable component and workflow definition. j flow combines a user friendly interface with an intuitive python API. It is, to our knowledge, the only WMS designed to be embedded in any web application, thanks to its organization as j query (http://jquery.com/) plug-ins.

conclusion j flow is a simple and efficient solution to embed WMS features within a web application. It is, to our knowledge, the only WMS designed with this purpose. It is already embedded in rna browse () and NG6 (), where it has been used to process more than 2000 sequencing runs on a 5000 cores HPC environment.. j flow integration: (a) a piece of the NG6 HTML code source in which is positioned an empty div to build the active wf plug-in and a modal box for the wf status plug-in. (b) The j query code in charge to build j flow plug-ins and manage user action. When the select active wf event is thrown from active wf div a function is called with two parameters: event and workflow. The last parameter stores all the workflow's information, such as its name and its id, used in this example to update the modal box title and to build the wf status plug-in. (c) The status of the illumina qc workflow with the id 26 displayed as a graph in the NG6 application
