Motivation: Molecular docking is a method for structure based drug design and structural molecular biology, which attempts to predict the position and orientation of a small molecule (ligand) in relation to a protein (receptor) to produce a stable complex with a minimum binding energy. One of the most widely used software packages for this purpose is auto dock which incorporates three meta heuristic techniques. We propose the integration of auto dock with j metal cpp an optimization framework, thereby providing both single and multi-objective algorithms that can be used to effectively solve docking problems. Results: The resulting combination of auto dock þ j metal cpp allows users of the former to easily use the metaheuristics provided by the latter. In this way, biologists have at their disposal a richer set of optimization techniques than those already provided in auto dock. Moreover, designers of meta heuristic techniques can use molecular docking for case studies, which can lead to more efficient algorithms oriented to solving the target problems. Availability and implementation: j metal cpp software adapted to auto dock is freely available as a Cþþ source code at

introduction the development of techniques such as high throughput protein purification, X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy have contributed in the discovery of many structural details of protein protein and ligand protein complexes. Such advances in association with the completion of the human genome sequencing have allowed the identification of many therapeutic drug targets (). In this context, molecular docking is a method of structure based drug design that has been in development since the early 1980s. This approach is based on two well defined steps: (i) determining the position and orientation of the ligand within the target receptor and (ii) assessing the affinity between the two structures by analyzing the binding energy scores and selecting those ligand protein conformations with minimum binding energies. For the past two decades, there has been an attempt to improve docking molecular techniques. Therefore, many researchers in this field have focused on improving the quality of the docking results. This depends on the energy scoring function for evaluating the results obtained and an optimization algorithm to detect the best state characterized by a minimum of binding energy. Furthermore, another challenge is to develop software solutions, the scoring functions of which allow the rotation around torsional degrees of freedom of the flexible ligands and side chains of receptors. An example of these software packages is auto dock (), a C toolbox, which has become the most cited and one of the most used software packages in molecular modeling studies, and also an efficient tool for virtual drug screening, which has been applied in real cases that involve flexibility (). The release of auto dock 4.2 provides three optimization algorithms: a simulated annealing and two genetic algorithms (GAs), one of which, referred to as the Lamarckian GA, incorporates a local search. These algorithms are meta heuristic techniques, which are high level techniques that rule a set of underlying simpler methods (typically, heuristics) designed to find optimal or near optimal solutions to a given optimization problem (). As mentioned, one important research area is to find appropriate search methods capable of producing the most accurate solutions to the docking problems. In this context, this article proposes a software platform oriented to provide a set of meta heuristic techniques allowing molecular docking problems to be optimized. Our approach has been to integrate auto dock with j metal an object oriented framework for multi-objective optimization with metaheuristics (), which has become one of the most popular software tools in the field. By multi-objective optimization, we refer to solving problems that have two or more conflicting objectives that have to be maximized or minimized at the same time. If an optimization problem is composed of a unique objective function, we say that it is a single objective problem. The underlying idea is to run the algorithms in j metal cpp and to use the scoring function of auto dock 4.2. The original j metal software is written in Java script, so we have built a C implementation from scratch called j metal cpp (http://jmetalcpp.sourceforge.net), the idea being to achieve a clean and efficient integration with auto dock 4.2. By doing this, the resulting platform can benefit, on the one hand, the biologists interested in applying other algorithms than those provided by auto dock to solve their target problems. On the *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com other hand, researchers in metaheuristics frequently search for real world problems to assess the performance of new algorithms, so our solution could lead to the appearance of more efficient techniques for solving molecular docking problems. To the best of our knowledge, this platform is the first to integrate a set of single and multi-objective metaheuristics to solve docking problems.

discussion the use of the j metal cpp framework provides several advantages for those researchers in drug discovery who are interested in improving the docking results with metaheuristics that are different from the searching methods provided by auto dock 4.2. To demonstrate the benefits of our proposal, we evaluated a set of single objective metaheuristics implemented in j metal cpp on a first standard benchmark provided by and a second benchmark that involves flexibility in side chains of arg-8 residue of human immunodeficiency virus protease receptors (). In this article, we have demonstrated that it is possible to improve upon the results obtained by the auto dock algorithms in some scenarios (). Furthermore, j metal cpp can be considered a useful tool for advanced users (or developers) with little C knowledge, who can implement new meta heuristic techniques that can be integrated into this framework with relative ease. Consequently, these techniques can be quickly integrated inside auto dock. The Web site of j metal cpp provides user instructions on how to install and run the j metal cpp framework. For future work, additional developments and improvements to be implemented in j metal cpp are being planned, such as the integration of new single eg. c maes and multi-objective meta heuristic techniques (e.g. sms emo a. We are also considering integrating the auto dock Vina docking function (), a recently developed energy function, the use of which is spreading throughout the auto dock user community.
