Motivation: Tremendous amount of omics data being accumulated poses a pressing challenge of meta analyzing the heterogeneous data for mining new biological knowledge. Most existing methods deal with each gene independently, thus often resulting in high false positive rates in detecting differentially expressed genes (DEG). To our knowledge , no or little effort has been devoted to methods that consider dependence structures underlying transcript omics data for DEG identification in meta analysis context. Results: This article proposes a new meta analysis method for identification of DEGs based on joint non-negative matrix factorization jnm fma. We mathematically extend non-negative matrix factoriza-tion (NMF) to a joint version jn mf which is used to simultaneously decompose multiple transcript omics data matrices into one common submatrix plus multiple individual submatrices. By the jn mf the dependence structures underlying transcript omics data can be interrogated and utilized, while the high dimensional transcript omics data are mapped into a low dimensional space spanned by meta genes that represent hidden biological signals. jnm fma finally identifies DEGs as genes that are associated with differentially expressed meta genes. The ability of extracting dependence structures makes jnm fma more efficient and robust to identify DEGs in meta analysis context. Furthermore, jnm fma is also flexible to identify DEGs that are consistent among various types of omics data, e.g. gene expression and DNA methylation. Experimental results on both simulation data and real world cancer data demonstrate the effectiveness of jnm fma and its superior performance over other popular approaches. Availability and implementation: R code for jnm fma is available for non-commercial use via http://micblab.iim.ac.cn/Download/.

introduction as high throughput biotechnologies have become routine tools in biological and biomedical researches, tremendous amounts of omics data have been generated that provide great opportunity for deciphering molecular mechanisms of cancer or other diseases (). Two famous public gene expression databases, GEO (www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/) and array express wwweb iac uk array express have deposited transcript omic data with more than a million assays from more than 30 000 studies. Another valuable resource, the TCGA project (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/), has released various types of omics data for nearly 10 000 cancer patient samples. Reusing the flood of transcript omics data with meta analysis can reduce sample bias and increase statistical power, and thus allow for in depth understanding of pathology of cancer or other diseases at molecular level (). However, the key issue of meta analysis i.e. capturing consistent but subtle patterns of gene activity across multiple transcript omics datasets, still remains challenging both theoretically and practically. Differentially expressed genes (DEG) across studies could reflect subtle but consistent biological effects and might be false negatives in individual analysis (). To efficiently identify DEGs, meta analysis methods need to overcome a variety of biological or non-biological variations introduced by distinct protocols and data platforms used in individual studies (). From the aspect of information to be combined, existing meta analysis methods can be categorized into three classes: p value based effect size based and rank based which each deal with non-specific variations at different levels of data. Among them, the p value based method is statistically most intuitive but allows for standardization of topic related associations from studies to the common scale of significance (). However, the performance of P value based methods heavily depends on the underlying method used for P value calculation in individual analysis (). Compared with P value based methods, the effect size based methods estimate and directly synthesize effect sizes across studies by using a t statistic like model. Because the effect size quantity provides a direct measure of differential expression, effect size methods tend to be more efficient in detecting DEGs than the P value based methods (). There are two types of effect size models that can be used for meta analysis of transcript omics data: fixed effect model (FEM) and random effect model (REM), which differ in whether between study variation is ignorable. Generally, effect size based methods suffer from unreliable error estimates due to improper distribution assumption *To whom correspondence should be addressed. and large noise inherent in microarray data (). Comparatively, the rank based methods combine the ranks of fold change instead of expression values as in effect size models and have an advantage of fewer or no assumptions about data structures (). These two features make the rank based methods more robust and outlier free in ranking and assessing genes (). A representative rank based method is the rank prod method, proposed by, which has been extensively demonstrated to be more reliable and robust than many other methods, especially in low sample number and or large noise settings (). Statistical hypothesis about variations of differential expression is another non-trivial factor in meta analysis. Two complementary hypotheses are generally assumed behind meta analysis methods: one (HSa) assuming that DEGs are differentially expressed (DE) in all the studies and the other (HSb) assuming that DEGs are DE in one or more studies. The former is more desirable when all the studies are homogeneous, while the latter is more useful and efficient when heterogeneity is expected across datasets. To reconcile the two complementary hypotheses, Song and Tseng (2014) recently presented a new type of hypothesis, HSr, which allows users to specify in what fraction of studies genes are expected to be DE. It is well known that gene correlations are ubiquitous in transcript omics data and can exert substantial impact on the performance of microarray data analysis (). Without exception, the dependence structures also considerably influence the meta analysis of multiple transcript omics datasets and need to be dealt with carefully (). To our knowledge, no or little effort has been devoted to the data dependency issue in meta analysis of transcript omics data. Generally, the dependency can be addressed by transforming the high dimensional data into a low dimensional space. In computer science, many dimensional reduction or projection methods () can be used for the task. For example, L^ e Cao et al. applied canonical correlation (CC) analysis to pursuit low dimensional projections that maximize the associations between two omics variables (L^ e). Other researchers proposed to use co inertia analyses to explore the relationships between two different types of omics datasets (). Non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) is a recently developed projection method, originally proposed for learning natural parts of faces or semantic features of text (). Under the constraint of non negativity NMF specifically factorize s data matrix to recover natural parts that are integral to the whole. It has been shown that NMF and its sparse versions perform well in microarray data analysis for pattern discovery and classification (). In this study, we propose a joint NMF transcript omics data meta analysis method jnm fma for DEG identification. Biologically, a certain number of independent biological signals underlie a phenotype and collectively shape gene activities that are associated with the phenotype. Relative to real gene entity, these biological signals can be referred to as meta genes. One meta gene might dominate the expression of a group of genes and account for the dependence structures between these genes. In return, we can recover these meta genes from transcript omics data and identify DEGs by associating them with meta genes that are responsible for the phenotype. Following this, this article develops a joint NMF algorithm jn mf to simultaneously decompose multiple transcript omics datasets into a low dimensional space spanned by meta genes. Then, we employ a regulation probability model to extract DE meta genes and formulate a new meta gene based statistic for measuring differential expression of a gene in meta analysis context. In summary, jnm fma can interrogate gene correlations in a joint decomposition way for efficient meta analysis of transcript omics data. The use of meta genes as an intermediate step also makes jnm fma flexible in identifying various types of DEGs by confining meta genes. For example, jnm fma can be used to meta analyze transcript omics data and DNA methylation data of a same or similar topic for identifying methylation driven DEGs (as shown in Results section). Compared with other dimensional reduction methods, jnm fma as an extension of NMF, derives a parts based representation, favors a sparse matrix decomposition and thus is more suitable to analyze large scale omics data that are sparse in nature. To evaluate the performance of jnm fma we first applied it to simulation data, where jnm fma successfully identified DEGs with high accuracies. Considering that lung cancer is one of the most malignant tumors worldwide, jnm fma was then employed to identify gene signatures for lung adenocarcinoma lu ad based on real world gene expression and methylation data collected from GEO database. In addition, we downloaded from TCGA (http://cancergenome.nih.gov/) another two expression and methylation datasets of lu ad as independent evaluation datasets. The results on both simulation and real world cancer data show that jnm fma is able to efficiently identify DEGs with biological significance and outperforms other popular approaches.
