Motivation: Whole genome sequencing (WGS) of parent offspring trios is a powerful approach for identifying disease associated genes via detecting copy number variations cn vs. Existing approaches, which detect cn vs for each individual in a trio independently, usually yield low detection accuracy. Joint modeling approaches leveraging Mendelian transmission within the parent offspring trio can be an efficient strategy to improve CNV detection accuracy. Results: In this study, we developed trio cnv a novel approach for jointly detecting cn vs in parent offspring trios from WGS data. Using negative binomial regression, we modeled the read depth signal while considering both GC content bias and mapp ability bias. Moreover, we incorporated the family relationship and used a hidden Markov model to jointly infer cn vs for three samples of a parent offspring trio. Through application to both simulated data and a trio from 1000 Genomes Project, we showed that trio cnv achieved superior performance than existing approaches. Availability and implementation: The software trio cnv implemented using a combination of Java and R is freely available from the website at https://github.com/yongzhuang/TrioCNV.

introduction copy number variations cn vs are defined as changes in the copy number (gain or loss) of large genomic segments, which can be transmitted from parents or arise de novo. cn vs have been shown to play an important role in human morbidities, including neuropsychiatric disorders () and cancers (). cn vs have been traditionally detected using fluorescent in situ hybridization, array comparative genomic hybridization and SNP microarray (). Recently, next generation sequencing (NGS), especially whole genome sequencing (WGS), has become extremely powerful in detecting cn vs comprehensively, being able to identify cn vs that are often missed by array based assays. On the other hand, ngs based approaches present substantial challenges for CNV calling. They usually work by mapping sequencing reads to the reference genome and subsequently identifying discordant mapping signatures putatively caused by cn vs. As summarized in, there have been and (iv) a combination of the above. In addition, cn vs can be detected by using the de novo assembly approach, which first reconstructs contigs from short sequencing reads and then compares the assembled contigs with the reference genome sequence to identify the regions with discordant copy numbers (). Most existing CNV detection approaches focus on one single sample (individually) or multiple samples without considering the inter sample relatedness (). Naturally, when genetic relatedness is known for multiple individuals, effective utilization of this information could potentially improve CNV detection accuracy. A common relevant study design with known inter-individual relationships is sequencing parent offspring trios. Indeed, the parent offspring trio design has been shown to be powerful in identifying disease associated genetic variants for both common and rare diseases (). For trio based NGS data, a joint modeling approach leveraging the parent offspring relationship can potentially improve detection accuracy for cn vs as the same principle has been successfully applied to improve detection accuracy for inherited and de novo single nucleotide variants and INDELs from NGS data () as well as that for cn vs from SNP array data (). Importantly, the joint modeling approach allows for an explicit identification of de novo mutations that have been increasingly recognized to play critical roles in many human diseases (). To our knowledge, there have been no approaches for calling cn vs from trio WGS data in a trio aware manner. Due to the popularity of trio sequencing in both research and clinical settings, such a tool is urgently needed. In this study, we presented trio cnv to fulfill this purpose. First, we modeled read depth signal with negative binomial regression to accommodate over dispersion and considered GC content and mapp ability bias. Second, we leveraged parent offspring relationship to apply Mendelian inheritance constraint while allowing for the rare incidence of de novo events. Third, we used a hidden Markov model (HMM) by combining the two aforementioned models to jointly perform CNV segmentation for the trio. We applied trio cnv to a simulated trio and a WGS trio from 1000 Genomes Project (1000GP) to demonstrate its performance and strength over existing approaches.

discussion in summary, we introduced trio cnv a novel approach to jointly detecting cn vs from WGS data in parent offspring trios. First, we modeled read depth by the negative binomial regression to accommodate over dispersion and account for GC content bias and mapp ability bias. Second, we incorporated parent offspring relation-ship into our model to leverage Mendelian inheritance constraint while allowing the rare incidence of de novo mutations. Third, we used an HMM to jointly make CNV segmentation of the parent offspring trio. To our knowledge, this is the first CNV detection method developed specifically to handle trio sequencing data. To evaluate the performance of trio cnv and compare it with existing approaches, we applied trio cnv to a simulated trio and a sequenced trio from 1000GP. Our results illustrate that trio cnv achieves a better performance compared with existing approaches in the trio setting. Our approach may be further enhanced in several ways. For example, we only modeled the RD signal for emission probability, while not all cn vs are assessable by RD. Therefore, other types of mapping signals such as read pairs and split reads can be incorporated to detect cn vs that are not easily assessable by RD. Similar to other rd based CNV detection methods, trio cnv reports lower (i.e. window based breakpoint resolution than SR-, pem and de novo assembly based methods, and these three kinds of signals can help refine breakpoints. In addition, our approach is now limited to WGS data, but it can be potentially adapted to support whole exo me sequencing data.
