j species Web Server j species ws is a user friendly online service for in silico calculating the extent of identity between two genomes, a parameter routinely used in the process of poly-phasic microbial species circumscription. The service measures the average nucleotide identity (ANI) based on BLASTþ a nib and MUMmer (ANIm), as well as correlation indexes of tetra nucleotide signatures (Tetra). In addition, it provides a Tetra Correlation Search function, which allows to rapidly compare selected genomes against a continuously updated reference database with currently about 32 000 published whole and draft genome sequences. For comparison, own genomes can be uploaded and references can be selected from the j species ws reference database. The service indicates whether two genomes share genomic identities above or below the species embracing thresholds, and serves as a fast way to allocate unknown genomes in the frame of the hitherto sequenced species. Availability and implementation: j species ws is available at

introduction dna dna hybridization (DDH) measures the degree of genomic similarity between two pools of DNA molecules. Despite that distinct DDH determination methods frequently lead to different results, since nearly 50 years it is considered as the gold standard for species delineation (Rossell o-M or a and). In times of cost efficient sequencing with scientists having easy access to thousands of publicly available genome sequences, the species delineation based on user friendly computational pairwise genome comparisons to determine overall genome relatedness indices)] has emerged. This approach has already been widely accepted by the scientific community () and specialized tools like the stand-alone software j species (Richter and Rossell o-M or a 2009) or similar solutions () have proven to provide valuable ogr i results. Here we present the j species Web Server j species ws a web based implementation of the core features of the original j species software for easy user access and extended functionality. It represents the latest development of j species in terms of usability,

conclusion recent studies have shown that electronic (in silico) pairwise ogr i can replace standard laboratory based DDH in order to simplify, and at the same time substantiate, this central aspect of prokaryotic species delineation. In addition, ogr i allows taxonomists to quickly verify the species affiliation of any public genome sequence and to identify wrongly annotated submissions. j species ws will help to further propagate this approach by providing fast and easy access to the corresponding analyses and a comprehensive genomes reference database.
