Motivation: Alternative splicing represents a prime mechanism of post-transcriptional gene regulation whose mis regulation is associated with a broad range of human diseases. Despite the vast availability of transcriptome data from different cell types and diseases, bioinformatics based surveys of alternative splicing patterns remain a major challenge due to limited availability of analytical tools that combine high accuracy and rapidity. Results: We describe here a novel junction centric method, j splice that enables de novo extraction of alternative splicing events from rna sequencing data with high accuracy, reliability and speed. Application to clear cell renal carcinoma ccrc c cell lines and 65 ccrc c patients revealed experimentally valid a table alternative splicing changes and signatures able to prognosticate ccrc c outcome. In the aggregate, our results propose j splice as a key analytic tool for the derivation of cell context dependent alternative splicing patterns from large scale rna sequencing datasets. Availability and implementation: j splice is a standalone Python application freely available at

introduction alternative splicing, a mechanism unknown more than 30 years ago, is now regarded a major contributor to transcriptome and proteome diversity (). It is estimated that, in human, 95% of multi exon genes undergo alternative splicing (), underscoring the importance of this posttranscriptional mechanism in the regulation of gene expression. Indeed, many key biological processes and disease states involve profound alternative splicing pattern changes (). Nowadays, technological advances in RNA sequencing rnase q are yielding data at an enormous scale and allow for genome wide analysis of alternative splicing patterns from patient data. However, the availability of in silico tools able to reliably interrogate alternative splicing events from rnase q data remains limited (). For example, transcript based approaches, such as cuff diff (), allow for reconstruction of the complete transcriptome but are limited in their accuracy of extracted events (). exon based approaches, such as dex seq (), provide more reliable results but due to their focus on a subset of events, yield only partial information. In addition, both of these approaches suffer from scalability issues, hindering the analysis of large scale datasets. Hence, there is pressing need to expand methodologies for fast and accurate analysis of alternative splicing patterns over the past few years, an increased ability to align split reads to the genome and greater sequencing depths raised the status of junction reads reads that span exon exon junctions to an independent and reliable source of information. To the contrary of other reads, they permit a precise localization of exon boundaries and allow testing whether two exons exist consecutively within a transcript, an essential step for the detection of alternative splicing events. An increasing number of methods, such as diff splice (), MISO (), jun c base (), or splicing compass (), are including junction reads in their analysis but only few eg. spank i () and r mats ()consider them as the primary source of information. Here we present j splice a junction centric method to identify differentially expressed alternative splicing events at the exon level. Unlike spank i and r mats which rely on databases of splicing events, j splice performs a de novo reconstruction of all possible alternative splicing events based on junction positions, allowing thus detection of simple and complex alternative splicing events even in poorly annotated genomes. Distinctive to other currently applied methods, j splice does not assess the statistical significance of the observed changes in expression between two groups of samples. Rather it relies on a set of user defined thresholds to select and rank alternative splicing changes by the amplitude. The performance of j splice visa vis other splicing analysis software tools was rigorously assessed on simulated and real datasets and shows a greatly enhanced sensitivity and specificity. Also, application of j splice to RNA sequencing datasets derived from human clear cell renal cell carcinoma ccrc c cell lines and patient tumors identified valid a table alternative splicing events. Our work suggests that j splice is a highly reliable and accurate method with remarkably low execution times, making it greatly suitable for routine large scale analysis of rnase q data.

discussion recent studies concur that most if not all of human multi exon genes yield multiple splice isoforms through alternative splicing. Alternative splicing is also highly context dependent and promotes an enormous diversification of gene function that dictates tissue differentiation, development and, when m is regulated disease development. With transcriptome s of different tissues and disease states becoming readily available through the application of high throughput rna sequencing analytical methods to distinguish and quantify mRNA isoforms hold the potential for an unbiased and thorough insight into alternative splicing. However, data analysis is not trivial and, as a result, the development of software for fast, reliable and ultimately routine detection of alternative splicing lags currently behind the sequencing capabilities. The development of j splice described here provides an important advance as it provides a method of unmatched specificity, sensitivity and rapidity for the analysis of AS events, key elements that currently hinder the comprehensive analysis of large scale experiments. Thus, j splice is highly suitable for reliable analysis of alternative splicing events in large scale transcriptome data. Application of j splice on rnase q datasets of renal carcinoma cells and human ccrc c tissues revealed novel, valid a table vhl and renal cancer dependent alternative splicing events substantiating the value of j splice as an analytical tool for genome wide analysis of AS events. j splice relies on a novel junction based definition of alternative splicing modules that allows for a rapid detection of alternative splicing events, simple or complex, without having to rely on a predefined set of transcripts such as implemented in r mats or MISO. The concept of as ms confers generality while keeping complexity at a low level but the associated software, diff splice suffers from high execution time and low accuracy. Another key feature of j splice is its entirely different method for the assessment of differential expression. That is, to focus on expression fold change instead of modeling biological and technical variations. Models of read count distribution are necessary to estimate transcript abundance for a given experiment and to assess the statistical significance of the change. However a simple fold change threshold, as implemented in j splice seems, in practice, sufficient to detect large splicing changes in comparisons of experiments. Supporting that argument recently pointed out that a fold change measurement is sufficient to identify differential expression of genes. Of note, as the complexity of an ASM increases, so does the number of pairwise comparisons, which increases the possibility of identifying a false positive. In this specific state, j splice may potentially over report complex ASM. Variability between replicates is inherent to biological experiments and, in the context of our simulations, affected all tested methods. Nonetheless j splice aims at ranking splicing events by the amplitude of the change in order to provide a list of valid a table genes for experimental biologists. In that respect the larger changes are potentially the most relevant ones and j splice showed a better accuracy than dex seq and r mats in detecting those. Additionally, we demonstrated that the use of a different read aligner, different parameters, or a different rna sequencing setup did not impact j splices high specificity. Application of j splice to detect alternative splicing events in renal carcinoma cells as a function of pv hl status identified alternative splicing events in MYO6, DNMT3B, NEDD4L and TMCC1. Since loss of VHL represents a signature lesion in human ccrc c it is attractive to consider that one or more of these changes in alternative splicing contribute, in part, to renal carcinogenesis. Myosin VI (MYO6), whose alternative splicing event was identified by j splice in both cell lines experiment and TCGA data, moves d events identified by j splice are outlined in orange. Splice graphs, with alternative exons in gray, were inferred from UCSC annotations j splice and its application to renal cancer toward the minus end of act in filaments and is involved in the transport of vesicles and organelles (). The three exons that we found alternatively spliced in renal carcinoma cells encode a fragment referred to as 'long insert' located in the cargo binding tail of myosin VI (). Thus, the presence of the 'long insert' may affect motor cargo interactions. It may also confer preferential expression in polarized cells (such as kidney cells (). As the long isoform of Myosin VI is more abundant in pv hl proficient renal carcinoma cells and in healthy tissue compared to tumor, it is conceivable that a myosin VI switch from the long to the short isoform may contribute to the loss of polarization of transformed kidney cells. DNMT3B is implicated in chromatin methylation and has been previously shown to be differentially spliced in multiple cancer types (). Also the alternative exon identified in this study has been previously shown to discriminate between pluripotent and differentiated cells gopala krishna pillai and Iverson, 2011). Thus, pv hl dependent changes in DNMT3B splicing may be added to the growing list of chromatin modifying enzymes functionally altered in human ccrc c. NEDD4L has been shown to regulate TGF-beta signaling () and its gene expression has been associated with several cancers (). However the reported alternative splicing event has not been explored. TMCC1 is the least studied of the four genes identified in the j splice analysis in renal carcinoma cells. In a recent study, it has been shown to anchor in the endoplasmic reticulum (ER) to regulate ER membrane organization and the attachment of ribosomes to the ER (). The short isoform identified in this study would encode only the c terminal transmembrane domain and create a loss of function. It has been previously reported that splicing events are not necessarily specific to one cancer type, but rather that common splicing signatures exist (). Consistent with this notion, our j splice analysis of rnase q data from human ccrc c obtained from the TCGA archive unveiled potentially generic alternative splicing events in SYK (previously shown to occur in breast and ovarian cancer ()), and MKNK2 (found in breast, lung and colon cancers (). In the case of MKNK2, we observed a highly significant correlation between the relative expression of the MKNK2 isoforms and patient outcome. Given the very encouraging reports on the recent development of orally available small molecule splicing modifiers for the treatment of spinal muscular atrophy (), it will be exciting to explore the possibility of targeting MKNK2 alternative splicing as a line of therapy in cancer. AS analysis of large scale patient data, such as provided by the TCGA, is currently unachievable with other software such as dex seq () or r mats (). Their long execution time or their inability to use read counts as inputs renders them impractical for large scale analyses. In that respect, j splice offers a convenient and fast solution. As a consequence, a pan cancer analysis of alternative splicing in patient data is now feasible and may reveal potential splicing signatures suitable for diagnostic and therapeutic applications.
