Kalign2 is one of the fastest and most accurate methods for multiple alignments. However, in contrast to other methods Kalign2 does not allow externally supplied position specific gap penalties. Here, we present a modification to Kalign2, kali gnp so that it accepts such penalties. Further, we show that kali gnp using position specific gap penalties obtained from predicted secondary structures makes steady improvement over Kalign2 when tested on bali base 3.0 as well as on a dataset derived from pfam a seed alignments. Availability and Implementation: kali gnp is freely available at

introduction the alignment of multiple sequences is essential for many tasks in sequence analysis, e.g. protein structure and function prediction, similarity search and phylogenetic analysis (). Due to the importance of multiple sequence alignment (MSA) in a variety of biological applications, a number of programs have been developed. Three aspects are usually considered when developing an MSA program, the alignment accuracy, the computational speed and the memory usage. Kalign2 () is one of the fastest MSA methods, and still the alignment accuracy is comparable to many of the slower methods. Moreover, it produces high quality alignments consistently when aligning large number of sequences, i.e. Kalign2 is well suited for MSA tasks in large scale genome analysis. However, in contrast to other methods such as ClustalW (), Kalign2 does not allow externally supplied position specific gap penalties esp sgp showed that gaps occur far more often between major secondary structure elements than within. Also gaps are much more frequent in disordered regions of proteins. For integral transmembrane (TM) proteins, residues are more conserved at TM regions and few gaps are allowed within (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Further, the inclusion of esp sgp allows some inclusion of expertise knowledge into the alignment procedure. Here, we introduce kali gnp as a modified version of Kalign2 that accepts esp sgp. Unlike ClustalW, where esp sgp is only applicable to profile alignments, kali gnp incorporates esp sgp into sequences and forward them to the full progressive alignment.
