Motivation: Although the majority of gene histories found in a clade of organisms are expected to be generated by a common process (e.g. the coalescent process), it is well known that numerous other coex-isting processes (e.g. horizontal gene transfers, gene duplication and subsequent neo functionalization will cause some genes to exhibit a history distinct from those of the majority of genes. Such outlying gene trees are considered to be biologically interesting, and identifying these genes has become an important problem in phylogenetics. Results: We propose and implement kde trees a non-parametric method for estimating distributions of phylogenetic trees, with the goal of identifying trees that are significantly different from the rest of the trees in the sample. Our method compares favorably with a similar recently published method, featuring an improvement of one polynomial order of computational complexity (to quadratic in the number of trees analyzed), with simulation studies suggesting only a small penalty to classification accuracy. Application of kde trees to a set of Apicomplexa genes identified several unreliable sequence alignments that had escaped previous detection, as well as a gene independently reported as a possible case of horizontal gene transfer. We also analyze a set of epic hlo e genes, fungi symbiotic with grasses, successfully identifying a contrived instance of paralogy. Availability and implementation: Our method for estimating tree distributions and identifying outlying trees is implemented as the R package kde trees and is available for download from CRAN.

introduction a central problem in systematic biology is the reconstruction of the evolutionary history of populations and species from numerous gene trees with varying levels of discordance (). Although there is a well established understanding that discordant phylogenetic relationships will exist among independent gene trees drawn from a common species tree (), phylogenetic studies have only recently begun to shift away from single gene and concatenated gene estimates of phylogeny in favor of multilocus methods (). These newer approaches focus on the role of genetic drift in producing patterns of incomplete lineage sorting and gene tree species tree discordance, largely using coalescent theory (). These theoretical developments have been used to reconstruct species trees from samples of estimated gene trees (). Detecting concordance among gene trees is also a topic of interest. For example, An e et al. (2007) developed a Bayesian method to estimate concordance among gene trees using molecular sequence data from multiple loci. The method can produce estimated gene trees as well as an estimate of the proportion of the genome that supports a particular clade. However, a priori assumptions must be made about the degree and structure of concordance present in the gene trees. Although there is a tremendous amount of ongoing effort to develop better parametric models for gene tree distributions, the parametric framework has inherent limitations. Although a parametric method typically makes the most efficient use of a given dataset when the model is specified correctly, they achieve this efficiency by assuming that the true distribution of gene trees is one of a relatively small class of distributions. This can lead to erroneous inferences when the true distribution does not resemble any of the models in the proposed class. Given that many questions remain about the proper way to incorporate a number of important processes into a parametric model (e.g. geographic barriers to migration or a population bottleneck), the problem of model mis-specification is real. Non-parametric methods avoid the majority of these modeling issues, enabling unbiased estimation for a much larger class of true tree distributions at a cost of statistical efficiency. Numerous processes can reduce the correlation among gene trees. Negative or balancing selection on a particular locus is expected to increase the probability that ancestral gene copies are maintained through speciation events (). Horizontal transfer introduces divergent gene copies into a different species through shuffling gene copies among species via hybridization (). The correlation may also be reduced by naive sampling of loci for analysis. For example, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. paralogous gene copies will result in a gene tree that conflates gene duplication with speciation. Similarly, sampled sequence data that span one or more recombination events will yield 'gene trees' that are hybrids of two or more genealogical histories (). These non coalescent processes can strongly influence phylogenetic inference (). In addition showed that an analysis of complete genomes indicated a massive prokaryotic gene transfer (or transfers) preceding the formation of the eukaryotic cell, arguing that there is significant genomic evidence for more than one distinct class of genes. These examples suggest that the distribution of eukaryotic gene trees may be more accurately modeled as a mixture of a number of more fundamental distributions. In this article, we focus on the problem of identifying significant discordance among gene trees, as well as estimating the distribution of gene trees as a whole. This set of gene trees is assumed to consist mostly of 'typical' (or non outlier gene trees, which are assumed to be independently sampled from some distribution f. For example, gene trees have evolved neutrally under a coalescent process. In addition, there are a smaller number of 'outlier' gene trees that are sampled from a different distribution f 0. These genes are assumed to arise from less common evolutionary processes, for example, paralogy, neo functionalization horizontal gene transfer or periods of rapid molecular evolution. In addition, more mundane errors such as incorrect sequencing, alignment, tree reconstruction or annotation can also produce outlier trees in a dataset (). Our method produces a non-parametric estimate of the distribution f and also attempts to identify potential outlier gene trees that are probably not generated by f. Trees identified as outliers can then be inspected more closely for biologically interesting properties. In particular, identifying and removing outliers that violate model assumptions can improve the accuracy of inferences made from a collection of gene trees (e.g.). Note that in this article we use dissimilarity maps, geodesic distances and topological dissimilarity maps between trees for simulations and implementation of our software (see Subsection 2.1.1). With these distance measures between trees, we implicitly assume a multispecies coalescent model (). Also note that the choice of tree distance measures might change the detected outlying gene trees. For example, if the subtree pruning and re grafting (SPR) distance between trees is used, the detected outlier gene trees would be having an excess of recombinations or horizontal gene transfers.

DISCUSSION

conclusion the ongoing development of ever cheaper sequencing methods is producing a plethora of data suitable for phylo genomic analysis. One of the great promises of modern genomics is that phylogenetics applied at the genomic scale phylo genomics should be especially powerful for elucidating gene and genome evolution, relationships among species and populations and processes of speciation and molecular evolution. However, for genomic data that can now be generated relatively cheaply and quickly, but for which computationally efficient analytical tools are lacking, there is a major need to explore new approaches to undertake comparative genomic and phylo genomic studies more rapidly and robustly than existing tools allow. There is a major need to explore new approaches to undertake comparative genomic and phylo genomic studies more rapidly and robustly than existing tools allow. In simulations and applications to biological data, we address particular challenges posed by bioinformatic artifacts, as well as interesting biological phenomena such as gene duplications and horizontal gene transfer. As we observed in the Apicomplexa and fungal datasets, our approach also serves as a means of identifying 'interesting' gene trees that may arise from horizontal gene transfer, paralogy or experimental artifacts such as mis annotations or misalignments. A further advantage of our method is that it may be applied in a straightforward way to phylogenetic reconstruction methods which produce a sample of many trees as output, rather than a single 'best fit' tree. Methods that produce only a point estimate do not represent the full set of possible phylogenies compatible with the gene sequences. We can circumvent this issue by building a kernel for each gene based on a collection or sample of reconstructed topologies (e.g. via the estimated posterior distribution of each gene), rather than using only a point estimate of each gene tree. In future work, we intend to extend our method to clustering trees based on similarity, in addition to identifying outliers. The identification and exclusion of outlier points is an important preliminary step in many clustering methods. The removal of outlier points facilitates better inference at the clustering stage (). A long term goal for this project is to develop a phylo genomic pipeline that is convenient and accessible, as well as robust. To accomplish this aim, important problems that need attention are (i) refinement of gene calls based on comparison among orthologs from multiple genomes and (ii) comparing thousands of gene phylogenies across whole genomes. Therefore, our approach is focused on the efficiency of the algorithm in terms of computational complexity and memory requirements, with less emphasis on achieving the highest classification accuracy possible. Such a trade-off makes our approach more attractive candidate for inclusion in a pipeline for genome wide phylogenetics as an annotation supplement or as a discovery aid for instances where evolutionary processes deviate significantly from normal.
