KeBABS provides a powerful, flexible and easy to use framework for kernel based analysis of biological sequences in R. It includes efficient implementations of the most important sequence kernels, also including variants that allow for taking sequence annotations and positional information into account. KeBABS seamlessly integrates three common support vector machine (SVM) implementations with a unified interface. It allows for hyper parameter selection by cross validation, nested cross validation and also features grouped cross validation. The biological interpretation of SVM models is supported by (1) the computation of weights of sequence patterns and (2) prediction profiles that highlight the contributions of individual sequence positions or sections. Availability and implementation: The R package kebabs is available via the Bioconductor project:

introduction the analysis of biological sequences is a fundamental task in bioinformatics. In the last two decades, kernel methods have been established as an important class of sequence analysis methods. For the classification of sequences, in particular, support vector machines (SVMs) have emerged as a sort of best practice. To apply SVMs for sequence analysis, it is necessary to either use a vectorial representation of the sequence data or to use sequence kernels, that is, positive semi-definite similarity measures for sequences. The use of sequence kernels, however, is not limited to sequence classification. For example, they can also be used for regression tasks and similarity based clustering. On the scientific computing platform R which is widely used in bioinformatics, only the kern lab package () provides a limited selection of sequence kernels. This article presents KeBABS, an r bioconductor package for kernel based sequence analysis that is primarily focused on biological applications. Compared with the SHOGUN Toolbox (), KeBABS provides a wider selection of up-to-date sequence kernels and facilitates seamless interplay with R and bioconductor s sequence data packages.
