KEGG pathway database is a collection of manually drawn pathway maps accompanied with KGML format files intended for use in automatic analysis. KGML files, however, do not contain the required information for complete reproduction of all the events indicated in the static image of a pathway map. Several parsers and editors of KEGG pathways exist for processing KGML files. We introduce kegg parser a MATLAB based tool for KEGG pathway parsing, semiautomatic fixing, editing, visualization and analysis in MATLAB environment. It also works with Scilab. Availability and implementation: The source code is available at

introduction kegg pathway database is a collection of manually drawn pathway maps representing current knowledge on molecular interaction and reaction networks, accompanied with KGML (KEGG Markup language) files for automatic computational analyses and modelling of metabolic and signalling networks (). Pathways in KGML are represented as graph objects with entry elements (gene products, compounds, pathways) as nodes and relations between elements as edges. However, in most cases, KGML files do not fully correspond to the static pathway images. Inconsistencies may include absence of event or entity labels, reversed directions for some associations, absence of some interactions, ambiguous definitions of group nodes, compounds and their interactions. Investigation of five randomly chosen KEGG pathways (tight junction, ubiquitin mediated proteolysis, toll like receptor signalling, autoimmune thyroid disease and homologous recombination) revealed that they contain on average 13, 26, 3 and 10 inconsistencies concerned with labelling, missing interactions, directionality and group node definitions, respectively (see Supplementary Data, 'Why to edit KEGG pathways after KGML parsing' section). These inconsistencies may have significant distorting effects on pathway flows. Thus, preprocessing of information contained in a KGML file is needed before it can be used in automatic analysis. Several KGML parsers have been developed recently, such as kgm led (), kegg graph (), kegg reader plugin for Cytoscape (http://cytoscape.github.com/kgmlreader/) and kegg translator (). Although some of these applications have the appropriate functionality for retrieving, parsing, visualizing and editing KGML formatted files, they all suffer from the aforementioned limitations of those files. Moreover, some of the softwares have additional drawbacks, e.g. kegg reader has reduced functionality for non metabolic networks and kegg graph and kegg translator do not completely support edge and node editing operations. In general, whichever program is chosen, there is always a need for saving manually edited pathways in an appropriate format suitable for further automated analyses of pathway data. As each program provides certain file formats for pathway maps, which can not be used in MATLAB for automated pathway analysis, a pathway editor is also needed to be developed in MATLAB environment. In this article, we introduce kegg parser (pathway semiautomatic parser editor which is based solely on functions contained in MATLAB, its Bioinformatics toolbox version 3.x and Image processing toolbox 2.x, and it does not require any third party package. This tool is aimed at enriching matlab s Bioinformatics toolbox functionality, which is focused on solving the most contemporary bioinformatics tasks. In addition, we have also ported kegg parser into Scilab 5.4, a free open source alternative for MATLAB (included in the source files archive).
