During mitosis, chromosomes are attached to the mitotic spindle via large protein complexes called kinetochores. The motion of kinetochores throughout mitosis is intricate and automated quantitative tracking of their motion has already revealed many surprising facets of their behaviour. Here, we present KiT (Kinetochore tracking an easy to use open source software package for tracking kinetochores from live cell fluorescent movies. KiT supports 2D, 3D and multi-colour movies, quantification of fluorescence, integrated deconvolution, parallel execution and multiple algorithms for particle localization. Availability and implementation: KiT is free, open source software implemented in MATLAB and runs on all MATLAB supported platforms. KiT can be downloaded as a package from http://www. mechano chemistry org mca in sh software php. The source repository is available at https://bitbucket. or gj armond kit and under continuing development.

introduction the process of mitosis involves the attachment of chromosomes to a protein scaffold, called the mitotic spindle, via large protein complexes called kinetochores (). Throughout mitosis, the kinetochores, and hence the chromosomes, execute a highly complex stochastic motion culminating in the segregation of the genetic material to the two daughter cells. Automated quantitative tracking of fluorescently labelled kinetochores is revealing surprising details of their behaviour and makes the analysis of large datasets consisting of hundreds or thousands of cells feasible (). We have developed a MATLAB package kinetochore Tracking kit for tracking the motion of kinetochores, facilitating the quantitative analysis of chromosome motion c. Although KiT is primarily developed with tracking of kinetochores in mind, it is also useful as a tool for tracking other fluorescently marked particles in cells, e.g. centrosomes, motors etc., provided they have an approximately Gaussian shape and are not extended objects. For example, the centrosomes can also be tracked when fluorescently marked (e.g.).

conclusion we have developed KiT, a software tool which enables user friendly and efficient particle tracking and basic analysis of kinetochores and other objects. We hope that it will lower the entry barrier for quantitative tracking analysis of live cell imaging data by cell biology laboratories.
