Motivation: protein protein interactions pp is underpin virtually all cellular processes both in health and disease. Modulating the interaction between proteins by means of small (chemical) agents is therefore a promising route for future novel therapeutic interventions. In this context, peptides are gaining momentum as emerging agents for the modulation of pp is. Results: We reported a novel computational, structure and knowledge based approach to model ortho steric peptides to target pp is pip red. pip red relies on a precompiled and be spoken library of structural motifs, i motifs extracted from protein complexes and a fast structural modeling algorithm driven by the location of native chemical groups on the interface of the protein target named anchor residues. pip red comprehensive and systematically samples the entire interface deriving peptide conformations best suited for the given region on the protein interface. pip red complements the existing technologies and provides new solutions for the disruption of selected interactions. Availability and implementation: Database and accessory scripts and programs are available upon request to the authors or at http://www.bioinsilico.org/PIPRED.

introduction protein protein interactions pp is are essential in the shaping of normal and pathological behaviors in cells. A new frontier in drug discovery is, therefore, the development of new therapeutic agents to modulate pp is (). Although originally considered un drug gable pp is are arising as promising therapeutic targets as reviewed in Wells and McClendon (2007) and they are attracting considerable attention from biotechnological companies as the un mined gold reserve' in drug discovery (). One part of the problem is that proteins usually interact through large and flat surfaces that lack defining physicochemical traits that can be exploited to attain the required affinities. It is becoming clearer that chemistry originating from traditional drug discovery programs is perhaps not the most suited for targeting pp is (), and thus new chemo types should be sought. It is in this context, and thanks to biotechnology advances that have improved its pharmacokinetic properties (), that peptides are gaining momentum as emerging agents for the modulation of pp is (). Besides, peptide mediated interactions are common in Biology, accounting for up to 40% of the interactions that take place inside the cell (). They are also central to number of essential cellular processes such as signal transduction, protein assembly, protein localization and regulation () and thus are the more natural candidates for the inhibition of pp is (). Moreover, peptides do not preclude traditional chemistry as they can be used as precursors to derive chemical compounds, i.e. pept i do mimetics (e.g. p53-MDM2 () and Bak BH3/ bcl xl ().) Computational tools can be used to model the structure of peptides targeting protein interfaces. Such approaches include peptide), linking (), property guided searches (), optimization () and docking (). While useful, these technologies present a number of limitations: (i) the search is usually restricted to a small region of the interface given the time that will be required to fully explore the entire interface; (ii) the structure of peptides tend to be biased toward linear and extended conformations as its maximized the contacts with the target surface, however, peptides can adopt different conformations including a helix (); (iii) do not explicitly exploit the natural repertoire of peptide sequences, which has been proved to increase the chance to identify bioactive peptides (); (iv) some methods require the sequence of the peptides, and thus neglecting the discovery of novel sequences; and (v) other methods are based on the optimization of main chain stretches isolated from its cognate partner(s), and thus can not be used to explore novel conformations. Here, we present pip red a novel, structure and knowledge based approach to model the conformation of peptides targeting protein interfaces. pip red relies on a be spoken library of structural motifs derived from interfaces named i motifs and it uses native structural elements of the interface being targeted target interface so called disembodied anchor residues. The search and sampling of peptides covers the entire interface, i.e. a systematic and comprehensive exploration without biases caused by specific location(s) of the target interface or by the conformation of peptides. pip red is therefore a good complement to existing methodologies.

conclusion in this work, we present a novel, knowledge based computational method to model and design ortho steric peptides: pip red. pip red relies on the structural information of the protein complexes and on a be spoken library of structural motifs: i motifs db. The residues that mediate the interaction of cognate partner(s) and target protein, i.e. anchor residues, are used to drive a comprehensive and systematic sampling and modelling of peptides derived from i motifs. pip red can be applied to any protein complex for which the three dimensional structure is known and thus open a new avenue to exploit the repository of protein complexes present in structural databases. Additionally, the technology can be easily adapted to), RAS-P120 (), ras ral () and ras scfv (). Bottom row, surface representation of RAS (gray) and switch iii depicted in red. Anchor residues and modeled peptides are represented as yellow spheres and ribbon representation, respectively (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online.). Example of modeling involving a small interface. Top row from left to right is the cartoon representation of Myc (gray) and Max (blue) complex bound to DNA (green and gold) (); anchor residues derived from max shown as red spheres. Bottom row, ribbon representation of Myc (gray) and modeled peptides in helical (left) and linear (right) conformation (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online.). Example of modeling involving two non-overlapping and distant interfaces. Top row from left to right is the cartoon representation of tapas in (cyan) and ERP57 (green) complex and the two interfaces labeled 'a' and b' (); anchor residues derived from tapas in shown as red spheres. Bottom row, ribbon representation of ERP57 (gray) and examples of modeled peptides for site 'a' (left) and site 'b' (right) (Color version of this figure is available at Bioinformatics online.) individual protein structures, i.e. cases where the structure of the complex is not known, since individual amino acids can be placed on the surface of the target protein structure via single residue docking [e.g as in (Ben. Finally, this new approach could be used in conjunction with high throughput peptide synthesis techniques such as peptide microarrays to generate a pool of sequences that are biased toward the targeted surface, i.e. a directed search as opposed to a random peptide screening.
