Motivation: By simplifying the many bodied complexity of residue packing into patterns of simple pairwise secondary structure interactions between a single knob residue with a three residue socket, the knob socket construct allows a more direct incorporation of structural information into the prediction of residue contacts. By modeling the preferences between the amino acid composition of a socket and knob, we undertake an investigation of the knob socket constructs ability to improve the prediction of residue contacts. The statistical model considers three priors and two posterior estimations to better understand how the input data affects predictions. This produces six implementations of ks cons that are tested on three sets: psi cov CASP10, and CASP11. We compare against the current leading contact prediction methods. Results: The results demonstrate the usefulness as well as the limits of knob socket based structural modeling of protein contacts. The construct is able to extract good predictions from known structural homologs, while its performance degrades when no homologs exist. Among our six implementations, ks cons ms tmp (which uses the multiple structure alignment prior and marginal posterior incorporating structural homolog information) performs the best in all three prediction sets. An analysis of recall and precision finds that ks cons ms tmp improves accuracy not only by improving identification of true positives, but also by decreasing the number of false positives. Over the CASP10 and CASP11 sets, ks cons ms tmp performs better than the leading methods using only evolutionary coupling data, but not quite as well as the supervised learning methods of meta psi cov and coin dc ann that incorporate a large set of structural features. Contact:

introduction due to the resource intensive nature of experimental protein structure determination, the amount of information about protein structure lags far behind the amount of known protein sequence data. Yet, a protein structure yields a deeper understanding of how a protein functions as well as how it is controlled in a biological system. Since an fine sens insightful experiments on protein folding (), it is generally accepted that all the information on a protein's structure is coded in its amino acid sequence. Therefore, automatic methods that predict protein structure from its sequence are a particular focus of computational biochemistry. As a step towards developing a protein structure prediction method, this work describes the statistical model for the prediction of protein residue contacts using the novel knob socket model of protein residue packing structure. There are four distinct levels of protein structure. The sequential chemical bonded nature of a polypeptide chain of amino acids allows 1. The structure of Protein G 1pgb () is shown with the backbone in ribbon and residues as ball and stick. For clarity, the sheet is shown in blue, the helix in orange. Because of the many bodied contacts between residue, the 3 @BULLET interactions are difficult to identify even when isolated in the 2 circles. In contrast, the knob socket representation of 3 @BULLET packing provides a clear decomposition of the packing surfaces between the helix and sheet, such that the interpretation of packing are simple pairings of knobs packing into sockets (). To be consistent with the color theme, the knob socket packing surface topology map shows knobs from sheets in blue, helix in orange, and coil in green. As examples, the interactions in the circles reference the sheet knob F52 packing into a helix socket made up of residues A26,E27:F30 and also the helix knob Y33 packing into the sheet socket made up of residues L5,L7:T16, where the sockets are given in the standard notation (). Therefore, instead of pairwise residue contacts, the 3 @BULLET residue packing contacts are classified as knob socket interactions, which allow a direct mapping of structure to sequence patterns. the primary (1 @BULLET ) structure of a protein to be simply represented as the linear sequence of the amino acids. At the secondary (2 @BULLET ) level of protein structure, the patterns of chemical interactions called hydrogen bonds determine the state assigned at that position in the sequence. The set of interactions that bring these 2 @BULLET structure elements together within a polypeptide chain is called the tertiary (3 @BULLET ) level of protein structure. The last quaternary (4 @BULLET ) level of protein structure occurs between two separate polypeptide chains. In prediction of protein structure, the goal is to predict a protein's 3 @BULLET structure from the amino acid 1 @BULLET sequence. An important part of predicting protein 3 @BULLET structure is to correctly identify the residues close in three dimensional space that define the topology of the folded backbone. As a result, residue contact prediction has become its own category in computational structural biology. As discussed in the most recent Critical Assessment of Structure Prediction (CASP) review of contact prediction methods (), accurate predictions of residue contacts have been successfully used to model soluble () as well as transmembrane () protein structures. Recently, it has been estimated that 1 long range contact is needed per every 12 residues for an accurate prediction of protein 3 @BULLET structure (). A thorough review comparison of the major contact prediction methods has been performed and serves as a good benchmark (). Generally, these approaches to contact prediction are based on the concept of evolutionary coupling (EC), where residues packing near in space will most likely mutate with each other (). This approach is most successful when there are many sequence homologs to provide a deep enough multiple sequence alignment to identify covariation between positions. To address cases with low sequence information, characteristics from protein structure usually on the order of hundreds have been added to EC. To properly integrate these large number of multiple inputs, machine learning methods like support vector machines () or neural nets () have been used. At the most recent 11th CASP meeting, the CONSIP2 server of the meta psi cov method () demonstrated quantifiable progress even on targets with little to no sequence homologs () by implementing a supervised machine learning approach that combined several EC protocols with over 600 protein features to address the lack of sequence information. By identifying exact residue contacts from 3 @BULLET structure packing, the knob socket model provides a simpler and more direct approach to incorporate structural data that is complementary to the aforementioned methods for predicting protein contacts. In a series of papers (), a novel description of protein 3 @BULLET packing has been developed that uses a new construct to predict protein contacts. The knob socket model represents a paradigm shift in the characterization of protein structure by directly relating protein sequence and the arrangement of residues in 3 @BULLET structure. As shown in, the model decomposes the complexity of the multibody residue interactions into discrete patterns of a four residue packing unit called the knob socket. Essentially, the entire 2 @BULLET structure simply maps into 3 residue sockets (which include irregular coil structure) that exist in either a filled or free state to define 3 @BULLET structure. A filled socket packs with a knob residue to form 3 @BULLET structure and reduces the many bodied residue packing interactions into a simple two body mapping of knob socket patterns. A free socket indicates those regions of the structure that are not involved in 3 @BULLET structure. It has been shown that the types of amino acids that make up the socket determine whether a socket is filled or free. As a result, filled sockets provide a scoped definition for predicting residue contacts in 3 @BULLET. In other words, protein contacts can be modeled based on the propensity of the filled knob socket interactions. In this work, we investigate the usefulness of a knob socket based approach to protein contact prediction. One challenge in identifying the residue contacts is projecting the 1 @BULLET and 2 @BULLET one dimensional structures into a three dimensional arrangements of amino acids. The characterization of packing as a knob residue contacting three residues in a socket allows the direct mapping of three dimensional residue arrangements to one dimensional contact pairs. Unlike the supervised learning approaches that use hundreds of inputs to include structural information, our approach uses only the knob socket construct. We incorporate this protein structural information defined by the knob socket construct into a principled statistical approach. The 3 @BULLET packing information provided by the knob socket model is captured by our likelihood and the evolutionary data from structural homologs provides prior information in our Bayesian approach. We name our proposed residue contact prediction program ks cons. To properly assess predictions, ks cons is run against 3 structure sets. The first is the set of 150 structural families used to comprehensively compare a number of current contact prediction routines () that was originally used to characterize psi cov (). The last 2 are the more challenging sets of structures from CASP10 () and CASP11 (). From the standard scores used in these comparisons, ks cons produces an improvement in the prediction of protein contacts and therefore demonstrates the usefulness of a structure based modeling of protein contacts in prediction.
