Motivation: Non-synonymous single nucleotide polymorphisms ns snps in voltage gated potassium (Kv) channels cause diseases with potentially fatal consequences in seemingly healthy individuals. Identifying disease causing genetic variation will aid presymptomatic diagnosis and treatment of such disorders. ns snp effect predictors are hypothesized to perform best when developed for specific gene families. We, thus, created kv snp a method that assigns a disease causing probability to kv channel ns snps. Results: kv snp outperforms popular non gene family specific methods snps go SIFT and poly phen in predicting the disease potential of kv channel variants, according to all tested metrics (accuracy, Matthews correlation coefficient and area under receiver operator characteristic curve). Most significantly, it increases the separation of the median predicted disease probabilities between benign and disease causing SNPs by 26% on the next best competitor. kv snp has ranked 172 uncharacterized kv channel ns snps by disease causing probability.

introduction one in every 300 bases of human DNA shows variation between individuals. These sites are called single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs;). Distinguishing benign SNPs b snps from those that cause disease dc snps is a key premise for personalized medicine, but with a total of 10 million polymorphic loci within the genome it is no trivial feat. Efforts are often focused on identifying SNPs responsible for specific diseases (), or all dc snps within certain genomic regions () or genes (); for example, identifying dc snps within the voltage gated potassium (Kv) channel genes, where genetic variation has been shown to cause, or be associated with, cardiac ar rhythm o genesis for which the first presenting symptom can be sudden cardiac death. Genetic screening of a Long QT Syndrome (LQTS) cohort of 262 patients revealed that 59% had at least 1 minor allele in a kv channel gene (). An additional concern with ar rhythm o genesis is that individuals with certain genetic backgrounds (including kv channel genotypes) can acquire it when administered with certain drugs (). Furthermore, SNPs in kv channel genes also cause, or predispose individuals to, various neurological disorders including epilepsy (), neuro myotonia () and episodic ataxia (), as well as other diseases, such as deafness (). While not directly fatal, these disorders would still benefit from pre-symptomatic diagnosis and treatment. Association studies have previously been used to identify kv channel dc snps (), but there is concern that some variants may be incorrectly assigned because study cohorts were not large enough to infer statistical significance (). Results are also confounded by multiple testing errors, and the fact that compound SNPs are likely to cause, or contribute to, disease (). Variable phenotype penetrance and severity is observed in arrhythmia patients harboring the same kv channel SNP (), suggesting that phenotypic modifier genes and or variants exist (). Ranking SNPs by disease causing probability would (i) prioritize variants for further examination and (ii) aid identification of phenotype modifying variants. This is made even more relevant by the current sequencing revolution, where advances in high throughput technology have facilitated genotyping to an unprecedented depth at affordable costs; resulting in a plethora of data that some are finding hard to analyse fast enough (). Computational methods to predict whether ns snps will cause disease were originally based on empirical rules () but now tend to use machine learning approaches (). Variants of known consequence are used to train the machine learning predictor, which finds patterns within the annotated ns snp attributes that best classify the data into in their constituent groups: dc snps and b snps. Once trained, the predictor can be applied to uncharacterized variants, emitting the likelihood that they are disease causing. This approach has resulted in prediction accuracies of up to 82% (), but there is some evidence that performance can be improved if the machine learning model is built for a specific gene
