Motivation: A complete repository of gene gene interactions is key for understanding cellular processes, human disease and drug response. These gene gene interactions include both protein– protein interactions and transcription factor interactions. The majority of known interactions are found in the biomedical literature. Interaction databases, such as bio grid and ChEA, annotate these gene gene interactions; however, curation becomes difficult as the literature grows exponentially. deep dive is a trained system for extracting information from a variety of sources, including text. In this work, we used deep dive to extract both protein protein and transcription factor interactions from over 100 000 full text PLOS articles. Methods: We built an extractor for gene gene interactions that identified candidate gene gene relations within an input sentence. For each candidate relation, deep dive computed a probability that the relation was a correct interaction. We evaluated this system against the Database of Interacting Proteins and against randomly curated extractions. Results: Our system achieved 76% precision and 49% recall in extracting direct and indirect interactions involving gene symbols co occurring in a sentence. For randomly curated extractions, the system achieved between 62% and 83% precision based on direct or indirect interactions, as well as sentence level and document level precision. Overall, our system extracted 3356 unique gene pairs using 724 features from over 100 000 full text articles.

introduction a complete repository of the gene gene interactions is a key for understanding cellular processes, human disease and drug response. Furthermore, these interactions inform gene network analyses that typically rely on curated interaction databases. Two types of interactions are critical for understanding how a protein or gene affects biological or disease processes: physical protein protein interactions pp is and transcription factor interactions tf is. pp is include interactions where two proteins physically bind to one another to form a complex or otherwise modify the function of one or both proteins. Alternatively, tf is involve transcription factors directly binding upstream of a gene to control transcription of that gene. Modifications to pp is and or tf is can have a detrimental effect on their associated cellular processes. An improved understanding of both of these interactions (henceforth called gene gene interactions for simplicity) may help uncover the V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

discussion in this work, we developed a gene gene relation extractor for the system deep dive and applied it to the entirety of three PLOS journals. Our system performance is on par, if not better, than current systems that have been applied only to abstracts. We extracted direct physical pp is indirect interactions and tf is to create a complete view of known protein and gene interactions. By extracting both pp is and tf is our work enables not only the construction of protein interaction networks but also how these networks impact or are impacted by gene regulation while different groups have focused on extracting physical pp is other types of gene gene relationships, including transcription factors, are key for understanding biological processes, disease etiology and drug response (). To build a complete knowledgebase of gene and protein relationships, we extracted both physical pp is as well as transcription factors with their respective target genes. Apart from the impact these different types of interactions have on one another, oftentimes a single isolated sentence will be too vague to deduce the type of interaction. For example, the verb 'associate' can be used for both pp is and tf is and does not provide enough information to specify the interaction type. Evaluating a combined interaction system presents a challenge because there is no combined test set for both types of gene gene interactions. To properly evaluate, we checked extractions in dip curated documents for missed transcription factor relationships and counted them as true positives. Additionally, we performed a random curation to assess performance for both types of interactions. By using the entirety of PLOS Biology, PLOS Genetics and PLOS One, we showed how scientific knowledge about a protein's interactions change over the course of a decade. As the PLOS family of journals is just over a decade old, the majority of documents containing interactions occurred after 2008. With a larger corpus across older journals, we will be able to show how genes grow or wane in popularity due to recent research. In the future, general relation extraction on full text journals spanning a decade or more will allow for more nuanced analyses about how our understanding on these relations changes over time. We constructed individual binary features from sentences encountered in the training data that matched high level feature patterns. As this strategy created millions of individual features, we were concerned with overfitting the feature weights to the training data. However, the tuning process highlighted sources of overfitting that were subsequently removed from the system on the next iteration. These sources of overfitting included highly frequent training examples that were removed from the training data. After tuning, 93.9% of the features had a weight less than 0.001 (3 212 458 out of 3 422 176) and did not impact the final probability of a given candidate relation. The remaining features were not only learning patterns in a noisy training set but were also learning patterns for gene co occurrence due to shared biological processes that are not strictly interactions. deep dive allows users to automatically annotate candidate entities or relations with distantly supervised labels to learn underlying patterns among the input features. By distantly supervising the training labels, we do not curate each sentence to confirm that the two genes are interacting based on the sentence. Rather, we label over 100 000 candidate gene gene relations as training examples even though most will be co occurrence. Using these uncertain training examples, we were able to detect true interaction patterns at the sentence level. Instead of providing a binary output or label for each candidate, deep dive provides a probability that the candidate entity or relation has some attribute (e.g. is correct. Thus, we can select a probability cut off to call a given output a specific label. Additionally, deep dive is specifically calibrated to have accuracy correlated with probability. The system calculates accuracy using the distant supervision training labels, and thus this calibration represents deep dives performance based on the provided labels. During tuning, the user may discover that the distant supervision labels are missing an entire class of relations and thus incorrectly labeling candidates. For example, if one only uses random English word pairs as a False relation, then the system may incorrectly say all co occurring deep dive genes are true relations due to random gene gene pairs existing with an easily recognizable genetic context that differs from random English words. deep dive requires several iterations of tuning to remove noisy distant supervision gene pairs and add or remove feature patterns. At the end of each iteration of deep dive we conducted an error analysis to identify sources of error in the system. We completed 24 in depth error analyses before freezing the system for evaluation. The false positives and false negatives from these error analyses were caused by unbalanced feature weights and training examples, lack of training examples for a given feature (low weighted feature) and missing features. Important to note, we did not aim to fix specific candidate relations but rather, to identify either missing or incorrectly weighted feature patterns. deep dives internal calibration and the user calibration are two distinct calibration steps with respect to machine learning. For the system calibration (learning features to predict labels), deep dive holds out a test set from the training labels to evaluate deep dives predictions based on the input data. On the other hand, user calibration refers to the process of adding and or refining features or training labels manually. deep dives internal calibration plots are shown in Supplementary. Plot (a) shows accuracy for the held out test set at different probability cut-offs. This calibration depicts deep dives performance solely based on the provided training labels. On the basis of prior work with constructing features, we only required 24 complete iterations of user calibration (calculating an estimate of precision and recall on sample sentences) before we froze the system. To decide when to stop this user calibration, we decided on an estimated precision and or recall of 90% for a given iteration. Because our system ultimately extracts interactions from an input corpus, we can not directly compare on previously constructed interaction data sets for text mining. This comparison would require new input documents, which may alter results. We evaluated our system against the DIP interaction database; however, this evaluation has its limitations. One limitation is that the 71 documents were solely from PLOS Biology, but the system was largely trained on PLOS One documents. Additionally, the DIP set contained pp is curated from documents with experimental evidence that may not be well represented in our overall PLOS corpus. There have been multiple papers and reviews focusing on protein interaction method comparison; however, we chose not to directly compare to other methods for multiple reasons. First, many of these methods were designed for abstracts only and may not perform as well on full text articles due to different levels of detail in the full text compared with the abstract. Second, these methods were tested on many different corpora and small scale gold standard data sets. In one comparison performed by, performance metrics vary depending on the gold standard used. In addition, some methods, such as PIE (), aim to prioritize protein interaction abstracts or articles. Our system has multiple components including text preprocessing, gene extraction, feature construction and distant supervision. A false positive or negative can arise from any of these components; however, we were interested in the number of false positives from the text preprocessing and gene extraction stages. An error in either of these two categories represents an impossible interaction in our system: one or both gene symbols actually being an acronym for a non gene entity (NG) or two genes not occurring in the same sentence (NP). As we wanted the highest recall for gene symbols and as these symbols are largely known and stored in databases such as NCBI Gene database and UniProt, we decided to find initial genes with a dictionary based approach and have the system learn that a non gene entity can not be in a gene interaction. However, we discovered numerous cases where authors only referred to genes by their full names or only used non-human and non-standard gene names. To address these errors, we could combine a dictionary based approach along with a named entity recognition tool such as Banner () or gen norm () (or even deep dive to catch these non-standard gene name variants. Sentence parsing errors occurred when two or more sentences were concatenated together, with two genes extracted as a single candidate relation even if the genes were present in separate sentences. These errors were introduced at the text preprocessing stage. One potential solution would be to train the Stanford parser on biomedical text to learn the different forms of sentences, tokens and parts of speech when complex gene names, symbols, acronyms and unknown words are frequently used. Alternatively, we can apply the GENIA Tagger () to tokenize and label words with parts of speech; however, this would not address incorrect sentence splitting. To investigate errors occurring at the extractor stage, we can disregard these NG errors and improve precision roughly five points for curation positive stringent and curation positive all to 66% and 84%, respectively. Disregarding the NP errors, precision for curation positive stringent and curation positive all increased two points to 64% and 81%, respectively. Removing both the NG and NP errors and focusing only on extractor errors, the system achieved 68% and 86% precision for curation positive stringent and curation positive all respectively. Text mining methods and applications require access to either abstracts or full text articles for data extraction. While researchers have access to the majority of biomedical abstracts through ncbi s PubMed database, access to full text articles remains limited. As of July 2015, there are over 3.5 million articles from nearly 5000 journals in PubMed Central (PMC) but only 646 681 available through PMC's Open Access Subset. This set includes many journals that are not relevant for mining gene gene interactions but may still mention co occurring genes. To reduce noise from journal selection, we focused on relevant journals from a single publisher. It is important to note that these three journals comprise almost 17% of PMC's Open Access journal articles. Future system tuning on additional open access journals will provide more interactions for use in the research community. deep dive contains internal parallelization and optimization to efficiently handle large document corpora. We set deep dives parallelization parameter to run 48 processes with a maximum of 64 GB of memory. Not including document parsing with Stanford core nlp runtime was less than 2 h to load documents into the database, construct candidate mentions with features and run the inference engine. In this work, we show the utility of deep dive and distant supervision for extracting gene gene interactions from a large corpus of documents. While we tuned the system for three PLOS journals with over 100 000 full text documents, adding additional documents or abstracts would require several rounds of system tuning. Our work is the first application of deep dive to the biomedical domain. Specifically, we extracted 12 390 gene gene relations linked to sentences from over 100 000 full text documents from three PLOS journals. These relations are available in Supplementary Data. This work enables an improved and more precise understanding of gene and protein interactions within the cell to further both experimental and computational research.
