Motivation: Major disorders, such as leukemia, have been shown to alter the transcription of genes. Understanding how gene regulation is affected by such aberrations is of utmost importance. One promising strategy toward this objective is to compute whether signals can reach to the transcription factors through the transcription regulatory network (TRN). Due to the uncertainty of the regulatory interactions, this is a p complete problem and thus solving it for very large TRNs remains to be a challenge. Results: We develop a novel and scalable method to compute the probability that a signal originating at any given set of source genes can arrive at any given set of target genes (i.e., transcription factors) when the topology of the underlying signaling network is uncertain. Our method tackles this problem for large networks while providing a provably accurate result. Our method follows a divide and conquer strategy. We break down the given network into a sequence of non-overlapping subnetworks such that reachability can be computed autonomously and sequentially on each subnetwork. We represent each interaction using a small polynomial. The product of these polynomials express different scenarios when a signal can or can not reach to target genes from the source genes. We introduce polynomial collapsing operators for each subnetwork. These operators reduce the size of the resulting polynomial and thus the computational complexity dramatically. We show that our method scales to entire human regulatory networks in only seconds, while the existing methods fail beyond a few tens of genes and interactions. We demonstrate that our method can successfully characterize key reachability characteristics of the entire transcriptions regulatory networks of patients affected by eight different subtypes of leukemia, as well as those from healthy control samples. Availability: All the datasets and code used in this article are available at bioinformatics cis eu fled up reach scalable htm
introduction major disorders, such as cancer, have been shown to alter the transcription of a large number of genes and thus affect the mechanism that governs cells functions (). Many complex disorders, such as acute lymphoblastic leukemias, however, yield a varying spectrum of expression profiles and, as a result, can not be robustly characterized by merely studying the gene expressions (). An important part of cell biology research is the study of the causal relationship between extracellular conditions and the cell response. Such causality is governed by a chain of biochemical reactions through which extracellular signals are transmitted from membrane receptors to transcription factors (i.e., reporters) via protein protein interactions (). While the pattern of this mechanism is similar for all organisms, important variations in its quantitative aspects such as gene expressions result from external perturbations, differentiation stage of the cell, timing of DNA replication and various epigenetic mutations (). Therefore, detecting these quantitative variations is an important source of information for assessing the fitness of the organism and ultimately for diagnosis and prognosis. Extensive evidence suggests that there is a degree of uncertainty in our knowledge of interactions within cells (). The source of this uncertainty is 2-fold. First, the biological processes that are modeled as protein interactions in biological networks are stochastic events (). Second, the evidence in support of an interaction is not entirely decisive for the actual presence of the interaction () due to many reasons, such as epigenetic variations across different cells (). Several schemes have already been proposed to assess the reliability of protein interactions in the form of confidence values (). Such interaction confidence values are now available in large biological network databases, such as MINT () and STRING (). Recent studies often model the uncertainty of the interactions in biological networks using probabilistic networks (). We adopt the same model in this article, namely, each node of the network denotes a gene and the directed edge from a node v i to node v j denotes that the gene corresponding to v i can regulate the gene denoted by v j through an interaction. Each edge in this network is a probabilistic event. That is, it is considered possible, but not certain, reflecting the insecure knowledge of the gene regulation process. A common way to model the uncertainty of each edge is to associate it with a probability value, which is computed for each interaction from several factors: gene expressions, available evidence for it and network topology around it (). The ability to compute confidence values for interactions provides opportunities to model and study biological networks accurately. It, however, comes at a high price as the uncertainty of the topology of interactions makes studying biological networks a computationally challenging task. The challenge is that a probabilistic network represents a large number of alternative deterministic network topologies. More precisely, a network with n probabilistic edges yields 2 n possible network configurations, as each one of the n edges may be present or absent. For instance, in *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com the probabilistic network shown on top corresponds to 16 deterministic networks since it contains 4 probabilistic edges. In this article, we address the problem of characterizing the signaling reachability in transcription regulatory networks (TRNs). Unlike most of the existing literature, we eliminate the limitations of the classical assumption that all interactions are deterministic and adopt the more descriptive probabilistic network. More specifically, given a set of source genes S=fs 1 ; s 2 ;. .. ; s a g and a set of target genes T=ft 1 ; t 2 ;. .. ; t b g, we compute the reachability profile of that network as a doubly indexed vector R where, for all i, j such that 1 i a; 1 j b, the entry Ris the probability that a signal originating at s i can reach t i (i.e., s i regulates t j ). We show that the reachability profile can help us understand how different disorders that alter the cellular functions based on the signaling patterns of the gene regulatory networks. We particularly focus on leukemias, which is challenging due to the heterogeneity of the transcription patterns. Summary of related work. The problem of computing reachability in uncertain network topologies has drawn significant attention in the context of network reliability. Various exact methods, as well as approximate methods, have been proposed. We refer interested readers to several surveys on the topic (). Theoretical results on the complexity of the problem reveal that it is #P complete (; hus feldt and tas laman 2010;). The problem is significantly simplified in the case of acyclic graphs. This type of graphs can be represented as Bayesian Networks, for which various inference algorithms exist. However, for this simple case sophisticated inference algorithms are unnecessary. In the context of biological networks, the problem for general graphs was first addressed by. The goal of these authors was to infer the structure of the signaling network that best explains a set of gene knockout pairs, given a protein protein interaction network. To achieve this goal, they developed a method to compute the reachability probability for each knockout gene pair. Their method is an exact solution based on the inclusion exclusion principle (van). However, due to its high time complexity, this method works accurately only for very small networks (i.e., those with a few tens of nodes). PReach () computes the exact reachability probability based on polynomial multiplication. It is significantly faster than the inclusion exclusion method off or networks where there are many paths. However, it does not scale to large networks. Thus, the existing solutions can not be used to study entire TRNs, and there is a great need for accurate yet efficient methods. Contributions. Here, we develop a novel method that computes the probability that a signal originated at a given source gene can reach to a given target gene in a given probabilistic network. Unlike existing methods, our solution is both precise (i.e., it computes this probability without error) and it scales to large networks. Our method follows a divide and conquer approach. We partition the given probabilistic network into a sequence of loosely connected clusters of nodes. On the boundary between two such consecutive clusters lies a set of nodes called node separators. Any signal which originates from the source node and arrives at any node in the latter cluster must visit the node separators. Similar to PReach (), we model the given probabilistic network using polynomials. The form of the polynomials of our method however differs from that of PReach in a way that allows us to collapse the polynomial to very small size that is determined by the size (number of interactions) of the clusters and the number of nodes in a given boundary. Each term in our polynomial evaluates the existence probability of a collection of subsets of interactions. In brief, instead of computing the reachability probability from the given source node to the target node, we incrementally compute the reachability probability from the source node to each node separator in sequential order. That allows us to avoid storing a massive fraction of terms of the polynomial (i.e., the terms corresponding to the nodes in earlier clusters). Our experimental results on real and synthetic datasets demonstrate that our method scales to very large network sizes while the inclusion exclusion method () and PReach () fail. We also observe that the reachability profiles provide a valuable resource for characterizing leukemias and differentiating the centrality of the genes across different leukemias as well as healthy control groups. In summary, the key contributions of this work are we introduce a new quantity for evaluating the state of a biological network, the reachability profile we introduce a novel, fast and scalable method to compute the reachability profile of large networks, based on polynomials and polynomial collapsing operators. We demonstrate the usefulness of reachability profiles in detailed analysis of different types of leukemias the rest of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our method. Section 3 presents our experimental results. Section 4 concludes with a brief discussion.

conclusion in this article we have characterized different types of leukemias based on the state of the regulatory networks in patients affected by this disease. The state is evaluated through reachability profiles. The reachability profile describes the ability of regulator genes to affect the transcription factors. For this we developed a fast, exact method for computing the probability for a signal to reach from a source node to a destination node in a probabilistic network. The rigorous mathematical apparatus, which involves polynomials and polynomial collapsing operators, allows fast execution time, demonstrated in the performance evaluation experiments. Valuable uses of the reachability profiles illustrated in this article include leukemia subtype classification, gene centrality evaluation and regulatory network stability analysis. All these are valuable tools for evaluating the viability of the TRN under varying conditions as a whole, not just limited to individual gene expressions levels. An interesting parallel can be drawn between
