Endeavour is a tool that detects the most promising genes within large lists of candidates with respect to a biological process of interest and by combining several genomic data sources. We have benchmarked Endeavour using 450 pathway maps and 826 disease marker sets from meta core TM of gene go Inc. containing a total of 9911 and 12 432 genes, respectively. We obtained an area under the receiver operating characteristic curves of 0.97 for pathway and of 0.91 for disease gene sets. These results indicate that Endeavour can be used to efficiently prioritize candidate genes for pathways and diseases.

introduction identifying disease causing genes is a key challenge in human genetics. In the process of identifying such disease genes, researchers are often confronted with large lists of candidate genes among which only one or a few are actually causal. The validation of each candidate is often too costly and time consuming, so that only a few candidates are further experimentally validated. A related problem arises when trying to identify new members of a biological pathway. The selection of a small subset of optimal candidates for validation is called gene prioritization. Since going manually through all possible sources of information is a slow and tedious process, several bioinformatics methods have been developed to tackle this problem (). We previously developed Endeavour () whose key feature is that it uses multiple genomic data sources (e.g. sequence, expression, literature and annotation) to estimate how promising a candidate gene is by measuring its similarity with a set of training genes. The training genes are genes which are already known to play a role in the biological process under study. The underlying assumption is that the most promising candidate genes are the ones that exhibit many similarities with the training genes. A schematic view of the algorithm is shown in. Originally, Endeavour was benchmarked by leave one out cross validations on 32 gene sets corresponding to * To whom correspondence should be addressed the inputs are, on the one hand, the training genes (on top, in red), known to be involved in the process of interest, and, on the other hand, the candidate genes to prioritize (at the bottom, in grey and orange). (B) Data are collected for these genes: e.g. expression profiles, functional annotations and protein protein interactions. (C) Candidate genes are prioritized, i.e. ranked according to their similarities to the training genes. For example, the gene in orange is the most promising candidate (i.e. it ranks in first position) because (i) its expression profile is similar to the red ones, (ii) it also shares several functional annotations and (iii) it is interacting with several training proteins.
