We present lat com a new web tool, which offers several alternative methods for rare codon cluster (RCC) identification from a single and simple graphical user interface. In the current version, three RCC detection schemes are implemented: the recently described %MinMax algorithm and a simplified sliding window approach, along with a novel modification of a linear time algorithm for the detection of maximally scoring subsequences tailored to the RCC detection problem. Among a number of user tunable parameters, several codon based scales relevant for RCC detection are available, including tRNA abundance values from Escherichia coli and several codon usage tables from a selection of genomes. Furthermore, useful scale transformations may be performed upon user request (e.g. linear, sigmoid). Users may choose to visualize RCC positions within the submitted sequences either with graphical representations or in textual form for further processing. Availability: lat com is freely available online at the URL http:// troodos bio lucy accy lat com html
introduction trna abundance is asymmetric (non-uniform) in cells of different organisms and can cause variation in the translation rate for each codon. It has been suggested that rare codons and their clusters are associated with translational pausing (). The translational rate can be maximized at mRNA regions with codons read by high cellular levels of cognate tRNA species and minimized at sites corresponding to rare tRNAs (RCCs) (). A critical issue is that the concentration of iso accepting tRNAs for a set of synonymous codons varies among organisms, tissues and stages of differentiation (). Moreover, different organisms show specific preferences for codons encoding the same amino acid (codon bias), reflected in the frequency of occurrence of synonymous codons in genomic DNA. In Escherichia coli, it has been shown that the nonrandom choice of codons is mostly attributable to the availability of transfer RNA within a cell (); however, more recent * To whom correspondence should be addressed. work by has shown that the correlation of codon usage and tRNA level is not perfect. In principle, the RCC detection process is the identification of codon clusters corresponding to rare tRNA species along mRNAs, as quantified using scales of experimental cellular tRNA levels. A complete dataset of this type is only available for E.coli (); therefore, approaches based on codon usage scales are alternatively used. Recently, two different methods have been developed for identifying RCCs in coding sequences: the %MinMax algorithm (; http://www.codons.org) and ribo tempo. An obvious limitation of window based methods is the detection of RCCs with length at least equal to the applied window size. We present lat com a novel flexible web server, aiming to address shortcomings of the existing methods and to also provide new tools and features for RCC detection. lat com offers users the option to use the %MinMax and ribo tempo methods, along with a new window-less RCC detection approach, based on the linear time Maximal Scoring Subsequences algorithm [MSS; (. In addition, both trna abundance and codon usage scales are supported, including the option for users to enter their own scales, and a selection of novel transformations that may prove useful for RCC analyses. Moreover, the ability to choose different values of w for window based RCC detection schemes, the explicit report of RCC coordinates and simulation based p values as a measure for statistical RCC validation, enable more sophisticated analyses of RCCs.
