Motivation: It is far from trivial to select the most effective clustering method and its parameterization, for a particular set of gene expression data, because there are a very large number of possibilities. Although many researchers still prefer to use hierarchical clustering in one form or another, this is often sub-optimal. Cluster ensemble research solves this problem by automatically combining multiple data partitions from different clusterings to improve both the robustness and quality of the clustering result. However, many existing ensemble techniques use an association matrix to summarize sample cluster co occurrence statistics, and relations within an ensemble are encapsulated only at coarse level, while those existing among clusters are completely neglected. Discovering these missing associations may greatly extend the capability of the ensemble methodology for microarray data clustering. Results: The link based cluster ensemble (LCE) method, presented here, implements these ideas and demonstrates outstanding performance. Experiment results on real gene expression and synthetic datasets indicate that LCE: (i) usually outperforms the existing cluster ensemble algorithms in individual tests and, overall, is clearly class leading (ii) generates excellent, robust performance across different types of data, especially with the presence of noise and imbalanced data clusters; (iii) provides a high level data matrix that is applicable to many numerical clustering techniques; and (iv) is computationally efficient for large datasets and gene clustering.

introduction the use of clustering is vital both for visualizing and extracting useful information from microarray data. However, different algorithms (or even the same algorithm with different parameters) often provide distinct clusterings. As a result, it is extremely difficult for users to decide which algorithm and parameters will be optimal for a given set of data this is because no single pass simple * To whom correspondence should be addressed. clustering algorithm can perform the best for all datasets (), and discovering all types of cluster shapes and structures presented in data is impossible for any known clustering algorithm (). Clinical researchers commonly use simple clustering methods, such as agglomerative hierarchical and k means () to cluster cancer microarray samples, despite the advent of several new techniques that capitalize on the inherent characteristics of gene expression data (noise and high dimensionality) to improve clustering quality (e.g.). de says this is because the use of such methods is difficult for non expert users. Recently, cluster ensembles or consensus clusterings have emerged as simple, effective, one stop methods for improving the robustness and quality of clustering results. Cluster ensembles combine multiple clustering decisions (referred to as 'base clusterings' or 'ensemble members') where the base clusterings contain diversity in their choice of clusters by i using a single clustering algorithm with random parameter initializations (); (ii) employing multiple clustering algorithms (); (iii) selecting a random number of clusters (); (iv) using different subsets of gene (); or (v) using data sampling techniques (). Most existing methods compare cluster associations between each of the N samples in the dataset to produce an N N pairwise similarity matrix [i.e. consensus (), agreement () and co association () matrices], to which a consensus function (e.g. agglomerative hierarchical clustering) is applied to acquire the final data partition. With the ensemble of two base clusterings ={ 1 , 2 } and five samples (x 1 ,...x 5 ) that is given in, the corresponding similarity matrix is shown in. An alternative approach (; Strehl and) to pairwise similarity methods makes use of an N P binary cluster association matrix (BM) (where P denotes the number of clusters in an ensemble shows the example of such matrix that is generated from the ensemble of. Despite reported success and efficiency, these methods generate the ultimate clustering result based on incomplete information of a cluster ensemble. The underlying association matrix presents sample cluster relations at a coarse level and completely ignores the relations among clusters (). As a result, the

conclusion a new LCE method has been introduced for clustering gene expression data samples that has greatly improved accuracy and efficiency. The performance of LCE is usually superior than existing graph based ensemble techniques, and those that are particularly developed for gene data analysis. LCE is highly effective over real gene expression datasets and synthetic data collections (with Page: 1519 15131519
