Motivation: Transcriptional regulation is directly enacted by the interactions between DNA and many proteins, including transcription factors (TFs), nucleosomes and polymerases. A critical step in deciphering transcriptional regulation is to infer, and eventually predict, the precise locations of these interactions, along with their strength and frequency. While recent datasets yield great insight into these interactions, individual data sources often provide only partial information regarding one aspect of the complete interaction landscape. For example, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) reveals the binding positions of a protein, but only for one protein at a time. In contrast, nucleases like m nase and DNase can be used to reveal binding positions for many different proteins at once, but can not easily determine the identities of those proteins. Currently, few statistical frameworks jointly model these different data sources to reveal an accurate, hol-istic view of the in vivo protein dna interaction landscape. Results: Here, we develop a novel statistical framework that integrates different sources of experimental information within a thermo-dynamic model of competitive binding to jointly learn a holistic view of the in vivo protein dna interaction landscape. We show that our framework learns an interaction landscape with increased accuracy, explaining multiple sets of data in accordance with thermodynamic principles of competitive DNA binding. The resulting model of genomic occupancy provides a precise mechanistic vantage point from which to explore the role of protein dna interactions in transcriptional regulation. Availability and implementation: The C source code for COMPETE and Python source code for mcmc based inference are available at

introduction as an essential component of transcriptional regulation, the interaction between dna binding factors (DBFs) and DNA has been studied extensively. To map genome wide protein DNA interactions experimentally, two basic categories of techniques have been developed: chip based methods (numerous studies in many organisms, but a few examples for yeast are); and nuclease digestion based methods that profile chromatin with either DNase () or m nase (). ChIP methods can be used to reveal high resolution DNA interaction sites for a single antibody targeted factor, especially the recently developed chip exo methods () that use lambda exonuclease to obtain precise positions of protein binding. Nuclease digestion methods can be used to efficiently assay genome wide DNA occupancy of all proteins at once, but without explicit information about protein identities. These and other experimental efforts over the past decade have generated a large amount of data regarding the chromatin landscape and its role in transcriptional regulation. We now need computational models that can effectively integrate these data to generate deeper insights into transcriptional regulation. A popular set of computational models use these data to search for overrepresented DNA sequences bound by certain DBFs; these are often applied in the setting of motif discovery (). More recently, models have been applied to dnase seq data to identify 'digital footprints' of DBFs (). However, many of these approaches share certain drawbacks. First, protein binding is typically treated as a binary event amenable to classification: either a protein binds at a particular site on the DNA sequence or it does not. However, both empirical and theoretical work has demonstrated that proteins bind DNA with continuous occupancy levels [as reviewed by. Second, most computational methods model the binding events for one kind of protein at a time instead of taking into consideration the interactions among different kinds of DBFs, especially nucleosomes. Although the work of and te if and Rippe (2012) are notable exceptions, these all consider small genomic regions and include only a few tfs did not consider the role of nucleosomes. Third, and most importantly, almost all current methods fail to integrate different kinds of datasets. This is suboptimal because data from one kind of experiment only reveal partial information about the in vivo protein dna interaction landscape. For example, ChIP datasets only contain binding information for one specific protein under one specific condition; nuclease digestion datasets provide binding information for all proteins, but do not reveal the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. identities of the proteins; and protein binding microarray (PBM) experiments only look at sequence specificity of one isolated protein in an in vitro environment. We previously developed a computational model of protein DNA interactions, termed COMPETE (), that overcomes the first two drawbacks above by representing the competitive binding of proteins to DNA within a thermodynamic ensemble. Interactions between proteins and DNA are treated as probabilistic events, whose (continuous) probabilities are calculated from a Boltzmann distribution. COMPETE can easily include a large number of DBFs, including nucleosomes, and can efficiently profile entire genomes with single base pair resolution. However, a limitation of COMPETE is that it is a purely theoretical model of binding, based on thermodynamic first principles but not guided by data regarding in vivo binding events. Indeed, it is possible for COMPETE to predict superfluous binding events that are inconsistent with observed data (Supplementary). It is therefore necessary to develop a new computational framework for jointly interpreting experimentally derived data regarding genomic occupancy within a model built on the thermodynamic foundation of COMPETE. Here, we develop just such a method: a general framework that combines a thermodynamic model for protein dna interactions and a new statistical model for learning from experimental observations regarding those interactions. Information from different experimental observations can be integrated to infer the thermodynamic interactions between DBFs and a genome. In this particular study, we demonstrate the use of this framework by integrating paired end m nase seq data, which reveal information about the binding occupancy of both nucleosomes and smaller sub nucleosomal factors. Our framework also integrates protein binding specificity information from PBM data and produces a more accurate and realistic protein dna interaction landscape than COMPETE alone, along with a mechanistic explanation of m nase digested fragments of different sizes. The cross validated performance of our framework is significantly higher than several baselines with which we compared it. Our framework is flexible and can easily incorporate other data sources as well, and thus represents a general modeling framework for integrating multiple sources of information to produce a more precise view of the interaction landscape undergirding transcriptional regulation.

discussion we show that integrating information from experimental data within a general framework built on a thermodynamic ensemble model of competitive factor binding can improve the accuracy of inferred protein dna interactions, providing a more biologically plausible view of the protein dna interaction landscape. Such a landscape gives a mechanistic explanation for observed paired end m nase seq fragments through various protein binding events, each with its own probability of occurrence. Many of those binding events are weak binding events that are typically missed in other modeling methods, but are captured in our framework; these weaker binding events are also supported by higher resolution experimental data where available (). These weak binding events are important: it has been reported that low affinity protein dna interactions may be involved in fine tuning transcriptional regulation and are common along the genome (). Our framework's predictions agree with this viewpoint: 72% of the binding events in our predicted profiles have a binding probability less than 0.5. Our framework could thus form an important basis for future computational work that connects transcriptional activity with the protein dna interaction landscape. Our framework does not successfully predict a few TF binding events reported by high resolution chip exo experiments (), most notably some of the binding sites for Phd1 and Reb1. We believe the primary reason is occasional mismatches between our input TF pwm s and these proteins' actual in vivo dna binding specificities. For Phd1, Rhee and Pugh (2012) reported several distinct in vivo motifs. However, the Phd1 PWM we used in our framework comes from in vitro data () and does not match the in vivo dna binding specificity of Phd1 reported by Rhee and Pugh (2012). Similarly, for Reb1, Rhee and Pugh (2012) reported that 40% of Reb1 binding sites are so called 'secondary binding sites', with motifs that deviate from the ttag gc consensus of the in vitro PWM we used. This mismatch in dna binding specificity may account for much of the discrepancy between our predicted profiles and reported binding sites. However, some caution should be taken when interpreting in vivo ChIP data, as the assay can not distinguish between direct protein dna interaction and indirect interaction (). We also note that our current framework only includes a subset of all yeast TFs. Some unexplained short fragment coverage peaks, such as those in the YBL014C promoter region, could indicate the binding of DBFs that are not in our set. These and other discrepancies may have an impact on our overall inference, resulting in missing binding events (or possibly even superfluous binding events, because of the competition that is inherent in our model). In the promoters of YNL157W and YDL012C, our predictions do not include Rap1 binding events even though they are reported in chip exo experiments. However, we believe this results from the nature of Rap1 binding report that Rap1 binding on non ribosomal protein promoters, like the two mentioned above, is highly dynamic and involves fast turnover. Such binding events are possibly captured in ChIP experiments because of cross-linking, but may be difficult to observe in an m nase based digestion experiment if the latter does not involve a cross-linking step. Incidentally, the two chip determined Rap1 binding events are not close to m nase seq small fragment coverage peaks. One possible use of our framework for extending the results shown here would be to incorporate data from chip based experiments and use the framework to estimate parameters that reflect information from both kinds of data. We demonstrate the use of prior information in our framework through incorporating measured bulk cellular protein concentration. The model performance improved marginally, which can be interpreted two ways. On the one hand, it is reassuring that one need not have measured cellular protein concentrations to perform effective inference. The fact that our uniform priors work as well as having priors informed by measured concentrations means that the measured concentrations available currently are not critical for good performance. However, that said, it is also reassuring that our framework has the ability to incorporate this sort of prior information when available because we anticipate such data will only improve. As measurement technologies enable us to move from bulk cellular concentrations toward nuclear concentrations of active TFs, we anticipate that the ability to incorporate prior information will become more useful, if not for achieving better results then perhaps at least for more rapid convergence toward optima when we move to higher dimensional inference (e.g. more TFs). With adequately fitted parameters, our framework has the potential to perform in silico simulation for various environmental conditions by changing the protein concentrations. For example, we could simulate in silico heat shock by increasing the concentration of heat shock response factors in our model. We could also investigate how certain single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) affect the overall protein dna interaction landscape, not just at the site of the SNP but propagating to the surrounding region because of altered competition. This work represents a first step toward a more general framework. By specifying probabilistic distributions appropriate for other kinds of experiments like chips eq faire seq or dnase seq the framework can integrate other sources of data through a joint likelihood. As more and larger scale sequencing projects are carried out, such a framework will prove valuable for integrating different pieces of information to infer a more precise view of the protein dna interactions that govern transcriptional regulation.
