Motivation: Recent studies have suggested that both the genome and the genome with epigenetic modifications, the so called epi genome play important roles in various biological functions, such as transcription and DNA replication, repair, and recombination. It is well known that specific combinations of histone modifications (e.g. methylation s and acetylation s of nucleosomes induce chroma-tin states that correspond to specific functions of chromatin. Although the advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies enables measurement of epigenetic information for entire genomes at high resolution the variety of chromatin states has not been completely characterized. Results: In this study, we propose a method to estimate the chromatin states indicated by genome wide chromatin marks identified by NGS technologies. The proposed method automatically estimates the number of chromatin states and characterize each state on the basis of a hidden Markov model (HMM) in combination with a recently proposed model selection technique, factorized information criteria. The method is expected to provide an unbiased model because it relies on only two adjustable parameters and avoids heuristic procedures as much as possible. Computational experiments with simulated datasets show that our method automatically learns an appropriate model, even in cases where methods that rely on Bayesian information criteria fail to learn the model structures. In addition, we comprehensively compare our method to chrom hmm on three real datasets and show that our method estimates more chromatin states than chrom hmm for those datasets.

introduction in the eukaryotic cell nucleus, the genome forms a complex structure called chromatin. The building blocks of chromatin are nucleosomes, in which a DNA strand is wrapped around an octamer of histone proteins H2A, H2B, H3 and H4. It is known that, in nucleosomes, post transcription modifications of the histone proteins and substitution of histone proteins with variants both occur frequently (). Gene regulation and DNA replication, repair V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com and recombination are greatly affected by the chromatin structures determined by not only transcription factors bound to DNA sequences but also post translation modifications and substitutions (with variants) of the histone proteins. In molecular biology, the study of mechanisms of gene regulation that do not depend on changing the DNA sequence itself is called epigenetics, and it is an important research field in the post genome sequencing era. Changes that affect chromatin structures are called 'histone marks' and include various histone modifications (e.g. methylation, acetylation, ci trulli nation phosphorylation, sumo y lation ubiquitination and adp ribosylation and substitution with histone variants (e.g. H2A.Z for H2A histone) (). Recently, it has become possible to measure these histone marks at high resolution across an entire genome by using specific antibodies in combination with next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies (). In 1999, Dr Brian D. Strahl and Dr C. David all is proposed the 'Histone code hypothesis', which posits that specific combinations of histone modifications correspond to specific functions of chromatin s (called 'chromatin states'), in a manner similar to how combinations of nucleotide (codons) correspond to translated amino acids (). Recent studies have offered strong evidence in support of this hypothesis (). For example, H3K4me2/3 (H3 lysine 4 di tri methylation and H3K9/14/18/23ac (H3 lysine 9/14/18/23 acetylation) characterize transcriptionally active chromatin, while H3K9me3 and H3K27me3 correspond to silent loci; Nucleosomes with both H3K4me3 and H3K27me3 characterize bivalent features of genes, which are frequently found in stem cells (); and an inactive x chromosome is marked by the presence of H3K9me2/3, H3K27me3 and H4K20me1. Although, as described earlier, a large amount of experimental evidence and knowledge has been collected about histone modifications in chromatin s definitive answers to the following questions are still elusive: How many chromatin states exist? What are the possible kinds? () The attempt to answer these questions has inspired the development of computational methods to estimate hidden chromatin states from accumulated observational data. Such a method is the focus of this study. There are several computational methods for characterizing hidden chromatin states from observed experimental chromatin marks (); See also Supplementary Section S4.1 for a review. A pioneering and popular tool for one method of characterization is chrom hmm (), which bin ariz es each chromatin mark with respect to 200 base pair (bp) intervals in genomes and then models the bin a rized data by using multivariate hidden Markov models (HMMs) whose hidden states correspond to chromatin states (The size of interval can be changed in chrom hmm. Because the conventional learning algorithm for HMMs (i.e. the baum welch algorithm) does not determine the model structure (e.g. the number of chromatin states), chrom hmm employs Bayesian information criteria (BIC) () to estimate the variety of chromatin states (i.e. the number of distinct states). Although model selection procedures frequently use BIC, quality guarantees with BIC are available only for probabilistic models that satisfy certain regularity conditions (see, eg for the details of these regularity conditions). Unfortunately, HMMs do not typically satisfy these conditions (), and so the model selection by chrom hmm is not mathematically well founded. Ernst and Kellis (2010) has recognized this limitation of BIC and primarily relied on intuition and biological interpretations to determine chromatin states. It is, however, important to develop unbiased methods of characterizing chromatin states to ensure that overly optimistic conclusions are not being reached. In this study, we propose a new method for automatically estimating the variety of chromatin states and simultaneously characterizing each state. This method is based on a recently proposed model selection method that uses so called factorized information criteria (FIC) for selection (). It has been shown that the use of FIC is more appropriate than the use of BIC for selection in non regular models, including HMMs (which are used in chrom hmm. As an additional benefit, FIC includes only two adjustable parameters and avoids heuristic procedures as much as possible when learning the underlying model structures. Model selection by FIC is therefore expected to obtain a more nearly unbiased chromatin state model than other approaches obtain. To confirm this expectation, we carried out extensive computational experiments on both simulated and real datasets, and the results indicate the usefulness of the proposed method. The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we describe the theory and methods used in this study. In Section 3, we describe computational experiments on both simulated and real datasets. Additional results from testing with both simulated and real data are shown in the Supplementary Information (SI).

discussion the recent advent of NGS technologies and related technologies ('*seq' including chips eq rnase q faire seq etc.) has allowed. Chromatin states with emission probability profiles (a) as estimated by fic hmm and in combination with enrichments by external genomic features for the ernst2010 real dataset (Supplementary Section S2.1.1): (b) general genomic functions (Supplementary Section S3.1.1 in the SI) including tss s TESs and UTRs; (c) tfbs s (Supplementary Section S3.1.2 in the SI), such as c myc ga bp and RELA; and (d) repeated elements (Supplementary Section S3.1.3 in the SI), such as Alu, SINE, L1 and L2. In all images, the numbers along the vertical axis are chromatin states. In each of the sub figures (b)(d), the enrichment of a chromatin state with respect to a corresponding genomic features is shown, where we estimate the chromatin states of each interval (location) in the genomes by using the Viterbi algorithm (). Warmer colors show higher degrees of enrichment. As in (Learning chromatin states with fic rapid gathering of a huge amount of omics data about topics including genomes, epi genomes vario mes transcriptome s and interactome s this has hastened a shift in biology research from hypothesis based approaches to data driven approaches. In this study, we aim to contribute to data driven biology by clarifying the biological model behind data about chromatin states. In the field of bioinformatics, biological data are often modeled by probabilistic models, in which the probability distribution px h of a characteristic x parameterized with h. Examples of such models are HMMs, paired HMMs (for sequence alignments), stochastic context free grammars (for RNA secondary structures), neural networks and mixture models (). To learn not only the parameters but also the model structures of probabilistic models is important in data driven biology. It is known that many probabilistic models, including HMMs, do not satisfy the regularity conditions necessary for certain performance guarantees; hence, there is no mathematical justification for even some frequently used model selection criteria, such as AIC, BIC and MDL, with these models. Broadly, models that include hidden (latent) structures rarely satisfy regularity conditions. In this study, we therefore applied FIC to learning models of chromatin states by using HMMs. It is noted that, in this study, a multivariate HMMs were taken from a previous study, and we focus mainly on model selection part of the HMM. Developing techniques that use FIC for and learning other types of probabilistic models will be useful and should be pursued in the future. Some other approaches are suitable for model selection on non regular models (including HMMs). For example, wai c () and w bic () are extensions of AIC and BIC, respectively, to non regular models. Variational Bayes () and non-parametric Bayesian approaches () based on Dirichlet models also enable us to simultaneously learn model structures and parameters. In this article, we used FIC because FIC is applicable to non regular models and not computationally burdensome (because the algorithm is similar to the conventional baum welch algorithm for training HMMs), but an application of alternative approaches to the problem addressed in this article would be interesting. In this article, we compared learning of chromatin states by fic hmm with learning by bic hmm and chrom hmm (), and suggested that fic hmms are more appropriate for both theoretical and practical reasons. It should be remarked that our method fic hmm includes only two parameters, which is expected to lead to unbiased learning of chromatin states. We consider that a method that relies little on heuristics is preferable for model selection. We observed that several differences between models learned by fic hmm and those learned by chrom hmm for three real datasets. We suspect that previous studies such as () favor a smaller number of chromatin states because a larger number of states complicate understanding. We confirmed the larger number of chromatin states estimated by fic hmm are useful for predicting promoters and or enhancers. We used bin a rized emission values (1 or 0) for each chromatin mark in this study, as was done in a previous study (). It might be useful to directly model the continuous values of observed chromatin marks instead of using bin a rized values. From a theoretical viewpoint, fic hmm could be applied to continuous emission values by using certain probabilistic models (e.g. Gaussian distribution), although the number of parameters would be increased learning them would be more difficult (in particular, poor but locally optimal solutions would be more likely) than with bin a rized chromatin marks. In Section 3.2.3, we reported that similar chromatin state models were learned by fic hmm for each of the cell types in ernst2011 real (nine cell types) and hoffman 2013 real (six cell types). However, if we investigate those results in detailed, the cell type specific annotated chromatin states (e.g. a genomic region in some specific cell types may be completely differ from in others;) can be found, and further study of this would be a worthwhile biological investigation.

conclusion in this study, we proposed a novel method to learn the latent chromatin states from observed chromatin marks by using fic hmm. Our method is more theoretically suitable for this purpose than existing approaches, such as bic hmm which has been adopted by the chrom hmm program. Learning with fic hmm is expected to provide unbiased chromatin states model from the observed chromatin marks. Comprehensive computational experiments on simulated and real datasets indicated that fic hmm could successfully recover the model of hidden chromatin states. Because model learning methods are important for data driven biology, with necessitates analyzing a huge amount of accumulated biological data, a similar approach will be useful to other problems in the field of bioinformatics.
