Motivation: Evolutionary expansion of gene regulatory circuits seems to boost morphological complexity. However, the expansion patterns and the quantification relationships have not yet been identified. In this study, we focus on the regulatory circuits at the post-transcriptional level, investigating whether and how this principle may apply. Results: By analysing the structure of mRNA transcripts in multiple metazoan species, we observed a striking exponential correlation between the length of 3 0 untranslated regions (3 0 UTR) and morphological complexity as measured by the number of cell types in each organism. Cellular diversity was similarly associated with the accumulation of microRNA genes and their putative targets. We propose that the lengthening of 3 0 UTRs together with a commensurate exponential expansion in post-transcriptional regulatory circuits can contribute to the emergence of new cell types during animal evolution.

introduction for the past decade of genome exploration, research into the evolution of organismal diversity and morphological complexity has shifted its focus from raw genome size to gene regulatory complexity (). Multicellular organisms may contain a variety of widely differing and specialized cell types. The morphological complexity, thus, can be defined as the number of distinct cell types within a species (). Generation of new cell types may require exploring and reshaping the expression landscape that relies on expansion or rewiring of extant regulatory circuits, leading to a variety of cell specific expression patterns. Complex gene regulatory circuits may allow a greater variety of potential combinations of gene expression, thereby facilitating the generation of novel cell types. This principle has been studied mainly at the transcriptional level, that is, the regulatory circuits of transcription factors (TFs) and corresponding cis regulatory elements on DNA (). However, recent studies have shown that the post-transcriptional gene regulation is believed to be widespread (). Also, extensive co regulation and crosstalk between the transcriptional and the post-transcriptional levels have been suggested (). Thus, it is of great interest to examine whether and to what extent this principle may also apply at the post-transcriptional level.
