Motivation: Haplotypes, defined as the sequence of alleles on one chromosome, are crucial for many genetic analyses. As experimental determination of haplotypes is extremely expensive, haplotypes are traditionally inferred using computational approaches from genotype data, i.e. the mixture of the genetic information from both haplotypes. Best performing approaches for haplotype inference rely on Hidden Markov Models, with the underlying assumption that the haplotypes of a given individual can be represented as a mosaic of segments from other haplotypes in the same population. Such algorithms use this model to predict the most likely haplotypes that explain the observed genotype data conditional on reference panel of haplotypes. With rapid advances in short read sequencing technologies, sequencing is quickly establishing as a powerful approach for collecting genetic variation information. As opposed to traditional genotyping array technologies that independently call genotypes at polymorphic sites, short read sequencing often collects haplo typic information; a read spanning more than one polymorphic locus multi single nucleotide poly-morphic read) contains information on the haplotype from which the read originates. However, this information is generally ignored in existing approaches for haplotype phasing and genotype calling from short read data. Results: In this article, we propose a novel framework for haplotype inference from short read sequencing that leverages multi single nucleotide polymorphic reads together with a reference panel of haplo-types. The basis of our approach is a new probabilistic model that finds the most likely haplotype segments from the reference panel to explain the short read sequencing data for a given individual. We devised an efficient sampling method within a probabilistic model to achieve superior performance than existing methods. Using simulated sequencing reads from real individual genotypes in the HapMap data and the 1000 Genomes projects, we show that our method is highly accurate and computationally efficient. Our haplotype predictions improve accuracy over the basic haplotype copying model by $20% with comparable computational time, and over another recently proposed approach hap seq x by $10% with significantly reduced computational time and memory usage.

introduction humans are diploid organisms with two copies of each chromosome, one inherited from the father and the other from the mother. The two copies are similar to each other and only differ at a small fraction ($ 0:1%) of sites. Most of the variation is contained at single nucleotide polymorphic (SNP) sites. The sequence of alleles on each chromosome is referred to as the haplotype. Haplotype information is centrally important for a wide variety of applications, including association studies and ancestry inference (). Unfortunately, standard methods for probing genetic variation are able to collect only genotype information but not haplotypes. A large number of computational methods, referred to as haplotype phasing approaches, have been proposed to infer haplotypes from genotypes. The most successful methods use a set of reference haplotypes to build a probabilistic model of the haplotypes in the population (). Using a population genetics model for the haplotype distribution, these models predict the most likely haplotype data that can explain the observed genotypes. Rapid advances in high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies provide new opportunities for haplotype phasing methods. HTS yields short segments of the DNA (reads) where each read originates from one of the pair of chromosomes. Therefore, all the alleles in this read are from the same haplotype. Although reads that cover multiple SNPs multi snp reads) could be used to improve haplotype inference, existing methods generally ignore this information, partially owing to computational difficulty associated with modeling such reads. Several methods have been proposed to predict haplotypes directly from the reads. These methods, referred to as haplotype assembly methods, use overlapping reads to construct the haplotype (). The most commonly used objective function for haplotype *To whom correspondence should be addressed. assembly is the minimum error correction (MEC). The MEC objective function aims at finding the minimum number of edits such that the reads can be partitioned into two disjoint sets, and each set of reads originates from one of the haplotypes. However, as these methods do not use the information in the reference haplotype panel, they significantly underperform standard phasing methods that ignore read information but use reference panel (). Recently, one of these methods has been extended to use the reference (). Unfortunately, this method has prohibitive memory and time requirements, thus making it unfeasible for moderate to large datasets. Here, we propose a novel approach called haplo typing with Reference and Sequencing technology (HARSH) for haplotype phasing. We use a probabilistic model to incorporate the multi snp read information together with a reference panel of haplotypes. We use an efficient Gibbs sampling method to find sample from the posterior distribution. This algorithm has the advantages of being computationally efficient, scalable in memory usage and accurate in genotyping and phasing prediction. We evaluate our method on simulations from real haplotypes from the HapMap project. At 1 coverage, HARSH gives $10% improvement in terms of total error rate compared with standard phasing approaches that do not use the multi snp read information, thus showing the benefits of modeling multi snp reads. We also evaluate HARSH and the basic model for varying coverage and read length, showing the benefits of our approach in higher coverage and longer read length. Additionally, we test our method on simulations starting from real sequencing data of 1000 Genomes project, where the density of SNPs is much higher than that in HapMap data. Through extensive simulations we show that the gain in performance of our approach over existing models extends to realistic read lengths (e.g. 100400 bp), making our approach readily applicable to existing sequencing datasets. With recent works showing that short read sequencing can dramatically increase association power in genome wide association study over genotyping arrays (), we expect our approaches to further increase power in genome wide association study by increasing accuracy in genotype calling and phasing from short read data.
