Motivation: In recent years, structural genomics and ab initio molecular modeling activities are leading to the availability of a large number of structural models of proteins whose biochemical function is not known. The aim of this study was the development of a novel software tool that, given a proteins structural model, predicts the presence and identity of active sites and or ligand binding sites. Results: The algorithm implemented by ligand binding site recognition application (LIBRA) is based on a graph theory approach to find the largest subset of similar residues between an input protein and a collection of known functional sites. The algorithm makes use of two predefined databases for active sites and ligand binding sites, respectively, derived from the Catalytic Site Atlas and the Protein Data Bank. Tests indicate that LIBRA is able to identify the correct binding active site in 90% of the cases analyzed, 90% of which feature the identified site as ranking first. As far as ligand binding site recognition is concerned, LIBRA outperforms other structure based ligand binding sites detection tools with which it has been compared. Availability and implementation: The application, developed in Java SE 7 with a Swing GUI embedding a JMol applet, can be run on any OS equipped with a suitable Java Virtual Machine (JVM), and is available at the following URL: http://www.computationalbiology.it/software/ LIBRAv1.zip.

introduction an important area of investigation in structural biology related to protein function recognition is the identification of ligand binding sites on the surface of proteins. This has a number of different applications ranging from function identification to drug discovery (). Current tools, implemented in software applications like ef seek (), glos a () and APoc (), predict putative binding sites of a given input protein by comparing the properties of its surface patches with those of known binding sites. In addition, web applications such as pro func provide similar predictions based on a combination of sequence and structural information (). In this study, LIBRA, a novel application employing a graph theory approach for function recognition and ligand binding sites detection, is described. LIBRA is based on the comparison of an input protein structure with a database of ligand binding sites extracted from PDB (). Besides, the application has been also designed to overcome some
