Motivation: Developments in biotechnology have enabled the in vitro evolution of binding proteins. The emerging limitations of antibodies in binding protein engineering have led to suggestions for other proteins as alternative binding protein scaffolds. Most of these proteins were selected based on human intuition rather than systematic analysis of the available data. To improve this strategy, we developed a computational framework for finding desirable binding protein scaffolds by utilizing protein structure and sequence information. Results: For each protein, its structure and the sequences of evolutionarily related proteins were analyzed , and spatially contiguous regions composed of highly variable residues were identified. A large number of proteins have these regions, but leucine rich repeats l rrs histidine kinase domains and immunoglobulin domains are predominant among them. The candidates suggested as new binding protein scaffolds include histidine kinase, LRR, tit in and pentapeptide repeat protein. Availability and implementation: The database and web service are accessible via http://bcbl.kaist. ack r lib bp
introduction the development of recombinant DNA technologies and binding protein screening methods has enabled researchers to imitate in vivo adaptive immune processes in the laboratory and thereby engineer specific protein binders. This in vitro protein evolution is composed of two steps: (1) generation of a large span of diversified proteins and (2) selection of proteins with high affinity to the target molecules. Various combinations of protein diversification and selection technologies, such as phage display (), yeast surface display () and ribosome display (), are currently applied to perform in vitro protein evolution. Except for the development of peptide epitopes, these technologies require scaffold proteins where the epitope recognition sites are randomized. Antibodies are the key component of the adaptive immune system and have highly variable complementarity determining regions; consequently, they have been widely engineered as the scaffolds for binding proteins (). However, the limitations of antibodies as scaffold proteins, such as their high molecular weight, multi chain nature and overly large variable regions, have emerged, and alternative proteins have therefore been sought (). To date, more than 40 alternative binding proteins, composed of a structurally stable region and a variable region where diverse amino acids can be placed, have been identified ().specifically described three desirable properties for scaffolds in a binding protein library: they must have (1) a compact and rigid core, (2) a contiguous surface region where the amino acids can be replaced and (3) exposure of hydrophobic residues in the variable region. For many scaffold proteins, their loop regions are selected as the variable regions (), and structural components are rarely considered during scaffold protein selection. The exceptions are repeat proteins, in which repetitive patterns constitute specific horseshoe shapes and their concave regions are used as the variable regions (). However, most binding protein scaffolds were selected for their native functions, and little attention has been paid to their diversity and structure. Along with exponential increase in protein sequence information (), recent advances in structural genomics have expanded our understanding of proteins and their structures (). This information can be utilized to systemically identify new candidates for binding protein scaffolds. In this study, we computationally analyzed the structures and sequences of proteins to discover scaffolds with desirable properties for binding protein libraries. First, the sequences of evolutionarily related proteins were collected and their amino acid diversity was evaluated to establish the variable residues. The spatial relationship among the variable residues was evaluated using the protein structures. A scoring function, combining the sequence and structure information, was employed to determine highly variable and contiguous regions. Consequently, we were able to identify new candidates for binding protein scaffolds along with previously developed binding proteins. In addition, we provide a web based database for the binding protein scaffolds found in this analysis, as well as a web based analysis tool that can be used to detect the variable region of any protein structure.

conclusion in this study, we developed a computational method that utilized residue variability and connectivity to evaluate proteins as scaffolds for binding proteins. LRR folds, histidine kinase domains and immunoglobulin domains were found to possess desirable variable patches. The LRR fold and immunoglobulin domain have previously been reported as good scaffolds for binding proteins. The high rank of these structures in our study suggests that our method identified structures that could be used as binding protein scaffolds. Considering our results and several other relevant features of the proteins, we selected five new binding protein scaffolds. These five proteins can be used to construct binding protein libraries, and we expect that the systematic evaluation of protein structure, as conducted here, will facilitate the development of additional new binding protein libraries.
