Large numbers of long intergenic non-coding RNA linc rna have been detected through high throughput sequencing technology. However, currently we still know very little about their functions. Therefore, a linc rna function annotation database is needed to facilitate the study in this field. In this article, we present Linc2GO, a web resource that aims to provide comprehensive functional annotations for human linc rna. microrna mrna and microrna linc rna interaction data were integrated to generate linc rna functional annotations based on the competing endogenous RNA hypothesis. To the best of our knowledge, Linc2GO is the first database that makes use of the competing endogenous RNA hypoth-esis to predict linc rna functions. Availability: Freely available at

introduction long intergenic non-coding RNAs linc rnas are endogenous long non-coding RNA molecules that transcribed from 'intergenic' regions of the genome. In recent years, as high throughput sequencing technology developed, more and more linc rna have been identified (). It has been demonstrated that linc rnas play critical roles in regulating multiple important biological processes (). However, currently most linc rnas are still poorly studied. Owing to the importance of linc rna it has become very necessary to develop computational tools to predict linc rna functions. Previous researchers have proposed a coexpression based method to predict linc rna functions and achieved many meaningful results (). That is, if a linc rna is coexpressed with a protein coding gene whose function is already known, then the linc rna is predicted to take similar functions in this article, we predict linc rna functions in a rather different approach and present Linc2GO, a novel linc rna function annotation database. Instead of using the co-expression information of linc rna and protein coding gene our work is based on the competing endogenous RNA hypothesis cern a hypothesis): linc rna can function as microRNA 'sponge' to interact directly with microRNA and prevent them from binding to mRNA. In this way, linc rna regulates gene expression and meanwhile regulates the biological processes in which they get involved in (). For example, MAML1 and MEF2C are two important transcription factors that activate muscle specific gene expression. marcella showed that a linc rna linc-MD1, regulates muscle differentiation by interacting with two microRNAs, miR-135 and miR-133, which can bind to MAML1 and MEF2C to regulate their expressions (). Based on the above fact, it is natural to infer that if a linc rna and an mRNA share some microRNAs that can interact with both of them, then the two have similar biological functions.
