Motivation: Perturbations constitute the central means to study signaling pathways. Interrupting components of the pathway and analyzing observed effects of those interruptions can give insight into unknown connections within the signaling pathway itself, as well as the link from the pathway to the effects. Different pathway components may have different individual contributions to the measured perturbation effects, such as gene expression changes. Those effects will be observed in combination when the pathway components are perturbed. Extant approaches focus either on the reconstruction of pathway structure or on resolving how the pathway components control the downstream effects. Results: Here, we propose a linear effects model, which can be applied to solve both these problems from combinatorial perturbation data. We use simulated data to demonstrate the accuracy of learning the pathway structure as well as estimation of the individual contributions of pathway components to the perturbation effects. The practical utility of our approach is illustrated by an application to perturbations of the mitogen activated protein kinase pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae.

introduction signaling pathways convey stimuli from the outside or inside of the cell to generate required cellular response. For example, under osmotic stress, the high osmolarity glycerol (HOG) mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK) pathway in yeast is activated, and the signal is transported from the receptors down to the MAPKK Pbs2, which in turn phosphorylates the MAPK Hog1. Finally, Hog1 regulates several transcription factors, which activate the hyper-osmotic stress response genes (). The central means to study signaling pathways is by cellular perturbations. Hence, computational analysis, modeling and interpretation of perturbation data constitute the crucial tools in the field (). Examples of experimental perturbations include crisp rcas genome editing, genetic knock-outs (gene deletions) or transcriptional knock-downs through RNA interference (RNAi). For the HOG pathway in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, its components were perturbed by deletion and the effect of these perturbations was assessed in osmotic stress conditions by measuring global expression changes between perturbed and wild type cells (O'). The rationale behind the perturbation studies is that interrupting the signal flow in the pathways gives insight into both their structure and their downstream targets. First, with the interruption at a certain node in the pathway, the signal can not be transmitted further. For example, when the MAPKK is deleted, the MAPK downstream can not be phosphorylated. In this way, perturbations propagate in the pathway along its edges in the same way as the signal. Second, each node in the pathway may have its own (direct or indirect) contribution to the perturbation effects, such as gene expression changes. Those effects will be observed in combination when the pathway components are perturbed. The focus of the present work is computational analysis of cellular signaling pathways from perturbation data. The aim is to model the structure of interactions within the pathway as well as the contributions of its components to the observed perturbation effects. The proposed approach is motivated by two problems that are inherent to the analysis of perturbation data. The first problem concerns the perturbation effect gap problem, a common discrepancy between the perturbed and the observed variables. In most experimental studies, the perturbed signaling pathway constitutes one layer of the system (layer 1 in), only indirectly connected to V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

conclusion to our knowledge, LEM is the first approach which uses observed effects of perturbations of hidden variables to tackle two tasks at the same time. First, it resolves the interconnections between the perturbed pathway components (layer 1 in), and second, it derives their individual contributions to the observed effects (layer 2). Results on simulated data clearly show that LEMs are indeed capable of accurately solving both tasks. One group of existing approaches, with the most prominent class of models based on nested effects assumption (NEMs and extensions) (), is mostly concerned with the first task. The output brought by LEMs from perturbation data is richer than what can be inferred with the nem based methods, but also requires more input.), as well as sensitivity (y-axis B, E) and specificity (y-axis C, F) of edge learning, decrease with growing noise levels (indicated by colours), and increase with the number of times the experiments are repeated x axis both for the exhaustive search over 3-node networks (AC) and greedy search over 10-node networks (DF). The addition of an increasing number of non-linear effects (colours G, H, I) decreases the fraction of perfectly learned pathways (y-axis G), as well as sensitivity (y-axis H) and specificity (y-axis I) of edge learning, regardless of the number of times the experiments are repeated x axis here plotted for greedy network search). The performance of structure learning is most affected by high noise values and addition of non-linear effects.
