link in path is a pathway mapping and analysis tool that enables users to explore and visualize the list of gene protein sequences through various flash driven interactive web interfaces including KEGG pathway maps, functional composition maps tree maps molecular interaction reaction networks and pathway to pathway networks. Users can submit single or multiple datasets of gene protein sequences to link in path to (i) determine the co occurrence and co absence of genes proteins on animated KEGG pathway maps; (ii) compare functional compositions within and among the datasets using tree maps (iii) analyze the statistically enriched pathways across the datasets; (iv) build the pathway to pathway networks for each dataset; (v) explore potential interaction reaction paths between pathways; and (vi) identify common pathway to pathway networks across the datasets. Availability: link in path is freely available to all interested users at

introduction pathways are functional units resulted from the interplay of interacting genes, RNAs, proteins and small molecules. Mapping genes or proteins into the context of pathways can help gain more insights into their functions and interactions in an organism. Although sequence similarity based methods [e.g. NCBI BLAST ()] have been commonly used for identification of pathways to genes proteins based on their orthologous genes proteins annotated in the well characterized pathways, these methods have limitations such that some best hits (such as those annotated as 'hypothetical' or 'unknown' genes proteins may not necessarily be annotated in any pathway. The incorporation of additional data such as protein protein interactions and enzymatic reactions can help infer the pathways and their interconnection and uncover the biological function of genes proteins. However, the information regarding the connections between pathways through molecular interactions and reactions are not included and adequately represented to support the exploratory analysis in most pathway mapping tools (reviewed in), for example, genma pp (), Pathway Explorer () and Pathway Projector (). To overcome * To whom correspondence should be addressed. these limitations, a web based interactive tool, so called link in path was developed to analyze, map and visualize the gene protein lists in the context of interconnected pathways, which provides a valuable resource for not only comprehensive studies of gene gene interaction, but also functional genomics in virtually all organisms.

conclusion link in path is a web based tool that was applied the state of the art visualization techniques for original aspects of pathway mapping and analyses. Its novel contributions such as functional composition using tree maps pathway to pathway interconnections and the global metabolic map with highlighting mechanisms add value over comparable existing tools.
