An essential element when analysing the structure, function, and dynamics of biological networks is the identification of communities of related nodes. An algorithm proposed recently enhances this process by clustering the links between nodes, rather than the nodes themselves, thereby allowing each node to belong to multiple overlapping or nested communities. The R package link comm implements this algorithm and extends it in several aspects: (i) the clustering algorithm handles networks that are weighted, directed, or both weighted and directed; (ii) several visualization methods are implemented that facilitate the representation of the link communities and their relationships; (iii) a suite of functions are included for the downstream analysis of the link communities including novel community based measures of node centrality; (iv) the main algorithm is written in C++ and designed to handle networks of any size; and (v) several clustering methods are available for networks that can be handled in memory, and the number of communities can be adjusted by the user.

introduction the advent of high throughput technologies in the biological sciences has resulted in a large amount of data that can often be represented as systems of interacting elements, such as genes or proteins. To understand how the nodes in these networks relate to one another and how the topologies of the networks influence how they work, an extremely useful analytical approach is to identify sets of related nodes, known as communities (). Until recently, this was conducted by clustering nodes in the network, however, a major drawback to this approach is that each node can belong to only a single community and in densely connected networks, subnetworks may often overlap to such an extent that this approach becomes un suitably restrictive. A superior method that circumvents this constraint is to cluster the links between nodes, thereby allowing nodes to belong to multiple communities and consequently revealing the overlapping and nested * To whom correspondence should be addressed. structure of the network (). We implement the algorithm outlined by, which employs the Jaccard coefficient for assigning similarity between links, e ik and e jk , that share a node, k where n + (i) refers to the first order node neighbourhood of node i. After assigning pairwise similarities to all of the links in the network, the links are hierarchically clustered and the resulting dendrogram is cut at a point that maximizes the density of links within the clusters normalizing against the maximum and minimum numbers of links possible in each cluster, known as the partition density.
