A major challenge for mass spectrometric based lipid omics aiming at describing all lipid species in a biological sample, lies in the computational and bioinformatic processing of the large amount of data that arises after data acquisition. lipid pro is a software tool that supports the identification of lipids by interpreting large datasets generated by liquid chromatography— tandem mass spectrometry lcms ms using the advanced data independent acquisition mode MS E. In the MS E mode, the instrument fragments all molecular ions generated from a sample and records time resolved molecular ion data as well as fragment ion data for every detectable molecular ion. lipid pro matches the retention time aligned mass to charge ratio data of molecular and fragment ions with a lipid database and generates a report on all identified lipid species. For generation of the lipid database, lipid pro provides a module for construction of lipid species and their fragments using a flexible building block approach. Hence, lipid pro is an easy to use analysis tool to interpret complex MS E lipid omics data and also offers a module to generate a user specific lipid database. Availability and implementation: lipid pro is freely available at:

introduction lipids are compounds of biological origin that are soluble in nonpolar solvents. In biological systems, lipids perform ubiquitous functions such as construction of cell membranes, stabilization of membrane bound proteins, balancing of energy metabolism or cell signaling (). All lipid species in a cell or tissue are referred to as the lipid ome. Changes within lipid omes have been closely linked to stress responses or various diseases including diabetes, obesity, heart diseases or neurodegenerative diseases (reviewed in). liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry lcms ms is suitable for lipid ome analysis since it can cover a broad range of lipids (). Both, data dependent acquisition (DDA) and data independent acquisition (DIA) are widely used for lcms based lipid omics. In DDA, the most abundant molecular ions at each retention time (rt) are successively V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals permission soup com selected for isolation and fragmentation. Despite the advantages of the DDA approach, there are some inherent limitations such as often ir reproducible molecular ion selection, under sampling and long instrument cycle times. DIA overcomes those limitations. MS E , supported by Waters qt of instrument platforms, acquires intact molecular and fragment ions in an unbiased manner by continuously switching the energy for collision induced dissociation between low (MS) and high (MS/MS) energy. DIA analysis requires coherent and intricate data processing since it produces complex data containing information on all molecular and fragment ions at each rt. Commercial and free downloadable software such as mz mine 2 () or Lipid Data Analyser () provide support to align and compare the spectral features of LCMS data. These applications identify lipid species in LCMS raw data by matching their mono isotopic masses or elemental compositions with a custom based or online database. However, these software applications do not consider fragmentation data. lipid blast () identifies lipid species by matching the measured MS/MS spectra to an in silico generated library after converting raw data into the MGF format. lipid blast can be used for the analysis of MS E data, but it is laborious to match hundreds of different lipid species of the database with lcms ms data. We developed the lipid pro software solution for rapid identification of lipids in preprocessed DIA data acquired with lcms ms using rt aligned mono isotopic masses of molecular ions (MS) and fragment ions (MS/MS). Since lipid pro provides a module for construction of lipid species and their characteristic fragments using a flexible building block approach, rare or even non described lipids beside the common species can be identified in total lipid extracts of biological samples. To meet the technological objectives of this research, we took a step forward in the development of a new user friendly, modular and client based database management system. The lipid pro application can be configured on Microsoft Windows platforms following a simple six step installation process.
