Thousands of human long non-coding RNAs ln crnas have been identified in cancers and played important roles in a wide range of tumorigenesis. However, the functions of vast majority of human ln crnas are still elusive. Emerging studies revealed that the expression level of majority ln crnas shows discordant expression pattern with their protein coding gene neighbors in various model organisms. Therefore, it may be useful to infer ln crnas potential biological function in cancer development by more comprehensive functional views of co-expressed cancer genes beyond mere physical proximity of genes. To this aim, we performed thorough searches and analyses of the interactions between l ncrna and non neighboring cancer genes and provide a comprehensive co-expression data resource, ln can et. In current version, ln can et contains the pre-computed 8 494 907 significant co-expression pairs of 9641 ln crnas and 2544 well classified cancer genes in 2922 matched TCGA samples. In detail, we integrated 10 cancer gene lists from public database and calculate the co-expression with all the ln crnas in 11 TCGA cancer types separately. Based on the resulted 110 co-expression networks, we identified 17 common regulatory pairs related to extracellular space shared in 11 cancers. We expect ln can et will enable researcher to explore l ncrna expression pattern, their affected cancer genes and pathways, biological significance in the context of specific cancer types and other useful annotation related to particular kind of l ncrna cancer gene interaction. Availability and implementation: http://

introduction long non-coding RNA l ncrna refers as non-coding transcripts longer than 200 bases and are abundant in various normal and cancer tissues (). Rather than being regarded as 'transcriptional noise', there is emerging evidence that ln crnas play important roles in regulation of gene expression through influencing chromatin modification, transcriptional complexes targeting, mRNA splicing, protein translation (). However, most ln crnas are poorly annotated, and their functions including their roles in complex diseases have not been widely studies.
