Motivation: A number of long non-coding RNAs ln crnas have been identified by deep sequencing methods, but their molecular and cellular functions are known only for a limited number of ln crnas. Current databases on ln crnas are mostly for cataloging purpose without providing in depth information required to infer functions. A comprehensive resource on l ncrna function is an immediate need. Results: We present a database for functional investigation of ln crnas that encompasses annotation, sequence analysis, gene expression , protein binding and phylogenetic conservation. We have compiled ln crnas for six species (human, mouse, zebrafish, fruit fly, worm and yeast) from ENSEMBL, HGNC, MGI and l ncrna db. Each l ncrna was analyzed for coding potential and phylogenetic conservation in different lineages. Gene expression data of 208 rnase q studies (4995 samples), collected from GEO, ENCODE, mod encode and TCGA databases, were used to provide expression profiles in various tissues, diseases and developmental stages. Importantly, we analyzed rnase q data to identify coexpressed mRNAs that would provide ample insights on l ncrna functions. The resulting gene list can be subject to enrichment analysis such as Gene Ontology or KEGG pathways. Furthermore, we compiled protein l ncrna interactions by collecting and analyzing publicly available clips eq or par clip sequencing data. Finally, we explored evolutionarily conserved ln crnas with correlated expression between human and six other organisms to identify functional ln crnas. The whole contents are provided in a user friendly web interface. Availability and implementation: ln crn at or is available at http://

introduction long non-coding RNAs ln crnas are non protein coding transcripts 4200 nt. Many ln crnas have been reported to play important molecular and cellular functions despite of not producing protein products. They typically recruit proteins to help or disturb formation of ribonucleoprotein (RNP) complexes. Depending on the role of interacting proteins, ln crnas play central roles in a wide range of cellular processes. An illustrative example is RMST, a brain specific l ncrna which physically interacts with SOX2 and plays a key role in transcriptional regulation of neurogenic transcription factors (). Several ln crnas were implicated in various types of cancers (). MALAT1 was reported to be a critical regulator of the metastasis phenotype of lung cancer cells (), and CCAT2 was shown to promote tumor growth, metastasis and chromosomal instability in wnt dependent fashion in colon cancer (). In fact, ln crnas are expected to be involved in every stage of hallmarks of cancer (), thereby serving as critical regulators and therapeutic targets in many cases. Owing to the development of high throughput sequencing technologies, thousands of ln crnas have been recently discovered from rnase q data. However, the biological and molecular characteristics of the large majority of ln crnas remain unknown. Databases or tools that facilitate functional investigation of ln crnas would be of great value to identify important ln crnas based on understanding of biological roles. Several databases on ln crnas have already been developed for various purposes. lnc i pedia (), l ncrna db () and l ncr nome () are mostly for annotation databases based on literature evidence. n red () and non code v3.0 () provide microarray expression profiles in various tissues for human and mouse. Some of these databases contain additional useful information on function such as the RNA secondary structure, microRNA binding and protein l ncrna interactions (), but they are mostly limited for human. Furthermore, rnase q data, the most useful source of l ncrna properties, have never been systematically collected and mined for functional investigation yet. Thus, we still lack a comprehensive resource to cover sequence characteristics and function related data organized in a systematic way. Here, we introduce ln crn at or to perform in depth functional analysis of ln crnas by combining sequence characteristics, gene expression data and protein l ncrna interactions. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first attempt to compile massive rnase q data with the support of downstream analysis such as *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. coexpression and gene set enrichment, covering six important model organisms.
