Motivation: Long non-coding RNAs ln crnas which are non-coding RNAs of length above 200 nucleotides, play important biological functions such as gene expression regulation. To fully reveal the functions of ln crnas a fundamental step is to annotate them in various species. However, as ln crnas tend to encode one or multiple open reading frames, it is not trivial to distinguish these long non-coding transcripts from protein coding genes in transcript omic data. Results: In this work, we design a new tool that calculates the coding potential of a transcript using a machine learning model (random forest) based on multiple features including sequence characteristics of putative open reading frames, translation scores based on ribosomal coverage, and conservation against characterized protein families. The experimental results show that our tool competes favorably with existing coding potential computation tools in l ncrna identification.

introduction it has been suggested that less than 2% of the human genome codes for proteins (). The majority of the transcriptome contains non-coding RNA (ncRNA) genes (), which function directly as RNAs instead of coding for proteins (). The most recently discovered class of nc rnas is long non-coding RNAs ln crnas which are generally defined as non-coding transcripts of length above 200 nucleotides (). Increasing evidence has shown that ln crnas play important and diverse biological functions. For example, ln crnas a nril and hot air bind to chromatin remodelling complexes PRC1 and PRC2 to alter chromatin and transcription. GAS5 l ncrna acts as a decoy for the GR transcription factor and prevents GR from binding to DNA and transcriptional activation. MALAT1 RNA binds to SR proteins to regulate mRNA alternative splicing, whereas BACE-1AS RNA binds to the complementary BACE-1 mRNA to regulate BACE-1 translation. As a result, the dysfunctions of ln crnas are associated with a wide range of diseases ranging from neurodegeneration to cancer (). ln crnas exist in many species such as Arabidopsis (), Zea mays (), honey bee (), chicken () and zebrafish (). In recent years, a large number of ln crnas have been identified. gen code () comprises 9277 manually annotated l ncrna genes in the human genome. The l ncrna disease database () contains 1564 human ln crnas that are likely to be associated with diseases. Thus, given the functional importance and ubiquity of ln crnas it is important to annotate them on a genome scale in various species. With the advances of the next generation sequencing technologies, the transcriptome s of a large number of organisms have been sequenced, providing us a unique opportunity to mine ln crnas. The assembled transcripts contain different types of functional elements such as small nc rnas ln crnas and protein coding genes. ln crnas can be effectively distinguished from most small nc rnas such as V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com miRNAs and snoRNAs, using size as the main criterion. However, ln crnas share similarities with protein coding transcripts in terms of transcript length and splicing structure (). In addition, ln crnas tend to encode putative open reading frames (ORFs). For instance, H19, Xist, mir g Gtl2 and KcnqOT1 all have putative ORFs greater than 100 amino acids, but have been characterized as functional nc rnas (). Thus, a major challenge for l ncrna identification is to distinguish ln crnas from protein coding genes, especially in non model organisms lacking comprehensive protein coding gene annotation. Many efforts have been made to distinguish between l ncrna and protein coding transcripts, ranging from applying a threshold for a single feature to more complicated supervised machine learning methods. One commonly used feature is the length of the ORF. For example, a simple approach is to classify a transcript containing an ORF of length above 100 amino acids as a protein coding gene (). This criterion is arbitrary and is not always correct (). Using this simple criterion, the mouse Xist RNA gene (), which encodes a putative ORF of 298 amino acids (aa), was mis-classified as a protein coding gene when it was first discovered (). A probability model constructed from multiple criteria has also been used to identify protein coding and non-coding regions such as the one used in the Phylogenetic Codon Substitution Frequencies phylo csf. phylo csf is based on nucleotide substitutions of multispecies sequences. It uses multiple sequence alignments to calculate the phylogenetic conservation score. As an alignment based method, it usually requires high quality alignments (), which are not trivial to produce and can incur high computational cost. More accurate approaches for identifying ln crnas use supervised machine learning methods. These approaches can be further divided into two types. One relies on sequence alignments and the other is alignment free. Representative examples of alignment based methods include coding potential Calculator (CPC) (). CPC aligns transcripts against known protein databases. As homologous protein coding genes tend to share higher sequence conservation than ln crnas the alignment score or its statistical significance provides useful information to differentiate these two types of transcripts (). An alternative and faster approach is alignment free methods such as cp at () and PLEK (). cp at integrates linguistic features of transcript sequences into a logistic regression model for l ncrna prediction. PLEK integrates km er based features into a support vector machine to distinguish ln crnas from mRNAs. In addition, cp at and PLEK allow users to create a model with their own data. This option, which is not present in CPC and phylo csf is very useful for l ncrna identification in different species. Despite the promising progress for l ncrna identification, there is still a need for better approaches and tools. In particular, existing machine learning based tools do not carefully handle the imbalanced training data, in which one class has far more instances than the other. The issue of imbalanced training data is particularly pronounced for l ncrna identification when it is formulated as a binary classification problem in existing tools. For example, due to poor annotation of ln crnas many species have far less characterized ln crnas than protein coding genes. As a result, a classifier tends to over predict query transcripts as the protein coding transcript (major class) (). In addition, many existing tools need users to provide a score threshold for l ncrna identification, which is not always obvious from users' perspective. For example, phylo csf and cp at do not suggest the specific type of an input transcript, but only output a coding potential score. The predefined score cutoffs of phylo csf and cp at vary from species to species. phylo csfs score cutoffs of 50 and 300 were used for mouse () and Zebrafish (), respectively. cp at suggests the score cutoffs of 0.364 and 0.44 for human and mouse, respectively. These specific score cutoffs can not be immediately applied to other species. Even worse, not every tool can be trained on different species to provide users with necessary information to choose an appropriate score cut off. In this article, we present ln crn aid an l ncrna identification tool, which applies random forest (RF) classification () to distinguish ln crnas from protein coding genes. RF is a classification model aggregating multiple classification trees generated from boot-strap samples and has been successfully applied in bioinformatics (). ln crn aid has several advantages over existing tools. First, it still takes advantage of alignment based features, which have strong discriminative power. However, instead of using genome scale multiple sequence alignments or pairwise alignments against all existing protein sequences, ln crn aid uses profile hidden Markov model (profile hmm based alignments, rendering more sensitive homology search and shorter running time than existing alignment based l ncrna identification tools. Second, ln crn aid is easy to use as it does not require users to provide a score cut off. It automatically determines the type of a query transcript as well as provides a coding potential score. Third, ln crn aid can be applied to various species by providing an option to train the classifier for different data. Fourth, ln crn aid does not require a large number of training data of neither protein coding transcripts nor ln crnas to construct a classifier and can handle imbalanced classes in the training data. In our experiments, we evaluated the performance of ln crn aid on two different species, human and mouse. In addition, we benchmarked ln crn aid with CPC, cp at phylo csf and PLEK on both species. The experimental results show that ln crn aid has both good sensitivity and specificity.
