Motivation: Sequences and protein interaction data are of significance to understand the underlying molecular mechanism of organisms. Local network alignment is one of key systematic ways for predicting protein functions, identifying functional modules and understanding the phylogeny from these data. Most of currently existing tools, however, encounter their limitations, which are mainly concerned with scoring scheme, speed and scalability. Therefore, there are growing demands for sophisticated network evolution models and efficient local alignment algorithms. Results: We developed a fast and scalable local network alignment tool called local ali for the identification of functionally conserved modules in multiple networks. In this algorithm, we firstly proposed a new framework to reconstruct the evolution history of conserved modules based on a maximum parsimony evolutionary model. By relying on this model, local ali facilitates interpretation of resulting local alignments in terms of conserved modules, which have been evolved from a common ancestral module through a series of evolutionary events. A meta heuristic method simulated annealing was used to search for the optimal or near optimal inner nodes (i.e. ancestral modules) of the evolutionary tree. To evaluate the performance and the statistical significance, local ali were tested on 26 real datasets and 1040 randomly generated datasets. The results suggest that local ali outperforms all existing algorithms in terms of coverage, consistency and scalability, meanwhile retains a high precision in the identification of functionally coherent subnetworks.

introduction a functional module is, by definition, a discrete entity whose function is separable from those of other modules (). They are usually separated based on spatial localization (e.g. a ribosome) or chemical specificity (e.g. a signal transduction system) and composed of many types of molecules, such as proteins, DNA, RNA and small molecules. A deficiency of a comprehensive chart of functional modules within organisms becomes an obstacle to unravel the general design principles that govern the structure and behavior of modules, and understand the evolutionary constraints they must obey. Thus, the problem of identifying functional modules attracts many researchers in the fields of computational biology and systems biology. To come up to this problem, network alignment based on evolutionary cross species comparison provides a valuable framework (). Despite the existence of many network alignment tools such as path blast (), network blast (NB;), Natalie 2.0 () and align mcl (), the developments of faster and more efficient tools are of significance to cope with the rapidly growing biological data. Network alignment aims at finding one to one or many to many node mapping tables by comparing networks based on information from sequence similarity, topology conservation, co-expression, co-evolution, etc. Nodes that are grouped into a same cluster in a node mapping table constitute an equivalence class. Each equivalence class must bear at most one protein from each species in one to one tables, whereas it might receive more than one node from a same species in many to many tables. Generally, network alignment algorithms are categorized into pairwise and multiple network alignments according to the number of compared species (), and into local and global network alignments according to its target regions of interest. Pairwise approaches align two networks and multiple approaches three and more networks. Local alignment approaches detect node mapping tables for conserved subnetworks, which are usually independent and high scoring local regions, each implying a putative functional module such as a protein complex () or metabolic pathway (). Global alignment approaches determine an optimal global node mapping table for the compared networks (), each set of matched nodes (i.e. proteins) implying a putative function oriented ortholog group. Typically, pairwise global alignment methods attempt to provide one to one mapping tables including n et al (), migra al (), h graal (), SPINAL () and MAGNA (). Multiple global alignment and pairwise multiple local alignment attempt to give many to many mapping tables, such as SMETANA () and net coffee (). The scope of this paper focuses on the problem of multiple local alignment. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com both in silico and in vivo studies suggest that functional modules of organisms tend to be conserved during the evolution history (). Grounded on this hypothesis, local network alignment provides a general computational framework that searches for high scoring conserved subnetworks to detect functionally conserved modules. The developments of local alignment tools or web servers have become a quite active field in the last decade. The most notable pairwise local alignment tools include path blast (), ma wish (MW;), network blast (), align nemo (AN;) and net aligner (). Just a few multiple local alignment tools have been developed. The currently existing multiple local alignment tools include grae ml in (), CAPPI () and network blast m (NBM;). In addition, there are also some works trying to detect functionally conserved modules by using a combination of clustering algorithms and global alignment algorithms, such as pina log (). See more information about existing local and global network alignment tools in the supplementary material. The currently existing multiple local alignment tools are concerned with three major issues. The first one is the scalability. To date, CAPPI has been applied to the analysis of three networks and only compatible with particularly designed data. NBM is unable to run on networks containing nodes with a large vertex degree (). Thus, the scalability of these tools is at a modest level. Another issue is the evolutionary relevance of the reported hits. To answer the question of how conserved modules of descendants have been evolved from their origin, the scoring schemes shall be more strongly rooted in an evolutionary model (). But, neither the evolution history nor a probabilistic model of network growth was considered by grae ml in and NBM. The third issue is speed. The problem of aligning multiple networks is computationally intractable. Parallelization techniques can largely speed up local alignment algorithms because each target of interest can be searched by a single thread. Yet, none of the existing multiple local alignment tools support parallel computing. To remedy these limitations, we developed a fast and scalable alignment tool local ali (LA) for the identification of functionally conserved modules in multiple networks. A new framework was firstly proposed for the inference of the evolution history of functional modules based on a maximum parsimony evolutionary model. By relying on this model, LA facilitates the interpretation of resulting local alignments in terms of conserved modules that have been evolved from a common ancestral module through a series of evolutionary events. To evaluate the performance, LA and four previous algorithms were tested on 26 real datasets and 1040 random datasets. We assessed the quality of the alignment results in terms of coverage, consistency, prediction of protein functions and prediction of protein complexes. The results show that LA outperforms all previous algorithms in terms of coverage, consistency and scalability, meanwhile retains a high precision in predicting functionally coherent subnetworks (FCS). Moreover, LA is also preferable to the state of the art algorithm NBM in predicting protein functions and protein complexes.
