Motivation: Discovery of nucleotide motifs that are localized with respect to a certain biological landmark is important in several applications , such as in regulatory sequences flanking the transcription start site, in the neighborhood of known transcription factor binding sites, and in transcription factor binding regions discovered by massively parallel sequencing chips eq. Results: We report an algorithm called local motif to discover such localized motifs. The algorithm is based on a novel scoring function, called spatial confinement score, which can determine the exact interval of localization of a motif. This score is combined with other existing scoring measures including over-representation and relative entropy to determine the overall prominence of the motif. The approach successfully discovers biologically relevant motifs and their intervals of localization in scenarios where the motifs can not be discovered by general motif finding tools. It is especially useful for discovering multiple co-localized motifs in a set of regulatory sequences, such as those identified by chips eq
introduction regulation of gene expression primarily occurs at the stage of transcription of the gene. A key event in the regulation of transcription is the binding of trans-acting proteins called transcription factors (TFs) to cis acting DNA sequences in the vicinity of the gene. The TFs bind to short 520 bp segments of DNA called transcription factor binding sites tfbs s. The tfbs s are not easily recognized in DNA sequences as they are of short length and frequently have mutations in their pattern. However, they can be discovered computationally within a set of sequences that are enriched with their occurrences. The computational algorithm looks for a short, conserved and often repeated pattern called the motif in these sequences. The motif is likely to be the TFBS. A number of computational algorithms for motif discovery have been developed over more than a decade (To whom correspondence should be addressed 2008. Motif finding algorithms can usually discover the real motif (i.e. which truly represents the tfbs s when the tfbs s are significantly over-represented compared to random (or background) patterns in the given set of sequences. However, when analyzing long sequences or a set of sequences in which the tfbs s are not significantly enriched, random patterns can appear equally or more conserved than the real motif and thus the real motif can not be discovered (). In such datasets, additional information about the real motif can aid its discovery. A useful piece of information that has not been adequately exploited in the existing motif finding algorithms is the positional localization of tfbs s. tfbs s usually occur in specific positions relative to a biological landmark within gene regulatory sequences. For instance, many tfbs s are located in specific position intervals relative to the transcription start site (TSS) (). tfbs s of cooperating TFs also occur at specific distances from each other (). Similarly, in a set of TF binding sequences obtained by high throughput techniques such as chip chip or massively parallel sequencing (, the tfbs s are localized around the positions of maximum signal intensity (such as a peak in chips eq. Such information of positional localization of tfbs s can be utilized to distinguish the real motif from random patterns. Localization information has been used previously to improve the performance of motif discovery. For example analyzed motifs in 1941 Drosophila regulatory sequences of length 300 bp each aligned (250, +50) relative to the TSS. The analysis of complete 300 bp sequences did not reveal many of the core promoter motifs. However, in a separate analysis of the local region (60, +40), most core promoter motifs were discovered. similarly analyzed the (50, 1) and (+1, +50) regions of Arabidopsis thaliana promoters separately in order to discover the core promoter motifs considered both positional localization around the TSS and pairwise distances among the motifs to identify novel tfbs s in human promoters imposed a positional prior on the motif in tfbs s identified by chip chip to improve motif discovery. The prior was proportional to the ChIP signal intensity at a given position, which was estimated by combining the intensities of all neighboring probes. Recently, some generic motif finding algorithms have incorporated the facility to define positional priors during motif search. For example, the AMADEUS algorithm () incorporates the facility to score motifs according in the localized motif finding problem, the instances of a motif M occur confined within an unknown position interval (p 1 , p 2 ) of the input sequences relative to an anchor point. The objective is to discover the motif M and the interval (p 1 , p 2 ). (b) local motif studies the positional distribution of the motif occurrences relative to the anchor point. (c) Different motifs could be localized within different intervals around the anchor point. (d) A localized motif is prominently over-represented in a certain interval with respect to the entire sequence length, (e) whereas a random pattern may be over-represented in certain intervals but not with respect to the entire sequence. to their distribution around the tss incorporated positional preference in their motif finding algorithm GLAM by performing gapless local alignment over windowed subsequences of the original sequence set (aligned relative to the TSS) instead of the complete length. These applications use a positional prior on the motif, i.e. the localization interval of the motif is defined a priori. However, in most practical scenarios both the position and the length of the localization interval are unknown. None of the existing algorithms has addressed this problem. A solution could be to subdivide the sequences (aligned relative to the biological landmark) into short intervals and analyze each interval separately with the existing algorithms. However, this is impractical due to several reasons. First, it is difficult to decide the interval length. If the interval is too short or too long compared to the actual region of localization, the motif will not be discovered. Furthermore, discovering multiple motifs spread over different intervals would require selection of different interval lengths (). Secondly, this approach would report a number of random patterns that are over-represented in a short sequence interval by chance, but which are not truly localized motifs. There is a difference between a localized motif and a motif that is overrepresented in a short sequence interval. As shown in and e, a localized motif has a distinct confinement of tfbs s in a certain interval in the context of the entire sequence length, while a motif that is over-represented in a certain short interval may not have such confinement in the global context. Therefore, local analysis without considering the global context of the motif may be misleading. This is illustrated in the study of where scoring functions with a positional bias resulted in a large number of false motifs. Thirdly, the task of fragmenting the sequences and combining together results for several intervals is laborious and time consuming. Thus, it would be useful to have an automated, efficient algorithm to accurately discover localized motifs. This article presents a computational algorithm called local motif for the discovery of localized motifs in sequences that have been aligned relative to a biological landmark (henceforth referred to as the anchor point). A new scoring measure called spatial confinement score is introduced that assesses whether or not a motif has localized occurrence within the sequences, and allows accurate demarcation of the localization interval. The spatial confinement score is combined with the existing scoring measures of motif over-representation and relative entropy to evaluate the overall prominence of the motif. The existing scoring measures are reformulated using information theory so that all scores can be easily combined into a single score. A time and memory efficient greedy search algorithm utilizes this scoring function for localized motif discovery. Experiments on simulated datasets show that local motif has consistently better performance than existing tools in detecting motifs in cases where they are localized in a certain sequence interval. The interval length predictions made by local motif are also highly accurate. Experiments on real datasets show that local motif can discover localized motifs around the TSS, co regulatory motifs around known motifs and motifs in chips eq datasets where the existing motif finding tools fail. Furthermore, the interval predictions made by local motif provide biologically useful information about tft f interactions page 1154 11521159

conclusion the local motif algorithm has been developed for discovering motifs localized relative to a biological landmark in long regulatory sequences. A localized motif differs from a locally over-represented pattern by the virtue of its spatial confinement within the local interval. A new scoring function called SCS has been developed to measure the spatial confinement. SCS is found to accurately identify the interval of localization. In a sequence set where the motif appears subtle to a usual motif finding algorithm, localization property allows the motif to still be discovered with high accuracy using the local motif scoring function. Information theoretic framework has been found useful for formulating the scoring function to be consistent for motifs of different lengths and mutations. This allows selection of best motifs while removing their redundant forms. The new formulation gives a clear quantitative as well as qualitative picture of the motif's relevance considering its over-representation, relative entropy and spatial confinement. The three individual scoring measures can be combined in various ways to rank motifs according to their performance in one of more of the three characteristics. Three specific examples where positional localization of motifs is found useful were reported. These include regulatory sequences surrounding the TSS, sequences flanking a known TFBS and sequences flanking the peaks in a chips eq dataset. local motif could detect motifs in longer sequences as compared to other tools which are sensitive to sequence length, and could amplify weak motifs in case they were localized. For similar reasons, local motif also detected a number of co regulatory motifs flanking a main motif. With the emergence of chips eq co motif discovery using positional localization is extremely relevant. The interval predictions reported by local motif provide additional insight into the range of tft f interactions. local motif is presently based on the (l, d) motif model. There are emerging opinions in the literature to give a more accurate description of the motif, such as gapped motifs, or motifs based on IUPAC character set. It will be interesting to study which motif representations lead to more accurate results on biological data. The local motif algorithm could also be improved from a heuristic search to exact search in the future using efficient data structures such as suffix tree and FM index.
