Motivation: Quantifying variability in protein expression is a major goal of systems biology and cell to cell variability in subcellular localization pattern has not been systematically quantified. Results: We define a local measure to quantify cell to cell variability in high throughput microscope images and show that it allows comparable measures of variability for proteins with diverse subcellu-lar localizations. We systematically estimate cell to cell variability in the yeast GFP collection and identify examples of proteins that show cell to cell variability in their subcellular localization. Conclusions: Automated image analysis methods can be used to quantify cell to cell variability in microscope images. Contact: alan moses u torontoca Availability and Implementation: Software and data are available at

introduction quantitative characterization of variability in gene expression has been a major area of research in systems biology p elk mans 2012; s nij der and p elk mans 2011). Time-lapse movies of reporter genes in live cell fluorescence microscopy demonstrated differences in protein expression between genetically identical cells (). cell to cell variability in protein abundance was measured for most yeast proteins () using high throughput flow cytometry of the GFP collection (). Time-lapse fluorescence microscopy experiments have also revealed examples of proteins that show cell to cell variability in subcellular localization (). For example, the yeast stress response transcription factors Msn2 and Msn4 have been observed to continuously shuttle between the cytoplasm and nucleus (). To our knowledge, cell to cell variability in subcellular localization has not been systematically characterized. Here, we set out to test whether cell to cell variability in protein abundance and subcellular localization could be systematically extracted from large image collections from automated microscopy. Still images have been used to quantify cell to cell variability in yeast protein abundance (), and advances in automated genetics and microscopy have led to large collections of yeast images (). Recently, we and others have showed that quantitative measurements of protein localization and abundance can be extracted for single cells in these images (). However, it is not obvious how to define a metric that allows meaningful comparison of variability between different proteins. In particular, proteins localized to different subcellular compartments may show cell to cell variability simply due to imaging artefacts (small organelles might be missed from cells) or due to cell to cell variability in organelle size and shape. For example, yeast mitochondria have highly variable size and shape(); proteins localized there will have more cell to cell variability than cytoplasmic proteins simply because of the underlying morphological variability. Another important complication is due to differential protein regulation during the cell cycle that creates cell to cell variability in asynchronously growing cells. Previous studies of cell to cell variability in subcellular localization have used protein specific measures. For example, a study of Crz1 quantified bursts of nuclear localization using the median intensity of the five brightest pixels in each cell (). While effective for that case, that approach is unlikely to generalize to other proteins or be quantitatively comparable between proteins of differing subcellular localizations. As in efforts to analyze image based measurements of morphological variability (), we define a local measure of variability, which we call 'Relative Variability' (RV) and show that it can be used to compare variability in both protein abundance and spatial pattern between proteins with different subcellular localization classes. We compare our image based cell to cell variability estimates for protein abundance cell to cell variability in total fluorescence intensity) with previous measurements from flow cytometry and find reasonable agreement. Because our analysis is based on images, we can also measure variability in the subcellular localization pattern (which we quantify using the spatial spread of the fluorescence in each cell), which is not possible using conventional flow cytometry. We identify examples of proteins that show cell to cell variability in their spatial distribution within the cells. To our knowledge, this represents the first systematic measurement of cell to cell variability in subcellular localization.
