Motivation: Subcellular localization is one aspect of protein function. Despite advances in high throughput imaging, localization maps remain incomplete. Several methods accurately predict localization, but many challenges remain to be tackled. Results: In this study, we introduced a framework to predict localization in lifes three domains, including globular and membrane proteins (3 classes for archaea; 6 for bacteria and 18 for eukaryota). The resulting method, LocTree2, works well even for protein fragments. It uses a hierarchical system of support vector machines that imitates the cascading mechanism of cellular sorting. The method reaches high levels of sustained performance (eukaryota: Q18=65%, bacteria: Q6=84%). LocTree2 also accurately distinguishes membrane and non-membrane proteins. In our hands, it compared favorably with top methods when tested on new data. Availability: Online through predict protein predict protein org as standalone version at http://www.rostlab.org/services/loctree2.

INTRODUCTION

conclusion the method introduced here, LocTree2, predicts protein subcellular localization through a consistent new framework that ignores many of the relevant features needed for the success of previous methods (such as no predicted aspects of protein structure and function). Nevertheless, it seemed to reach high levels of sustained performance aside from adding new aspects. Among the novel aspects was the large number of 18 localization classes predicted for eukaryota, 6 for bacteria and 3 for archaea. LocTree2 outperformed other methods on almost all data sets tested, implicating an improved ability to capture localization signals in the protein sequence. One example for the success in plucking implicit information is the high precision in the distinction between membrane and globular water soluble proteins. Our implicit distinction appeared as good as that of the best expert method for predicting integral membrane helices. Another important novelty is the robustness of the method against sequencing errors and its success when applied to protein fragments. This is particularly important in light of high throughput sequencing, of analyzing ancient DNA with short reads and of the fact that almost 80% of all proteins have multiple domains. This power along with the overall improvement in performance may recommend this new tool as an ideal starting point for comparing the proteomes between organisms and for using localization predictions to aid the prediction of protein function. We imagine that the framework for the method will prove extendable and that future methods will become better simply by using more experimental data and more sequences.
