genome wide association study g was of a biomarker is complicated when the assay procedure of the biomarker is restricted by a Limit of Detection (LOD). Those observations falling outside the LOD can not be simply discarded, but should be included into the analysis by applying an appropriate statistical method. However, the problem of LOD in g was analysis of such biomarkers is usually overlooked. lodg was is a flexible, easy to use R package that provides a simple and elegant way for g was analysis of such biomarkers while simultaneously accommodating the problem of LOD by applying a parametric survival analysis method. Availability and implementation: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/lodGWAS Contacts: a.vaez@umcg.nl or im nolte umc gnl
introduction genome wide association study g was of a biomarker such as immuno proteins (e.g. c reactive protein), cytokines (e.g. interleukins) and hormones (e.g. testosterone) is complicated if the detection range of the biomarker is restricted by the assay procedure. So far g was analyses of such biomarkers inadequately dealt with the problem of the limit of detection. As a consequence, the identified associations might be biased. The limit of detection (LOD) is the smallest or largest concentration of a biomarker that can be reliably measured by the analytical procedure. Those measurements falling outside the LOD, so called non detects (NDs), can not be considered as missing values since they do provide information about the distribution of the biomarker. Simple exclusion of NDs from the statistical analysis will therefore yield incorrect estimates. A number of statistical approaches have been proposed to deal with the problem of LOD while still including those NDs in the statistical analysis, such as: analyzing detect non detect dichotomies, substituting NDs with a constant smaller than or equal to the lower LOD, or substituting NDs with a random value between zero and lower LOD (). However these methods insufficiently account for the available information provided by NDs, particularly when NDs comprise a large proportion of the data. Recently Dinse and colleagues proposed to apply survival analysis to overcome the problem of LOD (). They stated that NDs can be viewed as censored data, as they are known to fall within a certain interval. More details on this can be found in the Supplementary data. This approach could also be applied to g was data. However, currently available software packages for g was analysis are not flexible enough to properly account for NDs. We developed lodg was a flexible, easy to use software package that is capable of performing g was analysis of biomarkers while accommodating the problem of LOD by applying survival analysis in which NDs are treated as censored data.

conclusion in this study we show the importance of applying an appropriate statistical method for g was analysis of biomarkers whose measurements are constrained by limits of detection. With lodg was we provide a flexible, easy to use R package for a simple and elegant way to perform g was analysis of such biomarkers while accommodating NDs.
