Motivation: Depletion of loss of function l of mutations may provide a rank of genic functional intolerance and consequently susceptibility to disease. Results: Here we have studied l of mutations in 60 706 unrelated individuals and show that the most intolerant quartile of ranked genes is enriched in rare and early onset diseases and explains 87% of de novo haplo insufficient OMIM mutations, 17% more than any other gene scoring tool. We detected particular enrichment in expression of the depleted l of genes in brain (odds ratio ¼ 1.5; p value ¼ 4.2eÀ07). By searching for de novo haplo insufficient mutations putatively associated with neurodevelopmental disorders in four recent studies, we were able to explain 81% of them. Taken together, this study provides a novel gene intolerance ranking system, called lof tool which may help in ranking genes of interest based on their l of intolerance and tissue expression.

introduction next generation sequencing technology has generated a vast amount of genomic data, but for clinical applications, interpretability of the results remains a major challenge. Whole exo me sequencing has recently started to detect variants related to rare Mendelian and complex diseases, usually in a trio setting where both the patient and the parents are exo me sequenced in order to identify de novo disease associated mutations (). Presently several tools exist to predict a single variant's pathogenicity, like poly phen () and SIFT (), but they do not extrapolate their predictions to the gene level. There are also tools that prioritize candidate disease causing genes such as ENDEAVOUR () or prioritize r (), but these need a priori genetic knowledge of the disease. Recently, a new set of tools that prioritize candidate disease causing genes with no a priori disease knowledge has emerged. By using the whole exo me sequences of 6503 individuals, from the NHLBI GO exo me Sequencing Project (ESP) (),devised a 'residual variance intolerance score' rv is from common missense and loss of function l of variants versus total number of protein coding variants regardless of their frequency in the ESP population. A complementary approach for gene level prioritization of disease genes calibrates de novo mutation rates per gene based on exo me sequenced trios in order to prioritize real excess of de novo mutations (). evo to l (), another gene score, measures the gene's intolerance to mutations using evolutionary conservation of protein sequences. Here we developed an alternative gene score method called lof tool based on the mutation patterns in the exo mes of 60 706 unrelated individuals from the exo me Aggregation Consortium ex ac dataset (http://exac. broad institute org. Although l of intolerance is not a synonym of general intolerance, l of mutations have the greatest pathogenic potential and hence are a good proxy for general genic intolerance to functional V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com variation. lof tool is based on the ratio of l of to synonymous mutations for each gene, adjusting for the gene de novo mutation rate and evolutionary protein conservation (Section 2). We evaluate lof tool against rv is (), Z-score () and evo to l (), and show that it clearly outperforms them in identifying de novo haplo insufficient disease causing genes from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (), and from studies of neurodevelopmental disorders ().

discussion we have shown that lof tool discriminates between genes that do and do not cause disease (mostly early onset), outperforming other state of the art gene scoring methods. lof tool predicts genome wide de novo haplo insufficient mutations accurately and could be of help in search for genetic causes of rare Mendelian diseases. Moreover, its brain expression enrichment coupled to a ROC AUC of 0.86 in detecting neurodevelopmental disorder genes makes lof tool also an attractive method for investigating complex brain diseases with strong genetic effects. In addition, our lof tool score has already been adopted by popular variant annotation tools like an novar snp eff d bnsf p UCSC Genome Browser Variant Integrator and Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (), which highlights the wide applicability of our gene intolerance score. Future work could focus on functional protein domains, rather than the overall gene mutation burden, in order to more easily prioritize the avalanche of rare variants putatively lof tool associated with a phenotype of interest (). Taken together, this study provides a novel gene intolerance ranking system that ranks genes based on their loss of function intolerance and tissue expression specificity.
