Motivation: In recent years, genome scale metabolic models (GEMs) have played important roles in areas like systems biology and bioinformatics. However, because of the complexity of gene– reaction associations, GEMs often have limitations in gene level analysis and related applications. Hence, the existing methods were mainly focused on applications and analysis of reactions and metabolites. Results: Here, we propose a framework named logic transformation of model (LTM) that is able to simplify the gene reaction associations and enables integration with other developed methods for gene level applications. We show that the transformed GEMs have increased reaction and metabolite number as well as degree of freedom in flux balance analysis, but the gene reaction associations and the main features of flux distributions remain constant. In addition, we develop two methods, opt gene knock and fast genes l by combining LTM with previously developed reaction based methods. We show that the fast genes l outperforms exhaustive search. Finally, we demonstrate the use of the developed methods in two different case studies. We could design fast genetic intervention strategies for targeted overproduction of biochemicals and identify double and triple synthetic lethal gene sets for inhibition of hepatocellular carcinoma tumor growth through the use of opt gene knock and fast genes l respectively. Availability and implementation: Source code implemented in MATLAB, RAVEN toolbox and COBRA toolbox, is public available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/

introduction genome scale metabolic models (GEMs), are a useful platform for systems biology, and have been widely used in industrial biotechnology applications. There are many successful stories showing the usefulness of GEMs in rational design of genetic modifications of microorganism for improved production of specific metabolites () and provide new biological insight into the physiology of different microorganisms (). More recently, human GEMs have been employed to identify novel prognostic biomarkers and potential drug targets for designing efficient treatment strategies (). Although GEMs are widely used, their uses have some limitations in genetic related applications. A number of bi-level linear programming methods have been developed for in silico metabolic engineering, such as opt knock (), opt reg (), opt force (), Genetic Design through Local Search g dls () and Genetic Design through Branch and Bound gdb b () and these methods have only identified potential targeted reactions (knockouts or up down regulations) rather than targeted genes which can be modified in vivo. Moreover, these reaction based methods did not consider the genetic interactions in the context of protein complexes and isoenzymes, which result in strategies genetically complicated or infeasible. Recently, another bilevel based method, opt orf (), was developed for identifying metabolic and regulatory gene that are targets for knockout or upregulation which may lead to overproduction of desired chemicals. opt orf employed a three dimensional gene enzyme reaction array to enable gene level prediction. Nevertheless, this array needs to be systematically defined by the user for each model, which restrict the widely use of opt orf in strain design. On the other hand, opt gene and its derived algorithms (), could identify gene knockout strategies. However, these methods are based on Genetic Algorithm, which is basically random mutation and would probably miss the optimal solution. Moreover, synthetic lethality (SL) analysis, which identifies combinations of mutations in two or more genes leading to cell lethality in silico, could be applied for identification of small hairpin RNA (shRNA) () and crisp r () targets for cancer treatment. However, the huge computational cost of triple or higher level SL makes it infeasible for its use in biotechnology applications. There were two methods developed for efficient identification of synthetic lethal reactions (). But when it comes to synthetic lethal genes analysis, one of them becomes unavailable, while the other one requires manual identification of 'appropriate equations' relating binary variables of genes and reactions, which is time consuming. This gene level application problem originates from the gene protein relations (GPRs) information loss in the gene reaction association matrix (GRAM). The GRAM is a predefined binary matrix in GEMs, whose i jth elements is 1 if ith reaction is associated with jth gene and is 0 otherwise. GRAM is the only mathematically friendly part for most of the existing methods to capture the GPRs information. However, GRAM does not include any information of the relationship among gene sets. For example, one can not know whether a reaction is associated with a protein complex (AND relationship in gene set) or with isoenzymes (OR relationship in gene set) directly from GRAM. Therefore, in order to correctly integrate GPRs information into the simulation algorithms, one needs to interpret the information into mathematical expressions, which is time consuming and tedious, and sometimes it may even be extremely difficult to reconstruct the correct relationship. Here, we introduced a GEM modification algorithm, called logic transformation of model (LTM), which extended the original GEM into a logically equivalent with much better genetic applicability. In this algorithm, pseudo reactions and metabolites were added into the GEM based on the GPR relationships described in GEMs to simulate the isoenzyme and protein complex relationships. Hereby reactions are associated with no more than one gene. Therefore, GPRs information was included in the stoichiometric matrix of GEM, and we can directly apply GRAM to all kind of optimization programming algorithms, such as opt knock opt reg and opt force. Furthermore, LTM could extend the use of previously well designed methods that were only developed for reaction simulations in gene level applications. We developed opt gene knock which incorporated LTM with a bilevel mixed integer linear programming milp based knockout method. The MILP problem was then solved by truncated branch and bound, to obtain near optimal gene knockout strategies with desired phenotype. In addition, by incorporating LTM with a previous method (), which was developed for efficient identification of reaction SL, a new method called fast genes l was designed for genetic SL analysis. We showed that fast genes l greatly outperformed exhaustive analysis in gene SL analysis for GEMs of Escherichia coli, Saccharomyces cerevisiae and hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). Finally, we performed two case studies for demonstrating the capability of the here presented methods. First, we identified gene targets that may increase the production of desired biochemicals by designing fast genetic intervention strategies by opt gene knock using two different GEMs of E.coli. Second, we employed fast genes l together with a HCC GEM for gaining biological insight into underlying molecular mechanism of HCC and identifying potential shRNA targets which may inhibit tumor growth.

discussion in this article, we developed a method, called LTM, which transforms a GEM to a logically equivalent extended model to enable gene level applications. The transformation enlarges the size of GEMs while keeps the correct GPRs, and the FBA results of extended models are equivalent to the original models despite the increased degree of freedom. We showed the applicability of our method in two different biotechnology applications. We first showed the utility of LTM in optimization frameworks. The optimization frameworks could be easily applied to genetic solution prediction by incorporating with LTM. This implicated the wide application of LTM with many well designed methods such as opt knock and opt force (). We developed opt gene knock by combining opt knock and LTM as well as truncated branch and bound algorithm, and showed its capability in designing gene knockout strategies leading to overproduction of desired biochemical. In addition, we developed a gene SL analysis method called fast genes l. This method combined LTM and a previous method fast sl and enabled efficient genet SL analysis in GEMs for different organisms. We demonstrated that the efficiency was greatly improved by fast genes l and this enable identification of triple SL genes in GEMs which was previously infeasible. Next, by employing fast genes l we identified novel anticancer drug targets that can be used for inhibition of the HCC tumors and performed in silico toxicity test for these identified targets. We found the most prominent distinguishing metabolic features of HCC and observed that here identified targets can be used in the drug development process for efficient treatment of HCC tumors. By the two biotechnology applications tested in this study, we could conclude that although the principle of LTM is simple, it greatly benefits gene level analysis and applications. In addition, many previous methods (e.g. opt knock and fast sl could be extended to gene level applications (e.g. opt gene knock and fast genes l by incorporating with LTM in a straightforward way. Furthermore, as GPRs are simplified after LTM, complex gene set controlled reactions are avoided and it becomes very convenient to integrate different omics data into extended models. Thus, LTM could also be used together with multi omic data integrating methods like GIMME and PROM (). In total, we could conclude that LTM is a useful tool which facilitates the application of GEMs and we are therefore confident that it will find wide use in the community.
