Motivation: Highly sensitive and specific screening tools may reduce disease related mortality by enabling physicians to diagnose diseases in asymptomatic patients or at risk individuals. Diagnostic tests based on multiple biomarkers may achieve the needed sensitivity and specificity to realize this clinical gain. Results: Logic regression, a multivariable regression method predicting an outcome using logical combinations of binary predictors, yields interpretable models of the complex interactions in biologic systems. However, its performance degrades in noisy data. We extend logic regression for classification to an ensemble of logic trees (Logic Forest, LF). We conduct simulation studies comparing the ability of logic regression and LF to identify variable interactions predictive of disease status. Our findings indicate LF is superior to logic regression for identifying important predictors. We apply our method to single nucleotide polymorphism data to determine associations of genetic and health factors with periodontal disease. Availability: LF code is publicly available on CRAN, http://cran.r-project.org/.

introduction diseases often stem from complex gene gene and gene environment interactions and single biomarkers typically perform poorly with respect to sensitivity and specificity alvarez note that common statistical methods for screening high dimensional biomarker data focus on only main effects and do not capture interactions that lead to disease. Failure to recognize interactions among genes leads to the inability to replicate study results in human populations (). Many authors suggest that a panel of biomarkers rather than a single marker has the potential to provide improvements in sensitivity and specificity required to replace traditional diagnosis (see, e.g.). Diseases for which panels of markers demonstrate improved sensitivity and specificity over single markers include prostate, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. ovarian and bladder cancer and heart disease (). Non-parametric tree based methods are easily interpretable and have flexibility to identify relationships among predictor variables (). Logic regression (LR;) is a tree based method capable of modeling a binary, continuous or survival response with higher order interactions among binary predictors. In this article, we focus on classification of a binary response. LR generates classification rules by constructing Boolean ('and'= , 'or'= , and 'not'= !) combinations of binary predictors for classification of a binary outcome. An LR model is represented as a tree with connecting nodes as the logical operators and terminal nodes (called leaves) as the predictors. LR has been used in the development of screening and diagnostic tools for several diseases and has shown modest improvements in sensitivity and specificity compared with traditional approaches such as logistic regression and CART (). LR can be unstable when data are noisy. In the context of identifying interacting genetic loci, performance was poor for frequently occurring interactions only weakly associated with the response (). A study designed to identify regulatory motifs confirmed that increasing noise in data severely limited the ability of LR to correctly identify the true model in simulated data (). Ensemble extensions of tree based methods demonstrate improved predictive accuracy (). Two ensemble adaptations of LR are available. Monte Carlo LR (MCLR) builds a series of models from the training dataset using Monte Carlo methods and identifies groups of predictors that co occur across all models (). However, the relationship among predictors (,  and !) is unclear. logic fs a bagging version of LR, constructs an ensemble by drawing repeated bootstrap samples and building LR models from each (). In contrast to MCLR, logic fs identifies explicit predictor interactions [referred to as prime implica nts (. Additionally, logic fs provides a measure of variable interaction importance. In Section 2, we present a new ensemble of logic trees approach called Logic Forest (LF), and introduce a new permutation based measure of predictor importance. We also develop the idea of subset matching as an additional means of identifying important interactions. We present a simulation study in Section 3 comparing the performance of LR and logic fs with LF considering data with noise in the predictors, latent predictors and varying true model complexity. We apply LF to periodontal disease data in Section 4 and discuss the results of our simulation studies in Section 5.
