We describe here LOTUS, a hitherto uncharacterized small globular domain, which was identified using sensitive sequence profile analysis. The LOTUS domain is found in germline specific proteins that are present in the nuage polar granules of germ cells. TDRD5 and TDRD7, two mammalian members of the germline Tudor group, possess three copies of the LOTUS domain in their extreme n termini. The Tudor domains of these proteins bind symmetric dimethyl arginine s present on the germ cell specific Piwi proteins, which form a particular clade of argonaut e proteins. Piwi proteins interact with a specific class of non-coding RNAs piwi interacting RNAs pirn as and play a key role in the repression (silencing) of transposons and possibly other germline specific functions. A LOTUS domain is also present in the Oskar protein, a critical component of the pole plasm in the Drosophila oocyte, which is required for germ cell formation. LOTUS domains are found in various proteins from metazoans and plants, are often associated with rna specific modules and are likely to adopt a winged helix fold. This suggests a germline specific role in the mRNA localization and or translation or a specific function toward pirn as
introduction the Tudor domain, the name of which originates from its identification in the Drosophila Tudor protein (), is a small domain belonging to the large 'Royal Family' that also includes Chromo, MBT, p wwp and plant age net domains (). Tudor domains are specialized in the specific recognition of methylated lysine or methylated arginine sites, and are involved in various epigenetic functions, such as chromatin remodeling and RNA processing. Based on their sequences and functions, four groups of Tudor domains were recently distinguished (). The first group, including the jm dj family of histone demethylase s as well as the related 53BP1 and Crb2 proteins, participates in the histone code deciphering, as their tandems of Tudor domains bind methylated * To whom correspondence should be addressed. lysines of histone tails (). Binding of symmetrically di methylated arginine s sdm as is a property shared by the two following groups that include proteins involved in the RNA metabolism (). The second group includes the Tudor domain of the SMN protein (the product of the survival of motor neuron gene), which interacts with the spliceosomal Sm proteins and regulates the mRNA splicing machinery (). The third group, typified by the Tudor domain of SND1 (also called tudors n or p100), a component of the rna induced silencing complex, is involved in the processing of small non-coding RNAs (). The fourth group contrasts with the others that include widely expressed proteins. It contains proteins highly enriched or selectively expressed in germ cells and involved in the formation of polar germinal granules or nuage, those electron dense organelles, abundant in RNA and proteins and characteristic of the germline in many organisms. These proteins are crucial for spermatogenesis and small RNA pathways (). Several recent studies showed that the Tudor domains of proteins of this group, called the germline Tudor proteins, bind sdm as present on the germ cell specific Piwi proteins. These last proteins form a particular clade of argonaut e proteins, interacting with a specific class of non-coding RNAs piwi interacting RNAs pirn as. pirn as piwi complexes are likely to have diverse roles in the germline (). They function in gene silencing, probably through a mechanism analogous to RNA interference by inducing the cleavage of gene transcripts [transposon silencing (or directly at the transcriptional level (). Moreover, they were shown in Drosophila to regulate mRNA stability and translation, a function which thereby contrasts with the only negative effect of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and micro-RNAs (miRNAs) (). Arginine methylation of piw is and interaction with Tudors seems to be a conserved feature of the Piwi pathway that distinguishes it from the somatic Ago pathway [the other clade of argonaut e proteins that bind to miRNAs and small interfering RNA (siRNA) and are ubiquitously expressed]. Thus, this specific interaction could be required for Piwi recruitment to nuage granules (), and germline Tudor proteins might provide the platform necessary for assembly of numerous proteins that function as a complex in the Piwi pathway (). This pathway is essential, in Drosophila, for germ cell determination and maintenance of germline stem cells and, in mice, for postnatal spermatogenesis].

discussion various mammalian td rd proteins have been reported to interact with Piwi proteins (). The LOTUS domain described here is, however, unique to the TDRD5 and TDRD7 proteins. Although having repeats of Tudor domains, the other td rds indeed differ in their extreme n termini which include either MYND domain (TDRD1), KH domains (TDRD2) or helicase domain (TDRD9). TDRD7 interacts more specifically with mi wi through its Tudor domains (). In Drosophila, Aubergine (Aub) and AGO3, two members of the Piwi family, interact with the Tudor protein (), which has apparently no LOTUS domain in its n terminal fragment. We, however, show here that a LOTUS domain is found in the Drosophila Oskar protein, whose localized activity (through mRNA localization and subsequent synthesis) in the nuage at the posterior pole of the oocyte, termed germ or pole plasm, induces germline formation and correct patterning in the fly embryo (). The localized Oskar protein has a critical function in the biogenesis of polar granules () and recruits downstream components of the pole plasm, such as Vasa and Tudor proteins (). It is interesting to note that, while many of the Drosophila germplasm components are conserved and play an essential role in mammalian germ cell formation as well (reviewed in), the key factor in Drosophila, Oskar, has no known orthologs in any other species. The results reported here show that the LOTUS domain is a conserved feature of the protein complexes present in the piwi containing Page: 1143 11401144 LOTUS. Multiple sequence alignment of LOTUS domains from various proteins. Positions where hydrophobicity is conserved, which should participate in the protein core structure, are boxed and shaded gray. Other striking identities (involving glycine and proline residues) are boxed. Predicted secondary structures are reported up to the alignment. Note that the helix a C is poorly conserved and does not exist in some of the sequences. The star indicates the protein end. The protein sequences are designated by their UniProt identifiers, and the limits (amino acid numbers) of the LOTUS domains in these sequences are reported. Note that the c terminal end of the domain is difficult to predict with accuracy, due to the extreme variability in this region. The fast a formatted file of this alignment is given in the Supplementary Material 4. This figure was drawn using esp rip t (http://espript.ibcp.fr/). germline specific granules in different organisms. LOTUS domains are indeed present, in mice, in germline td rds and in Drosophila, in the long and short isoforms of Oskar that directly interact with the Tudor protein. In that respect, TDRD5 and or TDRD7 might represent, at least in part, the functional homolog of Oskar in mammals. The exact molecular role of the LOTUS domain remains to be discovered. Its occurrence in proteins having domains associated with RNA metabolism (RNA recognition motif and KH domains) suggests that it might be involved in a rna binding function. This hypothesis is supported by the presence of several basic residues, as well as fold recognition programs, which indicate that the LOTUS domain may adopt a WHD fold. Possible RNA partners are pirn as brought by the TDRD5/7Piwi complexes or the numerous mRNA present in the nuage granules. The rna binding function might then be involved in the regulation of mRNA translation and or localization or of a specific function in which pirn as participate. The identification of this new domain in the mouse germline Tudor proteins, TDRD5 and TDRD7, and in the Drosophila Oskar protein should help to understand the function of these proteins in the pirn a pathways and germline determination, as well as to uncover the function of as yet uncharacterized proteins in this context.
