With the widespread availability of high throughput experimental technologies it has become possible to study hundreds to thousands of cellular factors simultaneously, such as coding or non-coding mRNA or protein concentrations. Still, extracting information about the underlying regulatory or signaling interactions from these data remains a difficult challenge. We present a flexible approach towards network inference based on linear programming. Our method reconstructs the interactions of factors from a combination of perturbation non perturbation and steady state time series data. We show both on simulated and real data that our methods are able to reconstruct the underlying networks fast and efficiently, thus shedding new light on biological processes and, in particular, into diseases mechanisms of action. We have implemented the approach as an R package available through bioconductor.

introduction using network inference approaches it is possible to understand how different cellular components (e.g. genes, proteins, metabolites) interact with each other. Several methods for network inference exist, such as Boolean networks (), (Dynamic) Bayesian networks (BN) () and methods based on differential equations (). Boolean networks scale up well for larger networks and are easy to interpret. Yet, the biological signal is bin a rized which leads to a substantial loss of information. BN and differential equations allow for a more detailed modeling of the underlying processes, but they are often applicable only to small scale problems as they usually scale up poorly. One of the major recent approaches to model signaling networks based on perturbation data are the Nested Effects Models (NEMs) () which have been widely applied and extended in different ways. This approach assumes a small number of candidate pathway genes which are silenced s genes and the effects of this silencing are measured on a large set of 'effects' genes e genes thus using indirect observations of effects for network inference. Approaches that use direct observations from perturbed networks obtained either at a single or several time points include). However, many of the published network inference approaches are computationally expensive and thus not suitable for large networks. Also, although many methods are publicly available, a substantial fraction of them are dependent on 3rd party proprietary software (e.g. Matlab) and are not properly documented, thus making them very hard to use. Here, we present a flexible approach implemented as a bioconductor package, lp net freely available for any of the major operating systems. The method implemented in lp net extends a previously developed method in () by adding support for time series data. As a result, the method is now suited for any combination of perturbation non perturbation and steady state time series data, and not only for perturbation steady state data, as in the previous version of 2013. Furthermore, the calculation of a node's activity, which directly influences the resulting network, was improved, leading to more accurate results. Finally, since the method is formulated as a linear programming approach, inferring networks becomes fast and efficient even for large scale problems.
