We propose a three step periodicity detection algorithm named l spr. Our method first pre processes the raw time series by removing the linear trend and filtering noise. In the second step, l spr employs a lomb scar gle periodogram to estimate the periodicity in the time series. Finally, harmonic regression is applied to model the cyclic components. Inferred periodic transcripts are selected by a false discovery rate procedure. We have applied l spr to unevenly sampled synthetic data and two Arabidopsis diurnal expression datasets, and compared its performance with the existing well established algorithms. Results show that l spr is capable of identifying periodic transcripts more accurately than existing algorithms.

introduction most algorithms for analyzing cell cycle or circadian rhythm temporal expression data require that the input signals are equally sampled. For irregularly sampled time series the lomb scar gle periodogram has been proposed to analyze time course gene expression data (). A comparison study of periodicity detection methods for irregularly sampled data concluded that the lomb scar gle method performed better than most existing methods (). However, this method is subject to noise and is not powerful for short time series. In this study, we propose a new periodicity identification algorithm based on the lomb scar gle periodogram and harmonic regression method for unevenly sampled time series. Our algorithm, named l spr has a similar procedure to that of the arse r algorithm, which was proposed to analyze evenly sampled temporal expression profiles (). The main difference is that l spr uses spectrum analysis for unevenly sampled data introduced by Lomb and additionally elaborated by scar gle while arse r employs autoregressive spectral estimation, which can only analyze evenly sampled data. For a given irregularly sampled time series l spr first estimates the period by the lomb scar gle periodogram in the frequency domain, and then models the periodic signals by the harmonic regression method in the time domain. Such a joint strategy overcomes the limitations of the lomb scar gle periodogram and gives better descriptions of periodic patterns. By applying l spr to the analysis of synthetic data and Arabidopsis diurnal expression data, we found our method was more powerful in detecting periodic transcripts compared with two well established periodicity detection algorithms.
