The mutational status of specific cancer lineages can affect the sensitivity to or resistance against cancer drugs. The MACE database provides web based interactive tools for interpreting large chemical screening and gene expression datasets of cancer cell lines in terms of mutation and lineage categories. GI50 data of chemicals against individual NCI60 cell lines were normalized and organized to statistically identify mutation or lineage specific chemical responses. Similarly, DNA microarray data on NCI60 cell lines were processed to analyze mutation or lineage specific gene expression signatures. A combined analysis of GI50 and gene expression data to find potential associations between chemicals and genes is also a capability of this system. This database will provide extensive, systematic information to identify lineage or mutation specific anticancer agents and related gene targets. Availability and implementation: The MACE web database is available at http://mace.sookmyung. ack r
introduction various drug responses are induced by somatic mutations in cancers. Approaches to the analysis of gene functions related to drug sensitivity are becoming a popular strategy for overcoming drug resistance and for predicting drug sensitivity (). Some efforts have focused on the lineage dependent association between cell lines and drug response () and the identification of mutation dependent compound sensitivity (). Currently, many small molecule databases have been developed, including several of the following databases: chemical information with biological activity and target information (), chemical search engines with a variety of cheminformatics tools (), and chemical information with extended response profiles on biological samples (). Most of these databases are focused on the collection of chemical information, not organized for quantitative analysis. Some studies integrating drug response with genomic data have been established on a plentiful of cell lines, but for limited numbers of chemicals (). Thus, we developed a web based database, MACE mutation oriented Analysis of Chemical response and gene Expression), to provide mutation or lineage oriented profiling of chemical response and gene expression on a wide variety of cancer cell lines from NCI60 datasets. The NCI60 by the nci60 cancer cell lines. The quantified response data, gi50 the concentration that inhibits growth by 50%, are available for more than 50,000 chemical compounds (). This resource can be used to find relationships among compound structure, mechanism of action, cell lineage, and tumor mutations (He and). The NCI60 cell lines represent nine cancer lineage types (breast, cns central nervous system, colon, leukemia, melanoma, lung, ovarian, prostate and renal). MACE includes top 15 most frequently mutated genes which are found in more than 4 cell lines (TP53, CDKN2A, PTEN, KRAS, BRAF, PIK3CA, APC, c my camp STK11, CTNNB1, SMAD4, RB1, MLH1, NRAS and tn stromal (). Mutations in these genes are known to be involved in cancer related cellular pathways. TP53 is a tumor suppressor, and somatic mutations in TP53 are the most common genetic changes found in human cancer (). Defects in the gene cyclin dependent kinase inhibitor 2A (CDKN2A) is involved in the genesis of many tumor types (). PTEN is a tumor suppressor, and PIK3CA is an oncogene. These proteins make up the PTENPI3K signaling pathway, which is involved in the regulation of many cancer related pathways (). KRAS, NRAS and BRAF are oncogenes involved in the ErbB signaling pathway, which mediates cell growth and malignant transformation through kinase pathway activation (). APC is a tumor suppressor, and CTNNB1 is an oncogene. Mutations in these genes cause defects in Wnt signaling (). High expression of the oncogene c myc c my camp and mutational inactivation of the tumor suppressor RB1 cause dysregulation of cell cycle control (). STK11 has been identified as a tumor suppressor involved in the development of cancer, especially in lung cancer (). Mutation of SMAD4 results in disruption of TGFbeta signaling and occurs frequently in association with malignant progression (). Genetic mutation of MLH1 is associated with colon cancer risk (), and activated expression of tn stromal is related to human breast cancer (). MACE provides tools for 1) category based analysis of chemical response or gene expression in cancer cell lines (), 2) finding a correlation between chemical response and gene expression on NCI60 cell lines, and 3) 2D-or 3d based chemical structural searches in real time. The term " category " refers to mutational or lineage groups of cell lines, and thus " a specific category " indicates a specific mutation or lineage (e.g. BRAF or lung).
