Mass spectrometry is widely used in bioanalysis, including the fields of metabolomics and proteomics, to simultaneously measure large numbers of molecules in complex biological samples. Contaminants routinely occur within these samples, for example, originating from the solvents or plasticware. Identification of these contaminants is crucial to enable their removal before data analysis, in particular to maintain the validity of conclusions drawn from uni and multivariate statistical analyses. Although efforts have been made to report contaminants within mass spectra, this information is fragmented and its accessibility is relatively limited. In response to the needs of the bioanalytical community, here we report the creation of an extensive manually well annotated database of currently known small molecule contaminants. Availability: The Mass spectrometry Contaminants Database macon da is freely available and accessible through all major brow-sers or by using the macon da web service http://www.maconda.

introduction our understanding of biological systems has considerably improved through recent developments in mass spectrometry ms based metabolomics (). Continuous efforts have been made to improve the quality of metabo lome measurements, including in sample preparation (), data collection () and data analysis (). The majority of experimental data reported in the literature has been collected in positive ion mode, which is reflected in the database. Also, the amount of MS/MS data for contaminants is currently rather limited. However, the database has the capability to store this type of data as more is recorded by the community. As such, and to the best of our knowledge, this is the first publicly accessible, readily searchable, readily implementable into an automated computational pipeline, readily expandable database of mass spectral contaminants. A summary of the macon da features the total database is freely available in several formats (e.g. tab delimited CSV, XML and SQL format).
