MAGI is a web service for fast micrornas eq data analysis in a graphics processing unit (GPU) infrastructure. Using just a browser, users have access to results as web reports in just a few hours 4600 end to end performance improvement over state of the art. MAGIs salient features are (i) transfer of large input files in native fast a with Qualities fast q format through drag and drop operations, (ii) rapid prediction of microRNA target genes leveraging parallel computing with GPU devices, (iii) all in one analytics with novel feature extraction, statistical test for differential expression and diagnostic plot generation for quality control and (iv) interactive visu-alization and exploration of results in web reports that are readily available for publication.

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) are short, single stranded and non protein coding RNAs, with an average size of 22 bases that silence target genes either by degradation of mRNA level or repression of a translated protein. miRNAs have generated great interest by the biomedical community because of their implications in human disease and development. The advent of high throughput short read sequencing has enabled comprehensive miRNA studies. There are several web services for mirna seq data analysis targeting the needs of non-technical users. deep sequencing Small RNA analysis Pipeline (DSAP) () quantifies known miRNAs, while mir analyzer (), Computational Platform analysis of Small RNA deep Sequencing data (CPSS) () and wap rna () perform novel miRNA prediction and and enriched pathways. In this article, we introduce four novel features of MAGI. Technical details are provided in the Supplementary Material. #1MAGI natively accepts large fast q format files as input, requiring no additional file processing by the user. For instance, in, with a simple drag and drop into the browser, six fast q files are added to the processing queue using HTML5 web workers that scan over the short reads and compress each sequence from a 3GB fast q file down to a 3 MB read count hash-table file, completely within the browser. This process makes the processed data small enough to reach our server in just a few seconds. The adoption of web workers technology reduced the end to end analysis time of 24 micrornas eq samples (total size 48 GB) down to 4 h using a 2012 MacBook Air with 1.3 GHz dual core CPU, 4 GB RAM, 500 GB HDD. Comparatively, when using o miras the fast q input file transfer time alone took 5 h. mir analyzer and mir tools require file preprocessing that alone took 57 h before uploading them to the web service. #2MAGI uses our parallel implementation of miRanda (), a widely used CPU algorithm for miRNA target identification. Its Compute Unified Device Architecture C implementation () modifies and parallelize s the smith waterman algorithm to return multiple alignment results with the corresponding trace-back sequences plus heuristic rules for miRNAs. Four NVIDIA M2090 GPU devices (6 GB memory) are installed in our MAGI server and reduced the prediction time from hours using just the CPU to a few minutes using the GPU devices additionally. #3MAGI predicts novel miRs using a novel feature extraction algorithm and random forest based classifier in just minutes (). With miRDeep2 (), a widely used novel miR prediction algorithm, the prediction module alone took 1216 h with the same 24 samples. Then, a list of differentially expressed miRNAs between two groups is tabulated using the de seq () R package that performs a statistical test for both known and novel miRNAs with multiple samples. For quality control, MAGI's web socket module collects diagnostic statistics and plots such as average quality score, length distribution of trimmed reads and guanine cytosine contents at the time of fast q file drag and drop by a user. #4MAGI generates D3 and j query enabled charts where users can zoom in out mouse over for actual numbers and export them as separate image files. Tables and pile up charts are interactive as users can sort and filter with different cut off values. Such powerful visualization features enable users to discover signals and patterns.
