Motivation: Analysis of the human genome revealed that the amount of transcribed sequence is an order of magnitude greater than the number of predicted and well characterized genes. A sizeable fraction of these transcripts is related to alternatively spliced forms of known protein coding genes. Inspection of the alternatively spliced transcripts identified in the pilot phase of the ENCODE project has clearly shown that often their structure might substantially differ from that of other isoforms of the same gene, and therefore that they might perform unrelated functions, or that they might even not correspond to a functional protein. Identifying these cases is obviously relevant for the functional assignment of gene products and for the interpretation of the effect of variations in the corresponding proteins. Results: Here we describe a publicly available tool that, given a gene or a protein, retrieves and analyses all its annotated isoforms, provides users with three dimensional models of the isoform(s) of his her interest whenever possible and automatically assesses whether homology derived structural models correspond to plausible structures. This information is clearly relevant. When the homology model of some isoforms of a gene does not seem structurally plausible, the implications are that either they assume a structure unrelated to that of the other isoforms of the same gene with presumably significant functional differences, or do not correspond to functional products. We provide indications that the second hypothesis is likely to be true for a substantial fraction of the cases.

introduction determining the identity and function of all the sequence elements in human DNA is a daunting challenge. The large scale pilot phase of the ENCODE project () provided an exhaustive identification and verification of functional sequence elements in a limited region of 1% of the human genome. The computational analysis of the data revealed several unexpected features of the genome (). Perhaps the most surprising one was that many transcribed elements could be neutral elements that serve as a reservoir for natural selection. Many of these transcripts derive from alternative splicing events. Their putative products were manually analysed by the bio sapiens European Consortium (). The analysis led to the striking conclusion that more than 50% of them might not give rise to proteins structurally and or functionally related to the other isoforms of the same genes or be the result of aberrant splicing events giving rise to non-functional proteins (). Indeed, comparison of the putative proteins encoded by the alternatively spliced transcripts with the main isoform showed that most of them lacked an active site, key trans-membrane segments, essential signalling regions and post transcriptionally modified sites. Most importantly, models of their putative three dimensional structures did not seem to correspond to plausible folds (). This observation was confirmed by Moult and co-workers (, b) who, using a completely different dataset of alternative splicing variants, found that the vast majority of them resulted in putatively unstable protein conformations. Recently, some of us manually analysed the putative structures of isoforms of the human genome, the existence of which had been confirmed by mass spectrometry and of isoforms of the same genes for which no evidence exists in proteomic databases reaching essentially the same conclusions (). Altogether these observations suggest that we might be observing the effects of noisy selection of splice sites by the splicing machinery and or that alternatively spliced products of a gene might assume unrelated conformations. These findings raise several interesting questions, but also a few practical issues. First of all, the careful manual analysis performed by the bio sapiens consortium on 1% of the genome needs to be scaled up to the whole genome and therefore automated. Secondly, analysis tools should be available to biologists performing experiments in a user friendly manner. At present, there are a few systems that partially satisfy this need. For example, the pros as database () (http:// www bio i film ude forschung structural bioinformatics pros as stores structures and models (provided the target proteins shares at least 40% sequence identity with a known template) for the alternative isoforms annotated in Ensembl (

conclusion the more detailed is the analysis of the genomes of higher eukaryotes, the more complex they are revealed to be. For example, it is becoming clear that alternative splicing events do not simply result in a modulation of the function of the gene products, for example, by removing or adding structurally compact domains, or by modifying the sequence of specific regions of the encoded protein, but that they can either have a profound effect on the structure and function of the products of the same gene or give raise to nonfunctional products (). The latter can nevertheless have a relevant biological function. For example, polis eno et al. demonstrated that transcripts may also function by competing for microRNA binding, a biological activity independent of the translation of the protein they encode (). It is impossible for any currently available method, including ours, to assess which is the case. The method described here is able to correctly classify as plausible a large fraction of the experimentally characterized isoforms, and to highlight dubious cases. Our aim is to provide easy access to a computational tool able to draw the attention of the life science community to them. Consequently, we took special care to convey the results of the analysis, although based on rather sophisticated tools, in an easy and understandable fashion. maist as provides access to all the intermediate data used to generate the results, but it describes them in a human readable form. We believe that maist as represents a step in the direction of using the knowledge accumulated in structural bioinformatics as well as the maturity of the tools available for applications related to the interpretation of genomic data and that it can be effectively used as a first step in characterizing novel proteins as well as a support for selecting interesting and intriguing cases for structural and functional studies.
