Genomic evolution is shaped by a dynamic combination of mutation, selection and genetic drift. These processes lead to evolutionary rate variation across loci and among lineages. In turn, interactions between these two forms of rate variation can produce residual effects, whereby the pattern of among lineage rate heterogeneity varies across loci. The nature of rate variation is encapsulated in the pacemaker models of genome evolution, which differ in the degree of importance assigned to residual effects: none (Universal Pacemaker), some (Multiple Pacemaker) or total (Degenerate Multiple Pacemaker). Here we use a phylogenetic method to partition the rate variation across loci, allowing comparison of these pacemaker models. Our analysis of 431 genes from 29 mammalian tax a reveals that rate variation across these genes can be explained by 13 pacemakers, consistent with the Multiple Pacemaker model. We find no evidence that these pacemakers correspond to gene function. Our results have important consequences for understanding the factors driving genomic evolution and for molecular clock analyses. Availability and implementation: clocks targ is freely available for download from git hub (https://

introduction the evolutionary process leaves genomic signatures that can be analyzed using phylogenetic methods. For example, methods based on molecular clocks can be used to estimate evolutionary rates and timescales (). However, these methods must account for the complexities of molecular evolution at the genomic scale, which is governed by interactions between mutation, selection and drift. These factors lead to different patterns of rate variation among lineages and across loci () Factors that cause rate disparities across loci are known as gene effects. Gene effects can be partly attributed to differences in the strength and direction of selection between genes, which lead to disparities in the proportion of sites that are free to vary (). Evolutionary rates can also vary substantially among lineages, owing to differences in generation time, DNA repair mechanisms and other traits (). These forms of rate variation are known as lineage effects (). Lineage and gene effects can co occur leading to a pattern of among lineage rate variation that is sustained across genes, but with differences among the absolute gene specific rates. A more complex pattern arises from the interaction between gene and lineage effects, known as residual effects (). Under this scenario, the pattern of among lineage rate variation can differ across loci. This can occur if selective constraints vary across loci in a lineage specific manner (). For example, a set of genes might be under positive selection in some lineages, but under purifying selection in other lineages (). Changes in population size can also cause residual effects because they alter the proportion of sites that are effectively neutral (). Partitioning rate variation into gene, lineage and residual effects is difficult (), but the influence of these three factors at the genomic scale can be described using the pacemaker models of molecular evolution (;). The Universal Molecular Clock (MC) is the simplest model of genomic evolution (). It posits a constant rate of evolution among lineages, but allows the rate to vary across loci. In this model, rate variation is governed by gene effects only. The Universal Pacemaker up m model assumes that both lineage and gene effects are present, but that residual effects are negligible. Therefore, a single pattern of among lineage rate variation is shared across all loci. The Multiple Pacemaker (MPM) model suggests that there is a limited number of pacemakers, such that there are groups of genes with the same pattern of among lineage rate variation, but with different absolute rates. This implies that residual effects within pacemakers are very small compared with those between pacemakers. In the Degenerate Multiple Pacemaker dm pm model, residual effects are pervasive and there is a distinct pattern of among lineage rate variation for each gene. This extreme case of gene specific among lineage rate variation is also known as 'erratic' evolution (). Support for the up m model has come from studies of various organisms, including archaea, bacteria, plants, fungi and Drosophila species (). In these analyses, the up m model was preferred over the MC, the MPM, and dm pm models. These studies compared models using goodness of fit statistics, but these are limited because they do not allow testing of all of the possible scenarios under the MPM model. The MPM hypothesis is much more complex than the up m or the dm pm because it comprises a large family of models: the n loci in a data set can be assigned to one of k pacemakers, where k can take any value from 2 to n  1. Given the large number of ways in which the loci can be assigned to pacemakers, testing the goodness of fit of every scenario under the MPM model is computationally intractable. This problem can be overcome by using clustering algorithms (). Here, we analyze a publicly available data set of 431 genes from 29 mammalian tax a to test the different pacemaker models. We tested the up m model using a clustering algorithm implemented in a new version of our program, clock star (), which we have modified so that it can be used to analyze genome scale data sets. We find that the patterns of evolutionary rate variation in the mammalian data set can be explained by 13 pacemakers, supporting the MPM model. Our results suggest that there is a degree of stability in genome evolution. However, we find no evidence of association between pacemakers and gene function.
