Ancient DNA extracts consist of a mixture of contaminant DNA molecules, most often originating from environmental microbes, and endogenous fragments exhibiting substantial levels of DNA damage. The latter introduce specific nucleotide mis incorporations and DNA fragmentation signatures in sequencing reads that could be advantageously used to argue for sequence validity. map damage is a Perl script that computes nucleotide mis incorporation and fragmentation patterns using next generation sequencing reads mapped against a reference genome. The Perl script outputs are further automatically processed in embedded R script in order to detect typical patterns of genuine ancient DNA sequences. Availability and implementation: The Perl script map damage is freely available with documentation and example files at

introduction the field of ancient DNA a dna has a colorful history, with early claims of DNA survival from the Cretaceous () periods later recognized as the by product of contamination (). Extensive fragmentation and substantial chemical modifications of nucleotide bases are introduced post-mortem as a result of DNA damage (). Some of these modifications, such as a basic sites, single strand breaks and inter strand cross-links, are not replicated by standard Taq DNA polymerases (), hence the relatively better preserved modern contaminant DNA molecules will often outcompete ancient templates during polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. For non-human species, contamination can be controlled by using specific PCR primers and or human oligonucleotide PCR blockers () and by filtering out human related sequences. But as long as * To whom correspondence should be addressed. ancient human fossils are concerned, including close relatives such as neandertals, contamination is still a risk. Several recent methodological improvements have helped improve reliability when sequencing ancient hominids. Firstly, DNA libraries are tagged in clean labs with project specific indexes in order to track back downstream contamination sources that could result from library amplification and or sequencing (). In addition, typical sequence patterns resulting from a dna damage have been identified that help distinguish damaged ancient sequences from modern contaminants; these include: short sequence length; an excess of cytosine to thymine c tot mis incorporations at 5 ends of sequences, and complementary guanine to adenine gto a mis incorporations at 3 termini due to enhanced cytosine deamination in single stranded 5 overhanging ends (); and an excess of purines at the genomic coordinate located just before the sequencing start, indicative of post-mortem dep urination followed by strand fragmentation (). Here, we present a Perl script that analyzes the size distribution of next generation sequencing reads, and dynamically recovers nucleotide mis incorporation patterns in a position dependent manner. In addition, the base composition of the genomic regions located up and downstream of each read is recorded within windows of user defined sizes. Using SAM files as input and corresponding reads mapped against a reference genome, the script map damage provides summary tables required to gauge a dna authenticity based on DNA damage patterns.
