Motivation: Ancestral genomes provide a better way to understand the structural evolution of genomes than the simple comparison of extant genomes. Most ancestral genome reconstruction methods rely on universal markers, that is, homologous families of DNA segments present in exactly one exemplar in every considered species. Complex histories of genes or other markers, undergoing duplications and losses, are rarely taken into account. It follows that some ancestors are inaccessible by these methods, such as the proto mono cotyledon whose evolution involved massive gene loss following a whole genome duplication. Results: We propose a mapping approach based on the combinatorial notion of sandwich consecutive ones matrix, which explicitly takes gene losses into account. We introduce combinatorial optimization problems related to this concept, and propose a heuristic solver and a lower bound on the optimal solution. We use these results to propose a configuration for the proto chromosomes of the monocot ancestor, and study the accuracy of this configuration. We also use our method to reconstruct the ancestral bore o eutheria n genomes, which illustrates that the framework we propose is not specific to plant paleo genomics but is adapted to reconstruct any ancestral genome from extant genomes with heterogeneous marker content. Availability: Upon request to the authors. Contact: haris.

introduction mapping ancestral genomes consists in ordering ancestral markers into chromosomes, according to the organization of the descendants of these markers in sequenced extant genomes. In the absence of a good model for genome structural evolution, mapping techniques for ancestral genomes, introduced by, have given the most reliable ancestral configurations on animals (), yeast (), or plant genomes (), and even on a wide eukaryote dataset (). These works also raised new methodological issues and stimulated a recent stream of algorithmic studies related to genome mapping (), * To whom correspondence should be addressed which had taken the back seat with the development of massive genome sequencing. The general principle of ancestral genome mapping is:(i) Define ancestral genome markers, constructed either from homologous gene families or from aligned chromosome segments ii Infer, from the structure of extant genomes, a collection of relations between ancestral markers which are believed to be ancestral; and iii Assemble this collection into an ancestral genome the relations between ancestral markers can take several forms, such as adjacency or distance between pairs of markers, or contiguity synteny of a subset of markers for example. The combinatorial nature of these relations defines the abstract representation of the ancestral genome, from totally ordered proto chromosomal segments () to contiguous ancestral regions () and ancestral linkage groups (). Up to now, most published methods require unique and universal ancestral markers, that is, each ancestral marker has exactly one descendant in every considered extant genome. This constraint, common to many genome mapping methods () and genome rearrangement studies (), results, in general, in more tractable algorithmic problems for the assembly phase. Recently, several works tried to account for the possibly complex history of markers, by integrating whole genome duplication and gene loss either at the level of ancestral markers definition (), or in the whole mapping process, allowing duplicated markers arising from a whole genome duplication (), or genes with duplications and losses (). In these works, either a backbone of universal makers is used, or only adjacencies between genes were considered. It means that gene loss is neglected, and is expected to produce a reasonable amount of noise in the assembly phase. The above assumptions are not appropriate anymore if there is a highly heterogeneous marker content within the extant descendants considered to reconstruct an ancestral genome. For example, in the early mono cotyledon evolution, a whole genome duplication is believed to have occurred (), followed by numerous gene losses, representing
