A map reduce based implementation called mr ms polygraph for parallelizing peptide identification from mass spectrometry data is presented. The underlying serial method, ms polygraph uses a novel hybrid approach to match an experimental spectrum against a combination of a protein sequence database and a spectral library. Our map reduce implementation can run on any had oop cluster environment. Experimental results demonstrate that, relative to the serial version, mr ms polygraph reduces the time to solution from weeks to hours, for processing tens of thousands of experimental spectra. speed up and other related performance studies are also reported on a 400-core had oop cluster using spectral datasets from environmental microbial communities as inputs. Availability: The source code along with user documentation are available on http://compbio.eecs.

introduction identifying the sequence composition of peptides is of fundamental importance to systems biology research. high throughput proteomic technologies using mass spectroscopy are capable of generating millions of peptide mass spectra in a matter of days. One of the most effective ways to annotate these spectra is to compare the experimental spectra against a database of known protein sequences. The main idea here is to generate candidate peptide sequences from the genome of the organism under study and then to use models of peptide fragmentation to generate model spectra that can be compared against each experimental spectrum. However, as samples become richer in diversity (e.g. from environmental microbial communities), the number of candidate comparisons could increase by orders of magnitude (Supplementary). An increase in the number of candidates also increases the probability of finding high scoring random matches. It is therefore essential to implement a peptide identification method that is both accurate and scalable to large sizes of spectral collections and sequence databases. The prediction accuracy of peptide identification can be improved * To whom correspondence should be addressed. if experimental spectra are also compared against spectral libraries, although this would only exacerbate the computational demands. recently developed a novel hybrid statistical method within the ms polygraph framework, which combines the use of highly accurate spectral libraries, when available, along with on the fly generation of model spectra when spectral libraries are not available. This method demonstrated increases of 57147% in the number of confidently identified peptides at controlled false discovery rates. This effort to enrich quality of prediction, however, comes at an increased computational cost. While a parallel MPI version of the code exists, most users do not have access to large scale parallel clusters. Whereas, open source science cloud installations and commercial vendors such as Amazon provide access to map reduce clusters on an on demand basis. In this article, we present a map reduce implementation of ms polygraph called mr ms polygraph. map reduce () is an emerging parallel paradigm for data intensive applications, and is becoming a de facto standard in cloud installations. One of the popular open source implementations for map reduce is the had oop framework. mr ms polygraph uses map reduce to efficiently distribute the matching of a large spectral collection on a had oop cluster. previously ported peptide identifications tools that use the database search approach onto the Amazon EC2 cloud environment. Our work incorporates the statistics of the hybrid search method in ms polygraph to any cluster running the open source had oop environment.
