continuous time Markov chain models with finite state space are routinely used for analysis of discrete character data on phylogenetic trees. Examples of such discrete character data include restriction sites, gene family presence absence intron presence absence and gene family size data. While models with constrained substitution rate matrices have been used to good effect, more biologically realistic models have been increasingly implemented in the recent literature combining, e.g., site rate variation, site partitioning, branch specific rates, allowing for non-stationary prior root probabilities, correcting for sampling bias, etc. to name a few. Here, a flexible and fast R package is introduced that infers evolutionary rates of discrete characters on a tree within a probabilistic framework. The package, marko phylo fits maximum likelihood models using Markov chains on phylogenetic trees. The package is efficient, with the workhorse functions written in Cþþ and the interface in user friendly R. Availability and implementation: marko phylo is available as a platform independent R package from the Comprehensive R Archive Network at https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/marko phylo/. A vignette with numerous examples is also provided with the R package.

introduction a Markov chain framework is frequently adopted to estimate evolutionary rates of discrete characters on phylogenetic trees. Some examples of previously investigated data using such models include restriction sites (), gene family size data (), gene family presence absence patterns (), intron presence absence data (), etc. A good introduction to such models can be found in o meara (2012) and Yang (2014). It has been noted before that many variants of such models are just restrictions of more general models for investigation of specific hypotheses or different kinds of data (O'). Hence, there is a clear need for a flexible and efficient software to provide a unified interface that would allow fitting of varied discrete character datasets. Recently, Kim and Hao (2014) put forward a unified R (R Core) package, namely disc ml that provided users the option of biologically realistic features like gamma rate variation (), estimation of character prior root probabilities (), correcting for ancient characters being lost from all examined extant tax a (cf.), etc. As noted in Kim and Hao (2014), while many of these features are found in existing programs like bayes traits (), CAFE3 (), bad i rate () and gloom e (), the sum total of these above mentioned desirable features was not available in a single flexible software. However, disc ml is not computationally inexpensive. Moreover, disc ml does not currently allow for partition analyses or for accounting for sampling bias arising due to multiple unobserved phyletic patterns (see Supplementary Material). Here, we present marko phylo an R package that is both fast and flexible. The marko phylo package allows for estimating evolutionary rates using a user specified i.e. hypothesis driven substitution rate matrix in a continuous time Markov chain model on phylogenies. The package is computationally efficient, with the workhorse functions written in C, using the rc pp () and rc pp armadillo () packages. The package is flexible, capable of modelling a myriad array of processes (described below in Section 2.2).

Description

discussion here a flexible and efficient R package named marko phylo for estimating evolutionary rates of discrete characters is introduced. When compared with existing packages like disc ml marko phylo is at least an order of magnitude faster. Moreover, marko phylo implements a wide variety of features increasingly seen in more biologically realistic Markov chain models run on discrete character datasets.
