Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a well established method for studying protein motion at the atomic scale. However, it is computationally intensive and generates massive amounts of data. One way of addressing the dual challenges of computation efficiency and data analysis is to construct simplified models of long time scale protein motion from MD simulation data. In this direction, we propose to use Markov models with hidden states, in which the Markovian states represent potentially overlapping probabilistic distributions over protein conformations. We also propose a principled criterion for evaluating the quality of a model by its ability to predict long time scale protein motions. Our method was tested on 2D synthetic energy landscapes and two extensively studied peptides, alanine dipeptide and the villin headpiece subdomain (HP-35 nlen le. One interesting finding is that although a widely accepted model of alanine dipeptide contains six states, a simpler model with only three states is equally good for predicting long time scale motions. We also used the constructed Markov models to estimate important kinetic and dynamic quantities for protein folding, in particular, mean first passage time. The results are consistent with available experimental measurements.

introduction protein motion is the aggregate result of complex interactions among individual atoms of a protein at timescales ranging over several orders of magnitudes. Thermal fluctuations, which occur in picoseconds (10 12 s), are small amplitude uncorrelated, harmonic motions of atoms, but they eventually provide the protein enough momentum to overcome energy barriers between metastable states. In contrast, biologically significant conformational motions, which occur in microseconds to milliseconds, are often large scale correlated, anharmonic motions between meta-stable states. For example, in a folded protein, they may occur between binding and non-binding states. The wide range of timescales and complex relationships among the motions at different timescales make it difficult to capture the biologically significant, long time scale dynamics of protein motion in a compact model. Molecular dynamics (MD) simulation is a well established method for studying macromolecular motion at the atomic scale (). However, it requires a detailed energy function and the equations of motion must be integrated with a time step much shorter than the timescale of atomic thermal fluctuations. For many proteins, to days computers can generate roughly a few nanoseconds of simulation trajectories in a day, which is insufficient for capturing events of biological significance. Distributed computing () and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. specialized computer architectures () speed up MD simulation significantly, but the sheer size of data generated is a major hurdle that prevents biological insights. One way of addressing both the issues of computational efficiency and data analysis is to construct simplified models that capture the essential features of protein motions at long timescales. Markov dynamic models md ms provide a promising direction towards this goal. An MDM of a system here a protein can be represented as a directed graph. Each node of the graph represents a state s of the system, and each edge represents a transition from state s to s. An edge (s, s ) is also assigned the probability that the system transitions from s to s in one time step. md ms have several advantages for modeling protein motion. First, they are probabilistic and thus naturally capture the stochasticity of protein motion. Second, md ms represent states explicitly. This makes them potentially easier to understand and faster to simulate. Finally, there are standard algorithmic tools, e.g. first step analysis (), for exploiting md ms without expensive explicit simulation. A key question in MDM construction is the choice of states. What are the Markovian states of a protein if we want to model its long time scale dynamics accurately? One contribution of this work is to have states represent not individual protein conformations (), not even disjoint regions of the conformation space (), but overlapping probabilistic distributions over the conformation space. This choice reflects the view that a conformation does not contain enough information to be assigned to a single state. Although this may seem odd at first, it is in fact quite natural in modeling many physical systems. For example, suppose that we want to classify some physical objects into two states, table or chair. For a cubic object one meter in size, if we see a meal on top of it, we may consider it a table; if we see someone seated on it, we consider it a chair. So, a cube in itself can not be assigned a single state because of insufficient information. Often, acquiring and representing missing information, if at all possible, is more difficult than capturing it in a probabilistic distribution. Hence, our choice of Markovian states that represent probabilistic distributions over the protein conformation space. This choice leads to md ms with hidden states, formally, hidden Markov models (HMMs). In this article, we present a method to automatically construct an HMM of the long time scale dynamics of a protein from a dataset of MD simulation trajectories. Another key question is how to measure the quality of a model. A good model enables us to predict biologically relevant quantities of protein motion accurately and efficiently. However, a particular model may do well for one quantity, but poorly for another. Also, we may not know in advance the quantities to be predicted when constructing a model. Another contribution of this work is to propose a principled criterion for evaluating the quality of a model by its ability to predict long time scale protein motions, as many interesting page i270 i269i277
