Grass seeds are complex organs composed by multiple tissues and cell types that develop coordinately to produce a viable embryo. The identification of genes involved in seed development is of great interest, but systematic spatial analyses of gene expression on maize seeds at the cell level have not yet been performed. mas ish is an online database holding information for gene expression spatial patterns in maize seeds based on in situ hybridization experiments. The web based query interface allows the execution of gene queries and provides hybridization images, published references and information of the analyzed genes. The maize kernel is classified botanically as a cary ops is. In consequence, it is a fruit composed by one seed and the remnants of the seed coats and nu cell us and is permanently enclosed in the pericarp. The endosperm occupies most of the seed and is basically a storage organ that accumulates starch and proteins. The aleurone layer is part of the endosperm and consists in a continuous layer of large cubical cells, which accumulate protein and lipid granules and surrounds most of the endosperm. In the area of the pedicel, which connects the seed to the mother plant, the cells adopt a special morphology, typical of transfer cells and form the basal transfer cell layer. The embryo consists of an embryonic axis and a single cotyledon, which is called the scutellum. The embryo axis is formed by the plu mule covered by the coleoptile and the radicle, covered by cole or hi za. All these organs are almost completely surrounded by the scutellum, an organ whose major function is to accumulate nutrient reserves, mainly lipids and proteins. A single layer of cells directly in contact with the endosperm, which is called the scu tell ar epithelium, is important in the digestion and transport of the nutrients from the endosperm to the embryo axis during germination. Both endosperm and embryo derive from the fusion of gametes, but while the embryo is derived from the fertilized egg, triploid endosperm is derived from fertilized polar nuclei. Surrounding the endosperm and embryo lays the pericarp, a protective organ derived from the maternal tissues (more information at
