We present MASiVE, an expertly built tool for the large scale yet sensitive and highly accurate, discovery, preliminary analysis and insertion age estimation of intact sire virus ltr retrotransposons in plant genomic sequences. Validation was based on the recently available and annotated large maize chromosome one. Results show a considerable improvement in the annotation of sire viruses and support our approach as an important addition to the bioinformatics toolbox of plant biologists. Availability: PERL source code and essential files are available online at

introduction the availability of large and complex plant genome sequences has necessitated the development of algorithms that can facilitate high throughput discovery and annotation of transposable elements, especially long terminal repeat retrotransposons ltr rtn that comprise the majority of these genomes (). Tools like ltr struc (), ltr finder () and ltr harvest () are available; however, they are all based on general structural characteristics of ltr rtns which may lead to mis annotations or incomplete identification of the ltr rtn set. The recent discovery that the abundant and plant specific sire viruses contain highly conserved motifs in key domains of their genome () provided the opportunity to develop MASiVE (Mapping and Analysis of sire virus Elements), presented herein, a tool able to identify, with high precision and sensitivity, intact sire virus elements in plant genomic sequences. All ltr rtns contain poly purine tract (PPT) and primer binding site (PBS) domains. However, their high sequence and length plastic ities () render them inappropriate for the identification of a specific retrotransposon class. In contrast, sire viruses have multiple identical PPTs at the upstream border of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.. The MASiVE algorithm pipeline and the effect of filtering on the numbers of sire viruses finally reported as intact. White parallelograms represent data, dark rectangles tools and grey diamonds filters. the 3 LTR and a highly conserved 5 ltr internal domain junction that includes part of the PBS. These, along with several filters applied sequentially, are used by MASiVE to target full length sire virus elements, while excluding false positives like other retrotransposons or non retroelement derived sequences resembling the structure of ltr rtns. MASiVE has been calibrated and validated in the largest chromosome of the now available, and expertly annotated, Zea mays (maize) B73 genome (), chromosome one.
