Motivation: network centered studies in systems biology attempt to integrate the topological properties of biological networks with experimental data in order to make predictions and posit hypotheses. For any topology based prediction, it is necessary to first assess the significance of the analyzed property in a biologically meaningful context. Therefore, devising network null models, carefully tailored to the topological and biochemical constraints imposed on the network, remains an important computational problem. Results: We first review the shortcomings of the existing generic sampling scheme switch randomization and explain its unsuitability for application to metabolic networks. We then devise a novel polynomial time algorithm for randomizing metabolic networks under the (bio)chemical constraint of mass balance. The tractability of our method follows from the concept of mass equivalence classes, defined on the representation of compounds in the vector space over chemical elements. We finally demonstrate the uniformity of the proposed method on seven genome scale metabolic networks, and empirically validate the theoretical findings. The proposed method allows a biologically meaningful estimation of significance for metabolic network properties. Contact

introduction the advances in omics technologies and algorithmic techniques for analysis of high throughput data have placed network based integrative studies in the focus of systems biology (). The promise of network analyses lies in the possibility to devise genome scale representations of biological systems for predictive analyses. However, the statistical significance of any prediction must be validated in a biologically meaningful context using an appropriate null model. The seminal work of () directed complex networks research toward revealing the unifying properties of biological networks, starting from metabolic () to gene regulatory () to protein protein networks () and their integrated variants (). Despite the identification of simple * To whom correspondence should be addressed. mechanisms by which these networks may arise and evolve, such as the preferential attachment of newly added nodes (representing genes, proteins, reactions or metabolites) to already highly connected ones, the advantage of such approaches to answering biological questions remains debatable. Nevertheless, this direction in network research has resulted in the discovery of salient properties of biological networks, i.e. properties which show similar trends for a wide variety of networks from different cells, tissues and species. Some of these properties include: scale free (i.e. power law degree distribution, large clustering coefficient, small average path length, degree degree correlation, different behavior of various centrality measures and the distribution and overrepresentation of subnetworks, known as motifs (). The studies following the work of b arabs i and Albert have attempted to relate the salient properties of biological networks to their functionality (). However, it is often the case that the detection of novel salient properties of complex biological networks and determination of their statistical significance is based on a generic null model, which may result in misleading conclusions and, consequently, in inappropriate biological reasoning (). Network null models are essential for establishing the significance of any prediction obtained from a network representation of a biological system. A randomization procedure allows for sampling from the (usually large) space of networks from a null model, and for estimating the statistical significance empirically. A p value of a given property is usually calculated based on the following procedure: (i) determine the chosen property from an investigated biological network, (ii) sample a large number of random networks which have a similar structure to that of the analyzed network and (iii) estimate the mean and variance of the property from the simulated networks to calculate a z-score and p value under the assumption of normal distribution. Without this assumption, in principle, step (iii) requires determining the distribution of values for the property under the considered network null model. Clearly, the p value of a property strongly depends on the sampling procedure and structure of the network null model. Therefore, any network based analysis is prone to detecting statistically significant properties due to an ill posed null model (). Finally, a null model strongly and ultimately depends on the type of analyzed network. For instance, gene regulatory networks include directionality, while protein protein interaction networks page 1398 13971403

conclusion the advances in high throughput omics technologies require developing algorithmic techniques for the analysis of large scale biological networks. However, the significance of any network based prediction must be validated using a realistic null model. While the method based on switch randomization has been extensively used to study the significance of topological properties in many different types of networks, we argued that it is unsuitable for the analysis of metabolic networks. We presented a new method for randomizing metabolic networks under the constraint of mass balance. We observed that a null model should satisfy two important requirements: preservation of ubiquitous constraints characterizing the class of analyzed networks and uniformity of the sampling procedure. We demonstrated the uniformity of the proposed method theoretically and empirically on seven metabolic networks from all kingdoms of life. By integrating the (bio)chemical constraint of mass balance into a network null model, our method allows for a more realistic measure of significance. In addition, the proposed approach can be used for identifying network properties which are independent of mass balance constraints, and thus are likely to relate to the evolutionary history of metabolic networks. For instance, in a recent study, we applied the method to assess the evolutionary significance of thermodynamic favorability of metabolic reactions (). We believe that the integration of mass balance constraints is a necessary first step toward extracting biologically meaningful properties of genome scale metabolic networks.
