MASS is a command line program to perform meta analysis of sequencing studies by combining the score statistics from multiple studies. It implements three types of multivariate tests that encompass all commonly used association tests for rare variants. The input files can be generated from the accompanying software score seq. This bundle of programs allows analysis of large sequencing studies in a time and memory efficient manner. Availability and implementation: MASS and score seq including documentations and executables, are available at http://dlin.web.unc. edu software
introduction meta analysis of genome wide association studies g was has led to the discoveries of common genetic variants for virtually every complex human disease. Recent advances in sequencing technologies have made it possible to extend association studies to rare variants. Because larger sample sizes are required to detect rare variants than common variants (with similar effect sizes), combining evidence from many sources is necessary for sequencing studies. For ethical and logistical reasons, it is strongly preferable to gather summary statistics than collecting original data. For association testing with rare variants, it is customary to aggregate information across several variant sites within a gene to enrich association signals and to reduce the penalty of multiple testing. The simplest approach is the burden test, which creates a burden score for each subject (by taking a weighted linear combination of the mutation counts within a gene or indicating whether there is any mutation within a gene) (). A second approach is the variable threshold (VT) test, which performs a burden test for variants with minor allele frequencies ma fs below a certain threshold and minimizes the p value over the observed MAF thresholds (). A third approach is the variance component test, which is aimed at detecting variants with opposite effects within a gene (). After creating a burden score for each subject, one may carry out the burden test by performing a standard regression analysis and combine the Wald statistics of multiple studies through the inverse variance formula. However, this strategy is problematic for rare variants because the effect estimates may be unstable or even undefined when only a small number of subjects carry any mutation. Indeed, the log odds ratio is undefined if the burden scores are zero for all cases or all controls. We recommend to use score statistics, which are statistically more accurate and numerically more stable than Wald and likelihood ratio statistics, especially for binary traits (). Currently, there is no meta analysis software for combining score statistics. Thus, we developed the meta analysis of Score Statistics (MASS) software, which performs an overall burden test by combining the score statistics of multiple studies. In addition, MASS performs an overall VT test for multiple studies based on score statistics. Finally, MASS performs an overall variance component test also based on score statistics. The meta analysis performed by MASS is statistically as efficient as joint analysis of individual level data. The software is extremely easy to use. Because score statistics are not available in existing software packages, we developed score seq which takes the standard input format of sequencing data and outputs score statistics, which can then be meta analyzed in MASS.

discussion protection of human subjects and other study policies make it difficult to share individual level data, even in well organized consortia. Thus, meta analysis is strongly preferable to joint analysis. The MASS software enables one to perform meta analysis of score statistics for sequencing studies, which is statistically as efficient as and indeed numerically equivalent to joint analysis of individual level data. This software can also be used to combine results from other types of genetic studies as well as non genetic studies. In meta analysis of sequencing data, the participating studies should use the same annotation file so that the summary statistics are generated in a consistent manner across studies. This does not mean that the variants have to be the same among studies. If a genetic variable is missing in one study, then zero can be used as a placeholder in the summary statistics and MASS will combine all available information. The calculation of the burden scores requires specification of the ma fs. The ma fs may be estimated separately in each study or jointly across all studies; they may also be determined from an external source. We recommend that the same ma fs be used by all participating studies. In this way, the same variants are included in the calculations of the burden scores among the studies, and the MAF thresholds for the VT test are consistent across the studies. For studies that use different exo me capturing kits or studies in which some have exo me sequencing while others have exo me chip data, the input variants are different. If the genetic variable pertains to the genotype of a variant and that variant is not measured in the kth study, then we simply set the corresponding entries in U k and V k to zero, so that MASS will combine all available data. If the genetic variable pertains to a burden score, then a variant that is absent in a study will not contribute to the calculation of the burden score for that study. The score statistics from such studies can still be combined in MASS, although the results need to be interpreted with extra care. If the burden score is a (weighted) linear combination of the genotype values (e.g. the total number of mutations or a weighted sum of the mutation counts), then the score statistics for the burden and VT tests are (weighted) linear combinations of the score statistic for testing the null hypothesis that the genotypes of individual variants are not associated with the trait of interest. In that case, it would be sufficient to input only the score vector and information matrix for individual variants because they can be used to create the score statistics and information matrices for the burden, VT and SKAT tests. We did not take this approach because it requires the burden scores to be calculated under the additive mode of inheritance. Indeed, it has become a common practice to define the burden score as the presence or absence of any mutation within a gene rather than the total number or weighted linear combination of the mutations. score seq allows burden scores to be calculated under the additive, dominant or recessive mode of inheritance. By asking the user to input the score statistics and information matrices for each specific test, MASS can accommodate any mode of inheritance. MASS adopts the fixed effect model, which assumes that the genetic effects are the same among the participating studies. This approach will have reasonable power as long as the effects are in the same direction across studies. An alternative approach is the random effect model, under which the effects in different studies follow a normal distribution. The random effect model tends to be less powerful than the fixed effect model even when the effects are heterogeneous and thus has rarely been used in genetic association studies.
