Motivation: With the vast increase in the number of gene expression datasets deposited in public databases, novel techniques are required to analyze and mine this wealth of data. Similar to the way BLAST enables cross species comparison of sequence data, tools that enable cross species expression comparison will allow us to better utilize these datasets: cross species expression comparison enables us to address questions in evolution and development, and further allows the identification of disease related genes and pathways that play similar roles in humans and model organisms. Unlike sequence, which is static, expression data changes over time and under different conditions. Thus, a prerequisite for performing cross species analysis is the ability to match experiments across species. Results: To enable better cross species comparisons, we developed methods for automatically identifying pairs of similar expression datasets across species. Our method uses a co training algorithm to combine a model of expression similarity with a model of the text which accompanies the expression experiments. The co training method outperforms previous methods based on expression similarity alone. Using expert analysis, we show that the new matches identified by our method indeed capture biological similarities across species. We then use the matched expression pairs between human and mouse to recover known and novel cycling genes as well as to identify genes with possible involvement in diabetes. By providing the ability to identify novel candidate genes in model organisms, our method opens the door to new models for studying diseases. Availability: Source code and supplementary information is available at

introduction cross species analysis has been at the center of genomics research for decades. Some of the most influential computational biology work, including BLAST () and various alignment methods () were aimed at comparing genomics data across species. In addition to answering several basic research questions [including issues related to evolution () and development (, cross species analysis is extensively used by pharmaceutical companies. Indeed, almost all drugs are initially developed and tested using model organisms, and knowledge about the relationship * To whom correspondence should be addressed. between target genes in these organisms and corresponding human genes is crucial for successful drug development (). While most work to date has focused on the analysis of sequence data across species, other types of genomics data are rapidly accumulating. One of the most abundant types of genomics data are gene expression data. Unlike sequence data, expression data changes between conditions, time points and developmental stages and is thus extremely useful for studies that involve responses to various treatments. Gene expression databases from microarray studies have grown exponentially over the last decade (). Other technologies, including RNA sequencing, are also generating large expression datasets in multiple species. This leads to a key challenge: How can we effectively mine these databases to identify similarities and differences in gene expression across species that complement sequence data? A prerequisite for cross species analysis is the ability to match data in one species to data in another. This can be easily done for sequence data since DNA is context independent and the nucleotides and amino acids are universal. However, things become more challenging when using expression data. First, genes need to be matched across species, and not all orthologs are currently known. More importantly, expression data are condition specific, continuous, sometimes dynamic and often much noisier than sequence data. This makes it hard to identify experiments that can be matched to find genes that are expressed in a similar way across species. To address this issue, several researchers performed controlled experiments in which the same biological system was studied under the same condition, in the same lab, and in multiple species. Examples include the cell cycle (), immune response (), various tissues (), drug response () and development (). see for a recent review. While these studies successfully identified similarities and differences leading to new insights regarding conservation and response mechanisms, this success only serves to strengthen the question mentioned above: Can we develop methods to mine the vast number of expression experiments currently deposited in public databases so that they can also be used in such a cross species analysis framework? Relatively little work has been carried out to date to address this general question (especially when compared with work that focuses on the cross species analysis of sequence data). One previous approach by used non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) to perform the unsupervised discovery of a small set of meta genes that are a linear combination of gene expression levels in one of the species being compared. By similarly combining the orthologs of these genes into meta genes in another
