Motivation: Expression quantitative trait loci e qtl analysis links variations in gene expression levels to genotypes. For modern datasets, e qtl analysis is a computationally intensive task as it involves testing for association of billions of transcripts np single nucleotide polymorphism) pair. The heavy computational burden makes e qtl analysis less popular and sometimes forces analysts to restrict their attention to just a small subset of transcripts np pairs. As more transcripts and SNPs get interrogated over a growing number of samples, the demand for faster tools for e qtl analysis grows stronger. Results: We have developed a new software for computationally efficient e qtl analysis called Matrix e qtl. In tests on large datasets, it was 2–3 orders of magnitude faster than existing popular tools for qt le qtl analysis, while finding the same e qtls. The fast performance is achieved by special preprocessing and expressing the most computationally intensive part of the algorithm in terms of large matrix operations. Matrix e qtl supports additive linear and ANOVA models with covariates, including models with correlated and heteroskedastic errors. The issue of multiple testing is addressed by calculating false discovery rate; this can be done separately for cis and transe qtls
introduction the goal of expression quantitative trait loci e qtl analysis is to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) which are significantly associated with expression of known genes. These associations can help reveal biochemical processes underlying living systems, discover the genetic factors causing certain diseases and determine pathways that are affected by them. Expression QTL analysis is used to determine hotspots [DNA regions affecting multiple transcripts,, construct causal networks, discover subclasses of clinical phenotypes, and select genes for clinical trials (see reviews of). There are various approaches to e qtl analysis. Most e qtl studies perform separate testing for each transcripts np pair. The association between expression and genotype can be tested for using linear regression and ANOVA models, as well as nonlinear techniques including generalized linear and mixed models, bayes sian regression (), and models accounting for pedigree () and latent variables (). Several methods has been developed to find groups of SNPs associated with expression of a single gene (). Expression QTL analysis is known to be computationally intensive. The issue is most pronounced for modern e qtl datasets, which have genotype measured over millions of SNPs and gene expression over tens of thousands of transcripts. For such data, the e qtl analysis involves over ten billion tests. The following three studies, analyzing relatively small datasets, indicate that non-linear methods can be prohibitively slow for large data applied family based association tests to a dataset with 142 samples. They tested only 40 227 transcripts np pairs and report the total computation time to be 'under 24 h on 20 processors in parallel on a Linux cluster were running efficient mixed model association (EMMA), which is said to be computationally efficient. They analyzed a dataset with 110 samples, 1813 SNPs, and 10 013 transcripts. They tested all transcripts np pairs and report the computation time of 'a few hours using a cluster of 50 processors tested their method on a dataset measuring 40 639 transcripts and 48 186 SNPs in 188 samples. They report that estimation took 10 h when parallelized across 1100 processors (this is more than a processor year. Note that the dimensions of a modern e qtl dataset can greatly exceed those in the examples above. In this article, we present a new tool, Matrix e qtl for fast e qtl analysis of large datasets. Our tests show that Matrix e qtl is 23 orders of magnitude faster than existing popular qt le qtl software. Moreover, the computation time of Matrix e qtl stays practically unchanged when covariates are added to the model. Such performance is achieved, in particular, by expressing the most computationally intensive part of the algorithm in terms of large matrix operations. This allowed to implement the algorithm using high level programming languages, R and Matlab, relying on their efficient implementation of matrix operations. Matrix e qtl tests for association between each SNP and each transcript by modeling the effect of genotype as either additive linear (least squares model) or categorical (ANOVA model). Optionally, Matrix e qtl can test for the significance of genotype covariate interaction. Matrix e qtl does not require genotypes to be discrete unless ANOVA model is chosen. The models can include covariates to account for such factors as gender, clinical variables, population structure and surrogate variables. Matrix e qtl also supports heteroscedastic and correlated errors to account for relatedness of the samples. Matrix e qtl performs a separate test for each genes np pair and corrects for multiple comparisons by calculating false discovery rate (FDR,). It is known that the SNPs located near a gene are more likely to affect its expression. To account for this fact, Matrix e qtl supports separate
