high throughput DNA sequencing technologies have spurred the development of numerous novel methods for genome assembly. With few exceptions, these algorithms are heuristic and require one or more parameters to be manually set by the user. One approach to parameter tuning involves assembling data from an organism with an available high quality reference genome, and measuring assembly accuracy using some metrics. We developed a system to measure assembly quality under several scoring metrics, and to compare assembly quality across a variety of assemblers, sequence data types, and parameter choices. When used in conjunction with training data such as a high quality reference genome and sequence reads from the same organism, our program can be used to manually identify an optimal sequencing and assembly strategy for de novo sequencing of related organisms. Availability: GPL source code and a usage tutorial is at

introduction given high throughput sequencing data, most current genome assemblers apply deterministic heuristics to infer the genome sequence. Usually a variety of parameters can be used to control the heuristic, for which the optimal combination of values may not be obvious. Given a training dataset consisting of high quality reference genomes and sequence reads generated from those genomes, it may be possible to manually or automatically select a good set of assembly parameters. A key requirement for this task is a means to quantify the accuracy of an assembly. Measuring the accuracy with which an assembly reconstructs the reference genome presents another inference problem. It is usually unknown which part of the inferred assembly corresponds to which part of the reference genome. We must somehow map parts of the assembly back onto the reference genome through sequence alignment, which usually takes one of two forms: local alignment, exemplified by algorithms like BLAST (), and whole genome alignment with algorithms like MUMmer () or Mauve (). We introduce a new set of assembly accuracy metrics based on the progressive mauve genome aligner ().

discussion the assembly metrics we describe illustrate substantial differences between sequencing and assembly strategies. For example, the volc454 assembly captured nearly all coding genes in the reference genome, but had a high scaffold count relative to the vol cidb a assembly. Striking an ideal balance between assembly error types, rates and sequencing cost is an exercise left for users of our software. When a finished reference genome is available and has been re sequenced the assembly metrics calculated by our system can be used to guide selection of sequencing strategy and tune assembly parameters. The reported metrics may form the basis for a future automated system to perform supervised machine learning of assembly parameters by conducting a parameter sweep over a large number of assembly strategies. Finally, we note that genome alignment algorithms are not perfect and some differences between the assembly and the reference may be due to alignment error and not true assembly errors. Funding: National Science Foundation award (ER 0949453).
