The recovery of genomes from meta genomic datasets is a critical step to defining the functional roles of the underlying uncultivated populations. We previously developed max bin an automated binning approach for high throughput recovery of microbial genomes from meta genomes. Here we present an expanded binning algorithm, max bin 2.0, which recovers genomes from co assembly of a collection of meta genomic datasets. Tests on simulated datasets revealed that max bin 2.0 is highly accurate in recovering individual genomes, and the application of max bin 2.0 to several meta genomes from environmental samples demonstrated that it could achieve two complementary goals: recovering more bacterial genomes compared to binning a single sample as well as comparing the microbial community composition between different sampling environments. Availability and implementation: max bin 2.0 is freely available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/ max bin under BSD license.

introduction recovering individual genomes from meta genomic samples remains a difficult task since sequences of all microbial populations are sampled simultaneously; however, it is a critical procedure to understand the functional potential of the uncultivated microbes in natural and engineered ecosystems. Binning is a process to classify unassembled reads or assembled contigs into discrete clusters, in which one bin represents one genome. Predominant binning approaches include clustering by nucleotide frequencies () or sequence coverages (). Automating the binning process provides a high throughput method to recover microbial genomes from meta genomes. We previously developed max bin (), an automated binn ning algorithm that classifies assembled genomic sequences from meta genomic datasets. Based on both tetra nucleotide frequencies and sequence coverages, max bin automatically estimates the bin number from the target meta genome classifies the sequences into genome bins, and measures the coverage levels for the binned genomes in the meta genome. In total, 19 and 26 draft genomes were recovered from two cell ulo lytic bacterial consortia enriched from compost using max bin (), demonstrating its utility in recovering the genomes of uncultivated microbes. Recovering genomes from multiple samples may improve the performance of binning algorithms. A differential coverage binning approach was developed to use the coverage information of the contigs from two meta genomic samples to bin genomes by plotting them on a two dimensional map (). Binning tools that employ multiple samples also demonstrated better performances when V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com two or more samples are co assembled and binned (). Here we describe max bin 2.0, the next generation of the max bin algorithm that recovers genomes from co assembly of multiple meta genomic samples. By exploiting contig coverage levels across multiple meta genomic datasets, max bin 2.0 achieves better binning results than binning individual meta genomic samples. In comparison to other binning algorithms that utilize multiple meta genomic datasets, max bin 2.0 is highly accurate in recovering genomes from simulated meta genomes. The ability of max bin 2.0 to measure the coverage levels of the genome bins also allows comparisons of the genome resolved microbial community composition across multiple samples.
