While many tools exist for performing enrichment analysis of transcript omic and proteomic data in order to interpret them in biological terms, almost no equivalent tools exist for meta bolo mic data. We present Metabolite Biological Role mb role a web server for carrying out over-representation analysis of biological and chemical annotations in arbitrary sets of metabolites (small chemical compounds) coming from meta bolo mic data of any organism or sample. Availability and Implementation: The web server is freely available at

introduction in general omics data require a secondary analysis in order to be understood in biological terms. In the case of transcript omics for example, the primary processing of the raw experimental data provides large lists of hundreds or thousands of genes which are over or under expressed in a given condition. These lists are not easily interpretable and they should be further processed in order to get insight into the underlying cause for that change in expression. The most widely used methodology for performing such analysis is termed 'functional enrichment' (). This analysis looks for keywords or descriptors over-represented in the set of genes of interest (e.g. those over-expressed) with respect to a background reference set (e.g. the whole genome or the set of genes printed in the array). Since originally proposed, a hundred of variations and different implementations of enrichment analysis have been proposed (). While transcript omic techniques provide information on the mRNA concentrations of the gene repertory of an organism, and proteomics on the respective protein concentrations, meta bolo mic techniques aim to massively measure the concentrations of the whole metabolite repertory of a given cell (). Hence, these methodologies complement each other in providing global pictures of the molecular components of living systems. Newer than transcript omics and proteomics, meta bolo mic techniques are still facing many technical problems. may be due to this, the number of tools for performing secondary analysis (i.e. biological interpretation) of meta bolo mic data is still scarce, e.g. met explore (). As far as we know, only one public tool

conclusion in this work we present mb role a tool to perform functional enrichment analysis on metabolic data from any organism or sample using sets of annotations of diverse nature. Only very recently the first tool for performing meta bolo mic enrichment analysis appeared: m sea (), which is restricted to human metabolites. Although focused on qualitative annotations, mb role is general and versatile enough to perform functional enrichment analysis in any meta bolo mic sample (including additional biological and chemical annotations for human metabolites), and hence complements existing software for the rising field of metabolomics.
