Gene duplication occurs via different modes such as seg-mental and single gene duplications. Transposed gene duplication, a specific form of single gene duplication, copies a gene from an ancestral chromosomal location to a novel location. mcs can x is a toolkit for detection and evolutionary analysis of gene co linearity. We have developed mcs can x transposed a software package to detect transposed gene duplications that occurred within different epochs, based on execution of mcs can x within and between related genomes. mcs can x transposed can be also used for integrative analysis of gene duplication modes for a genome and to annotate a gene family of interest with gene duplication modes. Availability: mcs can x transposed is freely available at

introduction gene duplication is a primary mechanism for increasing genetic complexity and diversity (). It has long been known that gene duplication occurs via different modes (). large scale gene duplications including whole genome duplication wg d and segmental duplication have occurred in different eukaryotic lineages such as fungi, plants and vertebrates (). single gene duplications, also widespread in eukaryotic genomes, by mechanisms include local (tandem or proximal) duplication, which creates two nearby duplicated genes (), and transposed duplication, which 'copies' a gene from an ancestral location to a novel (transposed) location via either DNA or rna based mechanisms (). Different modes of gene duplication may contribute differentially to the evolution of specific lineages (). The retention of duplicated genes following different modes of gene duplication is biased (). For example, in Arabidopsis thaliana, following w gds genes related to transcription factors, protein kinases and ribosomal proteins were preferentially retained; local duplicates are enriched for genes that encode membrane proteins and function in abiotic and biotic stress; gene families such as F-box, mads box nbs lrr and defensins are more likely to have transposed than others (). Moreover, different modes of gene duplication often show distinct evolutionary consequences (De Smet and Van). In rodents, transposed duplications show higher degrees of asymmetric sequence divergence than local duplications (). In a thaliana duplicated genes retained from single gene duplications, especially transposed duplication, are more likely to show rewiring of gene networks than those retained from w gds (Arabidopsis Interactome Mapping Consortium, 2011;). To study the evolutionary dynamics of duplicated genes, it is helpful to investigate gene duplication modes. Duplicated genes originating from wg d and segmental duplication can be obtained by using software for detection of gene co linearity (homologous genes are in corresponding chromosomal regions and conserved orders). However, to our knowledge, automated tools for detecting transposed gene duplications are not available. Transposed duplications in a genome, and the epochs during which they occurred, can be inferred based on co linearity conservation within and between related genomes (). mcs can is an algorithm to scan genomes to identify colinear homologs and duplicated chromosomal regions (). mcs can x is a toolkit for co linearity detection based on an adjusted mcs can (i.e. mcs can x algorithm and evolutionary analyses of identified co linearity (). Here, we present mcs can x transposed a software package based on execution of mcs can x within and between related genomes, for detecting transposed gene duplications, which occurred within different epochs, as well as integrative analysis of gene duplication modes or the Java SE Development Kit and 'libpng' should be pre-installed, respectively. The user is advised to read the readme txt file that provides detailed instructions on input file formats and command line options.

DESCRIPTION
