Motivation: The function of a protein depends not only on its structure but also on its dynamics. This is at the basis of a large body of experimental and theoretical work on protein dynamics. Further insight into the dynamics function relationship can be gained by studying the evolutionary divergence of protein motions. To investigate this, we need appropriate comparative dynamics methods. The most used dynamical similarity score is the correlation between the root mean square fluctuations rms f of aligned residues. Despite its usefulness, rms f is in general less evolutionarily conserved than the native structure. A fundamental issue is whether rms f is not as conserved as structure because dynamics is less conserved or because rms f is not the best property to use to study its conservation. Results: We performed a systematic assessment of several scores that quantify the (dis)similarity between protein fluctuation patterns. We show that the best scores perform as well as or better than structural dissimilarity, as assessed by their consistency with the SCOP classification. We conclude that to uncover the full extent of the evolutionary conservation of protein fluctuation patterns, it is important to measure the directions of fluctuations and their correlations between sites.

introduction proteins like all molecules undergo structural fluctuations in physiological conditions. Small and large structural changes directly related to protein functions occur at a wide range of time scales. Relatively fast local fluctuations are for example involved in induced fit ligand binding. Slower and more global fluctuations are important in complex coherent transitions of allosteric proteins and molecular machines. Such dynamics function relationships are at the basis of a large body of theoretical and experimental work on protein dynamics he nz ler. Concerted motions in protein structures are conditioned by the lowest energy modes of fluctuations around their equilibrium conformation. These modes can be obtained from simulation techniques, such as molecular dynamics (MD) simulations, where the modes are extracted by principal component analysis of the covariance matrix. Alternatively, and to avoid high computational costs, the normal modes can be calculated from an equilibrium structure (typically an experimental structure determined by X-ray scattering or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR)) using coarse grained representations and elastic network models en ms implying a harmonic approximation of the potential around the equilibrium structure. Several independent studies have shown that ENM modes and principal components obtained from MD simulations are in very good agreement, see e.g.,. For these reasons, ENM normal modes are commonly used to characterize protein dynamics and are convenient for studying large protein datasets. In addition, all oster is m has been successfully studied using en ms and it has been shown that functional conformational changes in general usually involve only a few normal modes, see for instance. This has for example been exploited to investigate allosteric mechanisms and predict effector binding sites () In contrast with sequence or structure, using dynamics in comparative computational studies has only recently started to emerge. Yet this is a field that has already contributed significantly to increasing our understanding of protein dynamics, and in particular its conservation through evolution and relation to function. In general, it has been shown that backbone fluctuations are evolutionarily conserved (). More detailed studies of particular folds or protein families have found that the lowest energy normal modes, or equivalently, the highest principal components of the fluctuation covariance matrix, are conserved for homologous proteins or even for non-homologous proteins with similar folds (). One obvious field of application is the adaptation of proteins to extreme temperatures and the associated changes in flexibility see and references therein. Among other applications reported are dynamics based alignments and detection of distant homologs *To whom correspondence should be addressed.() and analysis of evolutionary dynamics (). Comparing protein dynamics implies the choice of one or more properties that characterize the dynamics of the proteins and measures of the (dis)similarity of such properties. A number of properties and (dis)similarity measures have so far been reported to capture the conservation of protein dynamics. The simplest and most used property is the atomic root mean square fluctuations rms f (), which is comparable to X-ray b factors. Commonly, interpretations are restricted to only the fluctuations of the proteins carbons (C ). rms fs can be readily calculated from any ensemble of protein conformations, such as those obtained from MD simulations or Monte Carlo (MC) simulations. MD and MC simulations are computationally expensive and hard to parameterize. It is therefore convenient that multiple studies have shown that protein flexibility is well captured by the lowest energy normal modes, even when coarse grained approaches are used (). Several studies on comparative protein dynamics have taken advantage of this and are based on comparing protein flexibility as it is described by the proteins' normal modes (). Subspaces spanned by a few important normal modes or, equivalently, principal components of the fluctuation covariance matrix, have been compared using the root mean square inner product rms ip see for instance or the related rw sip (). A dynamic fingerprint matrix has been used to compare the backbone dynamics between PDZ domains (). A dynamic fingerprint matrix is analogous to a distance matrix for a single protein conformation, measuring variability of inter residue distances in an ensemble of conformations. Actually all the methods described for comparing protein dynamics can be seen as ways of comparing the conformational ensembles that characterise protein fluctuations. Each method focuses on some property, such as the rms f profile or the covariance matrix, and uses some measure of similarity or dissimilarity, such as the Spearman correlation or the rms ip for comparing this property between different proteins. Because of the variation in the properties and (dis)similarity measures that have been used on different sets of proteins, it is difficult to compare the results of these studies. Yet there are fundamental differences in the dynamical properties and (dis)similarity measures reported, and there is a need for knowing which one(s) should be used. For example, systematic studies of the evolutionary conservation of the fluctuation patterns are based largely on the similarity between rms f profiles (). These studies have demonstrated the evolutionary conservation of backbone fluctuations. However, rms f profiles do not utilize the full extent of information available from computational analysis of protein flexibility, either obtained by simulations or normal mode analysis. In addition, rms f profiles have not been shown to be more conserved than protein structure. Rather, previous studies thoroughly discuss the possibility that they are less conserved (), which we indeed find to be the case. This may be a practical issue of rms f not being the property that most adequately describes the fluctuation patterns or a fundamental one of protein dynamics being less evolutionarily conserved than protein structure. The purpose of this work is also to address this issue. To tackle the question of whether the rather low conservation of rms f profiles is a sign of low conservation of protein dynamics, we performed an assessment of different ways of comparing protein fluctuations. We consider protein domains with well defined native structures, for which the conformational ensembles that result from fluctuations are adequately described by multidimensional Gaussian distributions (). Such distributions around an equilibrium are completely characterized by the covariance matrices. The two most frequently used measures of dynamical similarity are the correlation between rms f profiles and the rms ip between the 10 principal components of the full covariance matrix. These can be thought of as two limiting cases: rms f considers only the overall magnitude of the fluctuation of each c atom whereas the full covariance matrix includes information on the anisotropy (the directionality) of such fluctuations and their correlations between sites. To disentangle the different contributions to dynamical similarity, we also study the correlation matrix, the isotropic covariance matrix and the isotropic correlation matrix. These matrices are compared using different measures of (dis)similarity. rms ip and rw sip have previously been used in the literature, and although they are well motivated by physical arguments they are not rigorously derived for the comparison of multidimensional Gaussian distributions. Therefore, we also introduce a new measure, ND B , based on the Bhattacharyya distance between probability density functions (). The performances of the properties and the (dis)similarity measures are evaluated by investigating their consistency with the SCOP classification at the superfamily level.
