Motivation: Compared with sequence and structure similarity, functional similarity is more informative for understanding the biological roles and functions of genes. Many important applications in computational molecular biology require functional similarity, such as gene clustering, protein function prediction, protein interaction evaluation and disease gene prioritization. Gene Ontology (GO) is now widely used as the basis for measuring gene functional similarity. Some existing methods combined semantic similarity scores of single term pairs to estimate gene functional similarity, whereas others compared terms in groups to measure it. However, these methods may make error prone judgments about gene functional similarity. It remains a challenge that measuring gene functional similarity reliably. Result: We propose a novel method called SORA to measure gene functional similarity in GO context. First of all, SORA computes the information content (IC) of a term making use of semantic specificity and coverage. Second, SORA measures the IC of a term set by means of combining inherited and extended IC of the terms based on the structure of GO. Finally, SORA estimates gene functional similarity using the IC overlap ratio of term sets. SORA is evaluated against five state of the art methods in the file on the public platform for col-laborative evaluation of go based semantic similarity measure. The carefully comparisons show SORA is superior to other methods in general. Further analysis suggests that it primarily benefits from the structure of GO, which implies expressive information about gene function. SORA offers an effective and reliable way to compare gene function. Availability: The web service of SORA is freely available at http://

introduction in recent years, gene functional similarity has become a main hotspot in biology research. Because it is important for a variety of applications such as gene clustering (), protein interaction prediction and evaluation (), gene function prediction () and disease gene prioritization (). Moreover, compared with sequence and structure similarity, functional similarity is more informative for understanding the biological roles and functions of genes. Gene Ontology (GO) is a controlled vocabulary of terms for describing behavior of genes and their products (), which is valuable to measure gene functional similarity. Gene and its products, which are collectively called gene to simplify in this article, are usually annotated with multiple terms. Functional similarity between genes can be inferred from the semantic relationships of their terms. It is considered that two genes are similar in function if their terms are similar in semantics. Accordingly, many methods based on semantic similarity have been put forward to estimate gene functional similarity. These methods could be generally classified into two categories: pairwise and group-wise (). Pairwise methods measure gene functional similarity through two steps. The first step is measuring semantic similarity scores of term pairs using term comparison techniques. The most typical term comparison techniques used by these methods are resnik s (1999), Lin's (1998), Jiang and conrath s (1998). The second step is computing gene functional similarity based on the semantic similarity scores calculated in the first step. Some rules such as average rule (AVG), maximum rule (MAX) and best match average rule (BMA) are used in the last step. The methods based on AVG regard the average of semantic similarity scores of all term pairs as gene functional similarity. The methods based on MAX take the maximal semantic similarity score of all term pairs as gene functional similarity. The methods based on BMA find all the best matches between the term sets and take the average of semantic similarity scores of these best matches as gene functional similarity. as made use of GO and AVG to estimate gene functional similarity, great efforts have been made in this field introduced methods like Lord's, but they used MAX and BMA rather than AVG. Meanwhile, many variants of aforementioned typical term comparison techniques like gras m (), wang s () and pozo s () were proposed. recently exploited dish in to update gras m and improved the semantic similarity between two terms by considering their common ancestors and descendants. Although pairwise methods are used widely for measuring gene functional similarity, they suffer from some limitations of combining rules. Methods based on AVG will underestimate gene functional similarity. For instance, if two genes both are annotated with two same terms, which are unrelated to each other, their functional similarity is 0.5 by these methods. In fact, they are exactly matched, and their functional similarity should be 1. Methods based on MAX will overestimate gene functional similarity. An example is that, the functional similarity between genes, which share common terms, is 1, regardless of the different terms of them. Unlike the methods aforementioned, methods based on BMA make a balance between them. Nevertheless, the pairwise methods are affected by how well the semantic similarity of single term pair is measured. The detailed discussion of these methods can be referred to several reviews (). Group-wise methods estimate gene functional similarity by comparing the terms in groups. These methods are categorized as foll wos set based graph based and vector based. set based methods () put terms and their ancestors into term set to denote gene firstly. Then, they compute semantic similarity score between the term sets using tversky s ratio model (). Finally, the semantic similarity score between the term sets is regarded as gene functional similarity. graph based methods make use of GO sub-graph to describe gene, in which nodes are terms and arcs represent relationships between terms. These methods estimate gene functional similarity by means of graph matching (). vector based methods represent each gene as a vector where each dimension corresponds to a term and 1 means the specific term occurs while 0 otherwise. They measure the gene functional similarity through calculating the cosine similarity of vector () or the probability of co occurrence of the terms (). To our knowledge, the group-wise methods also have some shortcomings. The set based and vector based methods ignore some valuable information implicit in the semantics and relationships of terms. The graph based methods are limited by the complexity of graph matching. In general, some error prone judgments about gene functional similarity may be raised by existing methods. In our views, it primarily results from the inappropriate computing of the information content (IC) of terms and unreasonable conversion from semantic similarity into functional similarity. For the effective comparison of gene function, we design a novel method based on Semantic Overlap Ratio of Annotations, namely SORA. Section 2 illustrates the details of our method, and the experimental results are shown and discussed in Section 3. Finally, Section 4 presents some concluding remarks.

conclusion in this article, we put forward a novel method, namely SORA, to measure gene functional similarity. It was evaluated against typical pairwise and group-wise methods on cess m. From the experimental results, SORA is a more effective and reliable way to estimate gene functional similarity than other tested methods. The success of SORA may be related to the following characteristics. First, SORA makes use of semantic specificity and coverage to measure the IC of the term. The term IC is determined by its location in the GO hierarchy rather than the number of proteins annotated with it. Thus, it can overcome the limitation of GOA corpus bias, which affects the corpus based approach heavily. With the help of both semantic specificity and coverage, our strategy could reflect the differences in semantics of terms more objectively than the structural IC. Second, SORA computes the IC of annotating term set by combining the inherited and extended IC of the terms based on the structure of GO. It can effectively avoid repeated summing of the shared IC of terms, which is the key point for estimating the IC of the term set correctly third SORA uses simple reciprocal ic or between the term sets as gene functional similarity. It is an appropriate description of functional relationship between genes. As discussed before, SORA measures semantic similarity in a single step, regardless of the number of annotations per protein, which is essential for combining similarities of term pairs in pairwise approach. This strategy has positive impacts on gene function comparison. Moreover, from the results of our experiments, all of the methods performed better with e terms than without. We consider that sometimes the e terms may provide new knowledge about protein function, which has not been confirmed by manual means. High quality computational inferring of annotations would promote the gene function comparison, which is one of our interests in the future the best results are in bold.
