Motivation: mechano transduction the ability to output a biochemical signal from a mechanical input is related to the initiation and progression of a broad spectrum of molecular events. Yet, the characterization of mechano transduction lacks some of the most basic tools as, for instance, it can hardly be recognized by enrichment analysis tools, nor could we find any pathway representation. This greatly limits computational testing and hypothesis generation on mechano transduction biological relevance and involvement in disease or physiological mechanisms. Results: We here present a molecular map of mechano transduction built in cell designer to warrant that maximum information is embedded in a compact network format. To validate the maps necessity we tested its redundancy in comparison with existing pathways, and to estimate its suffi-ciency, we quantified its ability to reproduce biological events with dynamic simulations, using Signaling Petri Networks. Availability and implementation: smb l language map is available in the Supplementary Data:

introduction mechano transduction is a ubiquitous phenomenon, the importance and complexity of which has not yet been fully captured. Yet, mechanical stresses are triggers for wound healing () and can initiate epithelial mesenchymal transition (EMT) in the presence of inflammation (). Both these phenomena are tightly related and important in the understanding of broader events like development (EMT Type 1), tissue regeneration/ healing (EMT Type 2) and tumorigenesis (EMT Type 3) (). Therefore, the understanding of these events for applications in regenerative and cancer medicine (), as well as in the treatment of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases (), is of crucial importance. In addition, given the possibility to induce mechanical stimuli in a relatively ample number of (accidental) ways (), understanding the extent of the phenomenon acquires practical relevance in numerous clinical areas. We observed, however, that, despite its importance, mechano transduction is poorly represented in terms of pathways and molecular maps, which are nevertheless crucial tools when medical research is performed in the frame of omic studies as it is the case for a growing number of maladies, trying to unravel the complexity of chronic inflammatory autoimmune diseases and cancers (). For this reason, we reconstructed the molecular map of mechano transduction using approved standard () which allows a detailed and yet compact description of the relations ongoing among molecules, easy sharing and editing of the map as well as topological analysis () and dynamic simulations (). Having built this map we were able to better quantify its overlap () with known pathways in Reactome () and Panther (). The non statistically significant overlaps with the pathways in these two databases imply minimum redundancy, confirming the need for a mechano transduction pathway representation. We then validated the map's ability to reproduce known information by dynamic simulations mimicking published experimental settings (). Given the successful tests run on the map's ability to mimic the effects of mechanical stress in relation to inflammation, relevant for example in rheumatic diseases, this network becomes an appropriate and flexible tool for the preliminary investigation in silico of therapeutic alternatives and side effects of mechanical stresses in inflammation related contexts.
