Motivation: Methylation of cytosine s in DNA is an important epigen-etic mechanism involved in transcriptional regulation and preservation of genome integrity in a wide range of eukaryotes. Immunoprecipita-tion of methylated DNA followed by hybridization to genomic tiling arrays me dip chip is a cost effective and sensitive method for methyl ome analyses. However, existing bioinformatics methods only enable a binary classification into unmethylated and methylated gen-omic regions, which limit biological interpretations. Indeed, DNA methylation levels can vary substantially within a given DNA fragment depending on the number and degree of methylated cytosine s. Therefore , a method for the identification of more than two methylation states is highly desirable. Results: Here, we present a three state hidden Markov model me dip hmm for analyzing me dip chip data. me dip hmm uses a higher order state transition process improving modeling of spatial dependencies between chromosomal regions, allows a simultaneous analysis of replicates and enables a differentiation between unmethy-lated, methylated and highly methylated genomic regions. We train me dip hmm using a Bayesian baum welch algorithm, integrating prior knowledge on methylation levels. We apply me dip hmm to the analysis of the Arabidopsis root methyl ome and systematically investigate the benefit of using higher order HMMs. Moreover, we also perform an in depth comparison study with existing methods and demonstrate the value of using me dip hmm by comparisons to current knowledge on the Arabidopsis methyl ome. We find that me dip hmm is a fast and precise method for the analysis of methyl ome data, enabling the identification of distinct DNA methylation levels. Finally, we provide evidence for the general applicability of me dip hmm by analyzing promoter DNA methylation data obtained for chicken.

introduction methylation of genomic DNA is one of the best characterized epigenetic modifications catalyzed by DNA methyltransferases that methyl ate cytosine s at their carbon 5 position (). In mammals, DNA methylation is found exclusively in the CpG dinucleotide context, except in embryonic stem cells, where a small proportion of cytosine s in other contexts (CpA, CpT and CpC) are also methylated. In plants, DNA methylation is found in symmetric CpG and c php g and in asymmetric cph ph contexts (H  A, T or C). Generally, DNA methylation plays important roles in regulation of gene expression () and silencing of transposons (;). Despite recent developments of next generation sequencing approaches for determining methyl omes at single base pair resolution (e.g.), methyl omes of different organisms or cell tissues are also frequently analyzed using whole genome tiling arrays (e.g.), which provide cost effective alternatives. Most array based studies are done based on methylated DNA immunoprecipitation coupled with hybridization to a tiling array me dip chip (). me dip chip enables to analyze the methyl ome of a genome at a resolution of few hundred base pairs, which in most applications is sufficient to draw biologically meaningful conclusions. The analysis of me dip chip data puts similar challenges on bioinformatics methods, as identified for the analysis of closely related array based chromatin immunoprecipitation data chip chip. Different methods for the analysis of chip chip data were proposed over the last years. Especially, methods based on hidden Markov models (HMMs) (e.g.) and on mixture models (e.g.) were shown to enable reliable predictions of chromosomal target regions of transcription factors or histone modifications. A common characteristic of all these methods is the modeling of two different populations of measurements to differentiate non enriched genomic regions from enriched ones. Main conceptual differences exist in the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. way of modeling dependencies between adjacent measurements on a chromosome, in handling of replicates and in training algorithms. From these methods, only approaches based on HMMs integrate dependencies between directly adjacent measurements on a chromosome. Some methods only enable a separate analysis of replicates (e.g.), whereas others try to improve the analysis by simultaneous modeling of replicates (e.g.). Mixture models are typically trained by specifically designed expectation maximization (EM) algorithms (). hmm based methods except tile map hmm () and HMMs by use a baum welch training (), representing a special case of an EM algorithm. tile map hmm is based on data dependent ad hoc settings, and HMMs by enable the integration of prior knowledge on measurements using a Bayesian baum welch algorithm. All these methods are useful tools for the analysis of chip chip data. Additionally, some methods like chip mix () and a mixture model approach by have already been applied to the analysis of me dip chip data. One general limitation of all these methods in the context of me dip chip data analyses is that they only enable a binary classification into unmethylated and methylated regions. me dip chip data is known to be more complex, showing differences in methylation levels of individual chromosomal regions as, for example, revealed for Arabidopsis thaliana having moderately methylated genes and highly methylated transposons (). To address that, a three state HMM specifically designed for the analysis of Arabidopsis me dip chip data has been developed in a companion work by. This approach uses arabidopsis specific ad hoc settings and enabled a better interpretation of me dip chip data using a classification of methylation states of genomic regions according to the underlying three states. Generally, organism specific ad hoc settings can only be hardly transferred to me dip chip data of other organisms. Thus, there is still a great demand of having a general method that is able to differentiate between different methylation levels without being dependent on a specific organism. Moreover, a systematic performance evaluation of different methods for analyzing DNA methylation data has not been carried out up to now, and current hmm based methods only focus on standard first order HMMs. Here, we present me dip hmm a method specifically designed for the analysis of me dip chip data. me dip hmm utilizes three states to differentiate between unmethylated, methylated and highly methylated regions overcoming limitations of typically used chip chip methods only enabling a binary classification into unmethylated and methylated regions. Additionally, me dip hmm can perform a simultaneous analysis of replicates and integrates prior knowledge on measurements to improve the identification of methylated genomic regions. Moreover, me dip hmm can also take advantage of higher order hidden Markov chains to improve spatial modeling of dependencies between neighboring regions. This has recently been found to improve the analysis of comparative genomics data () and provides a valuable option for improving the analysis of me dip chip data. We apply our me dip hmm to the analysis of the Arabidopsis root methyl ome and systematically evaluate the influence of using higher order Markov chains on the identification of methylated genomic regions. We further perform an in depth comparison study to widely used existing methods and demonstrate advantages of using me dip hmm based on comparisons to current knowledge on the Arabidopsis methyl ome. We also show that me dip hmm can be applied to non arabidopsis data by performing an additional study on promoter DNA methylation data obtained for chicken ().
