We have developed med pie a software package for preparing medical message board corpora and extracting patient mentions and statistics for drugs, herbs and adverse effects experienced from them. The package is divided into web crawling html cleaning de identification and information extraction modules. It also includes a sample controlled vocabulary of drugs, herbs and adverse effect terms.

introduction medical message boards mm bs are sites where patients with similar conditions seek and exchange information by posting messages to threads, collections of messages with similar topics. mm bs can contain a very large number of posts (e.g. over a million messages on http://www.breastcancer.org/), are often freely available and contain patient opinions and experiences that would be potentially useful to clinicians and researchers. However, due to the large number of messages in many mm bs reviewing each message by hand would be prohibitively slow. In addition, MMB text frequently contains spelling and grammatical errors that may hinder relevant medical information from being automatically extracted as well as personal identifiers such as MMB users' phone numbers, e-mail address and personal names that should be removed before using these data for research. In order to overcome these hurdles, we present med pie a software package that can be used to generate a de identified corpus of MMB posts and then extract information from it. Although researchers have examined message boards and other online communities (), they do not generally make their framework available to others. We have found med pie useful as a first stage in collecting and analyzing mm bs and believe it could facilitate further research of online communities such as mm bs (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

description the med pie software package consists of four modules written in Python: web crawling html cleaning de identification and information extraction. The package relies on and includes the CRF++ toolkit (http://crfpp.sourceforge.net/), the beautiful soup XML parser (http://www.crummy.com/software/ beautiful soup the porter stemmer implementation from nl tk (http://www.nltk.org/) and a slightly modified Python implementation of Fisher's exact test (http://pypi.python.org/pypi/ fisher).
