mega hit is a NGS de novo assembler for assembling large and complex meta genomics data in a time and cost efficient manner. It finished assembling a soil meta genomics dataset with 252 Gbps in 44.1 and 99.6 h on a single computing node with and without a graphics processing unit, respectively. mega hit assembles the data as a whole, i.e. no pre-processing like partitioning and normalization was needed. When compared with previous methods on assembling the soil data, mega hit generated a three time larger assembly, with longer contig N50 and average contig length; furthermore, 55.8% of the reads were aligned to the assembly, giving a fourfold improvement. Availability and implementation: The source code of mega hit is freely available at https://github. com v out cn mega hit under GPLv3

introduction next generation sequencing technologies have offered new opportunities to study meta genomics and understand various microbial communities such as human guts, rumen and soil. Due to the lack of reference genomes, de novo assembly of meta genomics data (short reads) is a beneficial and almost inevitable step for meta genomics analysis (). This step is, however, constrained by the heavy requirement of computational resources, especially for large and complex datasets encountered in environmental meta genomics (). The soil meta genomics dataset recently published by Howe et al. comprises 252 Gbp even after trimming low quality bases. The dataset was successfully assembled with preprocessing steps including partitioning and digital normalization. At present no de novo assembler can assemble the data as a whole using a feasible amount of computer memory. Estimated memory requirement for SOAPdenovo2 () and id baud () to assemble the soil data is at least 4 TB. As the volume of meta genomics data keeps growing, we are motivated to develop mega hit an assembler that can assemble large and complex meta genomics data in a time and cost efficient manner, especially on a single node server (current maximum memory capacity 768 GB for a 2 socket server).
