Motivation: A wide range of fundamental biological processes are mediated by membrane proteins. Despite their large number and importance, less than 1% of all 3D protein structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank are of membrane proteins. This is mainly due to the challenges of crystallizing such proteins or performing NMR spectroscopy analyses. All the more so, there is only a small number of membrane protein protein complexes with known structure. Therefore, developing computational tools for docking membrane proteins is crucial. Numerous methods for docking globular proteins exist, however few have been developed especially for membrane proteins and designed to address docking within the lipid bilayer environment. Results: We present a novel algorithm, mem dock for docking a helical membrane proteins which takes into consideration the lipid bilayer environment for docking as well as for refining and ranking the docking candidates. We show that our algorithm improves both the docking accuracy and the candidates ranking compared to a standard protein protein docking algorithm. Availability and Implementation

introduction analysis of the complete genomic sequences for several organisms indicates that 30% of all genes code for membrane proteins (). Due to their central role in a wide range of fundamental biological processes, membrane proteins constitute around 60% of approved drug targets (). However, despite their large number and importance and even though there is an increasing number of solved membrane protein structures, they are still under-represented in the Protein Data Bank (PDB)(). In July 2015 only 1722 PDB entries were of membrane proteins (http://blanco.biomol.uci.edu/ mp struc. This is owing to the difficulties involved in expressing, purifying and crystallizing these proteins (). In light of this deficit of empirical information, it is particularly important to develop efficient computational methods for predicting the structure, interactions and docking of membrane proteins. Docking algorithms aim to predict the atomic resolution structure of a protein protein complex given the structure of the separate proteins. Binding of two proteins to form a complex often results in conformational changes of the proteins. Therefore, there is a distinction between docking of 'bound' and 'unbound' protein structures. The conformation of the 'bound' structures is identical to their conformation in the complex, whereas the 'unbound' structure conformations are either the native conformation of the separate proteins in solution or their conformation in other complexes. Docking 'unbound' structures is a significantly more difficult task, since, as mentioned above, the 'unbound' proteins might undergo conformational changes upon binding ().The pipeline of docking algorithms usually includes three steps i rigid docking; (ii) conformational refinement and (iii) docking candidates re ranking by an energy score (). Numerous methods exist for the first step of rigid protein docking (). These include Fast Fourier Transform based methods z dock shape complementarity search by Geometric Hashing patch dock monte carlo based algorithms () or information driven methods (e.g. HADDOCK,). In the first step, of rigid body docking, minor steric clashes between the receptor and the ligand structures are penalized liberally, thus tolerating conformational inaccuracies, which usually do not affect the protein backbone, but could have a significant impact on the side chain conformations. Consequently, the calculated energy value of a docking candidate could be high even if it is a near native one. Thus, it is necessary in the next step of refinement to remove steric clashes from the structures by exploring the conformational space of the side chains, while allowing minor movements in the backbone, as well (). All refinement methods use energy based scoring functions for re ranking the candidate complexes in the last step. Membrane proteins have special properties which are determined by their hydrophobic environment. Since the membrane imposes strong folding constraints, the polar groups of the polypeptide backbone of the membrane protein participate in intra-molecular hydrogen bonds. This is typically accomplished through two structural motifs: the membrane spanning alpha helix bundle and the beta barrel (). One of the advantages of membrane protein modeling is the smaller conformational search space which includes those two structural motifs. In the past decade there was a vast improvement in membrane protein modeling as outlined in a recent comprehensive review () Developing algorithms for membrane proteins docking is important for understanding various fundamental biological processes and, especially, for drug design performed a systematic study on the suitability of some commonly used protein docking software designed for globular proteins, for modeling complexes of membrane proteins. Their results indicate that these algorithms can be used for obtaining relatively reliable models of membrane protein complexes. However, the protein protein docking results for membrane proteins are worse than corresponding results for water soluble proteins. They also conclude that the gramm x algorithm () may be considered the best performing algorithm for membrane proteins. Kaczor et al. explain gramm x success by noting that it takes into account evolutionary conservation in its scoring function developed an algorithm for predicting the quaternary structure of a helical multi homo oligomers based on the z dock 2.1 docking suite (). In a post processing step they filter the results which do not conform with the expected orientation of the transmembrane segments visa vis the membrane lipid bilayer also developed a protocol for modeling GPCR dimers. In the protocol each monomer is rotated around its z axis by increments of p/6 resulting in 144 dimer models compatible with membrane integration. In the next step, Rosetta protein protein docking () is applied using local refinement mode, resulting in a final population of 1440 dimer models. The obtained dimer models are evaluated according to a set of scoring factors especially tailored for GPCR. The scoring function contains up to 11 different parameters, such as: potential energy, electrostatic interaction energy, free energy of binding, energy of hydrogen bond interactions, evolutionary conservation score, shape complementarity and more. The protocol was evaluated on six GPCR dimers. The results showed a correct indication for all six dimers developed a tool, mp dock which combines rosetta mp with the rosetta dock algorithm. The algorithm conducts a local docking refinement of protein protein complex hypotheses. mp dock was tested on five protein protein complexes. Out of 1000 models for each complex the scoring function was able to rank the native like as a top scoring in about half of the targets. recently developed an algorithm for docking membrane proteins. In their work they use the rigid body docking algorithm dock pier without adaptation to the membrane environment. Then the results are re ranked with a new score developed for membrane proteins in which a new energy term is added representing the membrane transfer energy. The algorithm was applied to a benchmark of 30 protein complexes and was able to obtain a near native structure in the top ten solutions for 36.7% of the complexes. In the current paper we present an integrated docking algorithm which includes the docking, refinement and re ranking stages designed for docking within the membrane. Our docking algorithm, mem dock attempts to customize all three docking steps to the lipid bilayer environment. The first step of our algorithm is based on the patch dock algorithm (). patch dock is an efficient rigid 'unbound' soft docking algorithm, which ranks docking candidates mainly by geometric shape complementarity between the docked proteins. In the modified patch dock mem patch dock the hypothesized placement of the docked proteins is enforced to be in a membrane consistent orientation. Thus, the change in the angle formed between the protein helical axis and the membrane normal in the apo and holo forms of the protein is constrained. Likewise, the shift in the position of the protein helices along the membrane normal can not change significantly as a result of the docking. In the second step, a refinement algorithm is used, based on the fiber dock algorithm (), which conducts flexible refinement of docking candidates. The method models both side chain and backbone flexibility and performs rigid body optimization of the ligand orientation. In the modified fiber dock mem fiber dock perturbations of the ligand are enforced to be in a membrane consistent orientation, similarly to the rigid docking step. Finally, the refined models are re scored and re ranked according to an energy function that was designed specifically for membrane proteins. We evaluated our algorithm on an a helical membrane proteins dataset and show that it performs well and much faster when docking membrane proteins compared with the original algorithms designed for the docking of globular proteins.

discussion we introduced an algorithm with excellent performance for docking and refinement of a helical membrane proteins. This improvement is achieved by introducing sampling and scoring specific for membrane proteins. First, we enforce membrane consistent orientation in both docking and refinement steps as an integral part of the algorithms rather than a post-processing step. Second, the refined docking candidates undergo re ranking using a scoring function formulated from combination of knowledge based potentials derived from statistical analyses of known 3D structures of a helical membrane proteins and the fire dock scoring function terms which are based on the binding forces between the receptor and the ligand. The algorithm was applied to a benchmark set of 21 'bound' proteins structures and 11 'unbound' protein structures. In 33% of the 'bound' benchmark set and 36% of the 'unbound' benchmark set an 'Acceptable' docking candidate was ranked at the top (). In 71% of the 'bound' benchmark set and 45% of the 'unbound' benchmark set an 'Acceptable' docking candidate was predicted among the top 20 ranking results (). Thus, the algorithm is shown to perform well both on the 'bound' and on the 'unbound' examples. The algorithm significantly improves docking accuracy and the speed compared to the standard docking. A web server for the mem dock algorithm is being currently implemented and will be available at http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/ mem dock
