Motivation: Advances in high throughput sequencing have resulted in rapid growth in large, high quality datasets including those arising from transcription factor (TF) chips eq experiments. While there are many existing tools for discovering TF binding site motifs in such datasets, most web based tools can not directly process such large datasets. Results: The meme chip web service is designed to analyze chips eq peak regions short genomic regions surrounding declared chips eq peaks. Given a set of genomic regions, it performs (i) ab initio motif discovery, (ii) motif enrichment analysis, (iii) motif visualization, (iv) binding affinity analysis and (v) motif identification. It runs two complementary motif discovery algorithms on the input data meme and dre me and uses the motifs they discover in subsequent visualization, binding affinity and identification steps. meme chip also performs motif enrichment analysis using the AME algorithm, which can detect very low levels of enrichment of binding sites for TFs with known dna binding motifs. Importantly, unlike with the MEME web service, there is no restriction on the size or number of uploaded sequences, allowing very large chips eq datasets to be analyzed. The analyses performed by meme chip provide the user with a varied view of the binding and regulatory activity of the chip ed TF, as well as the possible involvement of other dna binding TFs.

introduction the genomic regions identified as bound by a transcription factor (TF) in a chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing chips eq experiment are a rich source of information about transcriptional regulation. These regions are defined by mapping the sequence tags to the genome, which identifies 'peaks' of (direct or indirect) binding by the chip ed factor typically to a resolution of about 100 bp. This high resolution is of obvious utility for identifying which genes a TF regulates, but the genomic regions surrounding the peaks are typically highly enriched for binding sites of the chip ed TF and other TFs. Hence, these regions can be mined * To whom correspondence should be addressed. computationally to understand the roles, interactions and functions of the chip ed TF and its regulatory partners. We describe here a web service called meme chip that automatically performs five types of analysis on chips eq regions i Ab initio motif discovery identifies novel sequence patterns (motifs) in the chips eq regions that may be due to TF binding sites. (ii) Motif enrichment analysis looks for enrichment of known TF dna binding motifs in the data. (iii) Motif visualization displays the relative locations and binding strengths of TF binding sites in the input regions. (iv) Motif binding strength analysis computes an estimate of the total dna binding affinity of each input region for the TF corresponding to each discovered motif. (v) Motif identification compares the ab initio motifs to known TF dna binding motifs. The output of meme chip is thus a multifaceted view of the identities, prevalence, dna binding patterns and potential interactions of the chip ed TF and its regulatory partners. Ab initio motifs discovered in chips eq data give an unbiased view of the in vivo dna binding propensities of TFs binding alone or in protein complexes. meme chip employs two motif discovery algorithms with complementary characteristics. The MEME () algorithm uses expectation maximization (EM) to discover probabilistic models of dna binding by single TFs or TF complexes. MEME motifs can provide accurate thermodynamic models of TF binding. MEME is complemented by dre me (), which uses a simpler, non probabilistic model (regular expressions) to describe the short binding motifs characteristic of single eukaryotic TFs. dre me is often able to detect very short motifs that are not found by MEME. meme chip also attempts to identify the motifs found by MEME and dre me by comparing them to a database of known TF motifs using the TOMTOM () algorithm. Motif discovery thus identifies novel binding motifs and TFs that are regulatory partners of the chip ed TF. Motif enrichment analysis can identify additional regulatory motifs whose enrichment in the chips eq regions is too slight to be detected by ab initio motif discovery. It achieves higher sensitivity by limiting the search for motifs to a set of previously known TF dna binding motifs. meme chip uses the AME () algorithm for motif enrichment analysis. For motif visualization and binding strength analysis, meme chip utilizes the MAST () and am a () algorithms, respectively. MAST uses a threshold based approach to identify a putative set of nonoverlapping binding sites in the chips eq regions for all the motifs discovered by MEME (or dre me. This allows associations among the locations of the different motifs (TF binding sites) to be seen by eye. The am a algorithm computes a thermodynamic estimate of the average binding affinity of the TF (as described by the motif) for the each chips eq sequence region.
