genome wide expression analysis can result in large numbers of clusters of co-expressed genes. Although there are tools for ab initio discovery of transcription factor binding sites, most do not provide a quick and easy way to study large numbers of clusters. To address this, we introduce a web tool called meme lab. The tool wraps MEME (an ab initio motif finder), providing an interface for users to input multiple gene clusters, retrieve promoter sequences, run motif finding and then easily browse and condense the results, facilitating better interpretation of the results from large scale datasets. Availability: meme lab is freely accessible at: http://wsbc.warwick. acu kw sbc tools web page
introduction analyzing microarray expression data using cluster analysis is a common and frequently performed task in functional genomics. Typically, a large number of clusters are produced, each containing a large number of genes (e.g. 50 clusters of 200 genes). Each cluster is predicted to contain a set of genes that are co-expressed and as such would be expected to share common regulatory features, such as transcription factor binding sites tfbs s. There are established methods and tools for predicting known tfbs s (such as Athena, O'), but ab initio motif discovery remains an important aspect to consider. Several tools exist to perform this task, and MEME in particular is a well recognized suite for motif discovery (), but the MEME web suite offers limited usage on large numbers of clusters and subsequent navigation and post-processing of the results. macha nick and Bailey (2012) provide a web tool meme chip that is specifically tailored towards chips eq data, providing a useful expansion in MEME's functionality. Here, we describe a web tool called meme lab (MEME Launcher and Browser), which wraps the MEME tool in ways that are ideally suited to the task of ab initio motif finding in co-expressed gene clusters: (i) users can input multiple gene clusters at once. (ii) Promoter sequences are automatically retrieved from a local database or from a user specified file. (iii) MEME is run on all clusters simultaneously, and the results are presented in a condensed and navigable format. (iv) Identified motifs are compared for similarity with known TFBS motifs.
