The significance and function of posttranscriptional cytosine methylation in polya rna attracts great interest but is still poorly understood. high throughput sequencing of RNA treated with bisulfite rna bs seq or subjected to enrichment techniques like az aip or mi clip enables transcriptome wide studies of this particular modification at single base pair resolution. However, to date, there are no specialized software tools available for the analysis of rna bs seq or az aip data. Therefore, we developed merant k the first publicly available tool kit which addresses the special demands of high throughput RNA cytosine methylation data analysis. It provides fast and easy to use splice aware bisulfite sequencing read mapping, comprehensive methylation calling and identification of differentially methylated cytosine s by statistical analysis of single and multi replicate experiments. Application of merant k to rna bs seq or az aip data produces accurate results in standard compliant formats. Availability and Implementation: merant k source code and test data are released under the GNU GPLv3þ license and are available at

introduction modifications of DNA by methylation and hydroxy methylation of the carbon 5 atom of cytosine (m 5 C, hm 5 C) are well established epigenetic mechanisms that affect the activity state of genomic regions. In contrast to the relatively limited array of DNA modifications, RNA can be target to 100 chemically distinct modifications, roughly two thirds of which are methylation s (). Most of these RNA modifications were studied on rRNAs and tRNAs, where m 5 C plays a role in structural and metabolic stabilization (). Surprisingly, little is known about the significance and function of m 5 C in pol yarn as. Recently, one of the first studies to globally evaluate RNA cytosine methylation showed that m 5 C occurred throughout the human transcriptome in coding and non-coding RNAs (). Moreover, cytosine methylation in the long non-coding RNAs hot air and XIST was found to have the ability to interfere with rna protein interaction (). RNA m 5 C modifications can be detected by bisulfite treatment which converts all unmethylated cytosine s into uracil s leaving methylated cytosine s unaffected. An alternative technique is the enrichment of RNAs covalently bound to rna methyltransferases (RMT) that were trapped on their substrate either by the pre cence of 5aza cytidine az aip () or by mutating the catalytic center of the respective RMT mi clip (). When these methods are combined with high throughput sequencing it is possible to obtain either global rna bs seq or enzyme specific az aip mi clip m 5 c modified transcriptome s. To date, numerous software tools are available for the analysis of dna bs seq data (), but to the best of our knowledge none of these tools supports the analysis of V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com data from rna bs seq or az aip which causes a C to G conversion at the rmt bound cytosine. Aligners and methylation callers specific for DNA methylation data are of limited use when dealing with RNA. The major shortcomings are due to the fact that transcripts may exist in multiple different splice forms and that they may be transcribed from either of the two DNA strands. At present, a few methylation studies using rna bs seq and az aip have been published. However, the analysis strategies used in these works are time consuming and cumbersome involving many steps utilizing many different in part commercial tools and on top they require the development of custom programs (). To address these issues and improve the RNA m 5 C data analysis, we developed merant k a tool kit that provides programs for fast mapping of high throughput rna bs seq data and enables accurate identification of methylated and differentially methylated cytosine s from bs seq and az aip experiments at single base pair resolution.

conclusion previously proposed analysis approaches for RNA cytosine methylation data consist of many time consuming non automated steps involving the usage of different tools and still demand writing of custom programs. merant k solves these issues and enables easy, time saving and accurate analysis of rna bs seq and az aip experiments.
