We present a Mendelian randomization (MR) pipeline (MeRP) to facilitate rapid, causal inference analysis through automating key steps in developing and analyzing genetic instruments obtained from publicly available data. Our tool uses the National Human Genome Research Institute catalog of associations to generate instrumental variable trait files and provides methods for filtering of potential confounding associations as well as linkage disequilibrium. MeRP generates estimated causal effect scores via a mr score analysis using summary data for disease end-points typically found in the public domain. We utilize our pipeline to develop genetic instruments for seven traits and evaluate potential causal relationships with two disease endpoints, observing two putatively causal associations between blood pressure and bone mineral density with type 2 diabetes. Our tool emphasizes the importance of careful but systematic screening of large datasets for discovery and systematic follow-up. Availability and implementation: MeRP is a free, open source project and can be downloaded at

introduction the surge in genome wide association studies g was has generated an abundance of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with a wide range of phenotypes, resulting in a rapidly growing body of research employing a statistical method utilizing SNPs as instrumental variables to draw causal inference between traits and diseases (; her n n and). This method, termed Mendelian randomization (MR), represents a genetic version of the randomized control trial where genetic variants are selected to correspond exclusively to a biomarker for which a causal estimate to a disease outcome is desired. The approach can address confounding by the fact alleles as sort randomly at meiosis and also addresses reverse causality by the fact that disease states do not influence germline genetic variation. In 2013 alone, 115 mr related studies were published. Thus, the limiting factor is no longer obtaining results from association studies but rather how we take advantage of these data efficiently and appropriately in MR studies today and in the future. As the number of g was and high throughput sequencing studies extends the catalog of disease and trait associations, tools primed to take advantage of these data as they are produced will be essential. The research community performing MR studies would be well advantaged by a computational pipeline that facilitates the use of the largest datasets available, supporting the labor intensive process of curating data, streamlining the selection of genetic variants at an appropriate level of linkage disequilibrium (LD) with one another (if combined into a genetic score) and finally evaluated for association with confounding factors. Such a tool would generate hypotheses that could help facilitate rapid transmission of discoveries to the research and ultimately, clinical communities, after sufficient evidence of causality has been accrued. To address these aims, we present MeRP, a computational pipeline to facilitate MR studies at high throughput.

discussion we present MeRP as a tool to help facilitate the labor intensive steps in instrument creation for MR studies, and one valid, score based analytical approach to summarize causal association. One caveat of the score based approach is the concern of heterogeneity, as multiple genetic mechanisms or pathways may impact the trait of interest, and subsequently the outcome, differently. However, this hypothesis of heterogeneity is itself a testable one for multiple variants aggregated in a score, one that can be evaluated given the output from MeRP. With this output, MeRP also empowers users to investigate individual variants selected in their instrument, potentially applying prior biological knowledge to their inference, which may be critical to the longer term success of such studies. It is critical to emphasize that the evidence generated in an initial screen from MeRP adds but one piece of evidence to establish causality. An overwhelmingly compelling case for causality must involve further statistical analysis, studies in model systems, key insights into biological mechanisms and, ideally, evidence from interventional studies where applicable: a case built for LDL-C and CHD was done in precisely this way over the course of more than 100 years of directed research effort. Thus, we suggest that data mining and filtering strategies provided by MeRP are themselves not to be taken lightly and serve as the first piece of evidence to focus on potentially meaningful relationships that undoubtedly require additional lines of evidence to provide casual evidence beyond a reasonable doubt.
