Motivation: Medical Subject Headings mesh s are used by National Library of Medicine (NLM) to index almost all citations in MEDLINE, which greatly facilitates the applications of biomedical information retrieval and text mining. To reduce the time and financial cost of manual annotation, NLM has developed a software package, Medical Text Indexer (MTI), for assisting MeSH annotation , which uses k nearest neighbors (KNN), pattern matching and indexing rules. Other types of information, such as prediction by MeSH classifiers (trained separately), can also be used for automatic MeSH annotation. However, existing methods can not effectively integrate multiple evidence for MeSH annotation.

introduction as a controlled vocabulary, Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/mesh/meshhome.html) is developed by National Library of Medicine (NLM) for indexing almost all citations in the largest biomedical literature database, MEDLINE (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/medline.html), which currently covers more than 5600 journals world-wide (NCBI Resource). The documents, books and audiovisuals recorded in NLM are also cataloged by MeSH. MeSH is organized hierarchically and updated annually with minor changes. By 2014, there are 27,149 MeSH main headings ((http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/mesh.html). On average each citation in MEDLINE is annotated by 13 MHs to describe its content. In addition to indexing, MeSH has been widely used to facilitate many other tasks in biomedical information retrieval and text mining, such as query expansion () and document clustering (). Accurate MeSH annotation is thus very important for biomedical researchers for knowledge discovery. Currently indexing MEDLINE is mainly performed by a number of highly qualified NLM staff and contractors, who review the full text of each article and assign suitable MeSH headings.

discussion the fundamental idea of mesh labeler is to integrate multiple types of diverse evidence for boosting the performance of indexing MeSH. mesh labeler is highly effective, showing nearly 10% improvement in both m if and EBF over MTI, the current cutting edge tool provided by NLM. The high performance of mesh labeler is derived from the diversity and accuracy of the evidence, which complement each other. mesh labeler uses five types of evidence: global evidence, local evidence, pattern matching, MeSH dependency and indexing rules (from MTI). The first two types of evidence are obtained by machine learning, meaning that they can be captured from the training data. The global evidence is from prediction models trained by using all instances, while the local evidence uses only similar instances to the given test instance. Pattern matching is a string matching technique that only uses the test instance. In contrast, the last two types of evidence are very different from the other evidence types. MeSH dependency is obtained from the correlation between MeSH, which requires scanning over the whole MEDLINE database. The number of combinations by different MHs is huge, which makes directly incorporating the information on different MeSH combinations very hard, and no existing methods have considered MeSH dependency. We emphasize that our strategy of capturing MeSH dependency is very efficient, resulting in high performance improvements, as shown in our experiments. We further stress that mesh labeler is the first method to incorporate MeSH pair correlations directly. Indexing rules from MTI are also very different from the other evidence, because they are human domain knowledge and parts of them would be very difficult to learn from data. mesh labeler integrates all these different types of diverse evidence, enabling mesh labeler to achieve high performance for MeSH recommendation. We showed three groups of evaluation metrics, i.e. EBF, MaF and m if. Both m if and EBF can be higher by focusing on frequent MHs more, while MaF can be higher by considering all MHs more equally. mesh labeler has been developed to improve the performance of m if since m if was a major metric in bio asq challenge. For example, prediction scores of different MeSH classifiers have different accuracies (even if their values are the same, as shown in our experiments), and other methods, like meta labeler have to select infrequent MHs (because of high prediction scores) more than frequent MHs. To overcome this problem, we thus incorporate the idea of score normalization in mesh labeler resulting in high improvement of m if. Also the trade-off between m if and MaF is an issue in evaluation. For example, mesh number focused on a small number of MeSH terms with high precision, and achieved a significant increase in m if suffering from a slight decrease in MaF.

conclusion we have presented mesh labeler which achieved the best performance in the 2014 bio asq challenge, a competition of large scale biomedical semantic indexing. Our experiments have shown that mesh labeler achieved 9% increase in m if over MTI, the current leading edge solution provided by NLM. The most important idea of mesh labeler is to integrate five types of diverse evidence: global evidence, local evidence, pattern matching, MeSH dependency and indexing rules. In addition, mesh labeler has numerous features, such as MeSH score normalization and MeSH dependency, which have not been implemented in any other methods and greatly contributed to the better performance of mesh labeler. These new features might shed light on developing efficient algorithms for other multi label classification problems with a large amount of training instances, such as ontology annotation. In the future, it would be interesting to further explore the limitations of mesh labeler and improve the indexing performance by combining other different types of information or evidence with the current framework, such as the prediction results of SVM.
