Motivation: Macromolecular structures and interactions are intrinsically heterogeneous, temporally adopting a range of configurations that can confound the analysis of data from bulk experiments. To obtain quantitative insights into heterogeneous systems, an ensemble based approach can be employed , in which predicted data computed from a collection of models is compared to the observed experimental results. By simultaneously fitting orthogonal structural data (e.g. small angle X-ray scattering, nuclear magnetic resonance residual dipolar couplings, dipolar electron electron resonance spectra), the range and population of accessible macromolecule structures can be probed. Results: We have developed MESMER, software that enables the user to identify ensembles that can recapitulate experimental data by refining thousands of component collections selected from an input pool of potential structures. The MESMER suite includes a powerful graphical user interface (GUI) to streamline usage of the command line tools, calculate data from structure libraries and perform analyses of conformational and structural heterogeneity. To allow for incorporation of other data types, modular Python plugins enable users to compute and fit data from nearly any type of quantitative experimental data. Results: Conformational heterogeneity in three macromolecular systems was analyzed with MESMER, demonstrating the utility of the streamlined, user friendly software. Availability and implementation: https://code.google.com

introduction changes in macromolecular structure over a range of timescales are intrinsic to many biological processes, and by definition produce structural heterogeneity within a defined time frame he nz ler. Such structural heterogeneity plays a role in functions as diverse as molecular recognition (), catalysis (), transport (), regulation () and all oster y (). This heterogeneity presents unique challenges for structural characterization, as analytical tools that probe molecular structure involve measurements over defined time windows, thereby providing at the extremes either snapshots reflecting the uniqueness of the populations, or a weighted average of the existing configurations. A further complication is that many functionally important states are short lived or lowly populated, existing amidst a diverse background of other states and intermediates (). Therefore, in order to understand the mechanistic details of biological processes, it is often necessary to appreciate the range of structural configurations adopted by the system. One approach to describing these configurations and their abundance is to fit experimental structural data against the predicted values obtained from ensembles of possible structures. ensemble based V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 1951doi: 101093 bioinformatics btv079
discussion obtaining meaningful results from ensemble based approaches is contingent upon various factors. These include the discriminating power of the input data, the proper sampling of conformational space and the selection of an appropriate ensemble size. If the ensemble size is too small, insufficient structural variability will typically result in poor fits, while overly large ensembles run the risk of over-fitting the experimental data and potentially including unreasonable components. Indeed, the ensemble size embodies the difference between 'minimal ensemble' and other ensemble based techniques. Some methods that employ larger ensembles and thus greater computational requirements, such as EROS () typically avoid over-fitting by using statistical methods, such as maximum entropy which restricts excessive optimization of ensemble component concentrations contributions. However, even these approaches are subject to significant pitfalls, most notably that insufficient or inaccurate sampling of conformational space may result in unnecessarily large ensembles. In the other extreme, it is possible that an artificially small set of component structures may provide acceptable fits to experimental data while insufficiently describing the system's true heterogeneity. Both concerns may be partially addressed by cross validation with different types of experimental data, and examination of the variability present in multiple converged solutions. MESMER facilitates the process of finding structural ensembles that can recapitulate data obtained from heterogeneous solutions. We have validated MESMER by investigating a variety of case studies previously shown to exhibit structural heterogeneity. Despite this heterogeneity, the averaged experimental data available from these systems were sufficient to report on specific structural characteristics, providing new insights into the systems' function. MESMER introduces several innovations that may find utility in similar ensemble based methods, streamlining much of the necessary workflow while retaining flexibility. mesmer s GUI is intended to enable a wide user base to readily and intuitively investigate complicated structural heterogeneity, while its extensible and modular nature enables advanced users to incorporate new experiments and analytical techniques.
