Frameshift (FS) prediction is important for analysis and biological interpretation of meta genomic sequences. Since a genomic context of a short meta genomic sequence is rarely known, there is not enough data available to estimate parameters of species specific statistical models of protein coding and non-coding regions. The challenge of ab initio FS detection is, therefore, two fold: (i) to find a way to infer necessary model parameters and (ii) to identify positions of frame shifts (if any). Here we describe a new tool, meta gene tack which uses a heuristic method to estimate parameters of sequence models used in the FS detection algorithm. It is shown on multiple test sets that the meta gene tack FS detection performance is comparable or better than the one of earlier developed program frag genes can. Availability and implementation: meta gene tack is available as a web server at

introduction meta genomic sequences are obtained from environmental microbial communities. The short sequences are usually sequenced using next generation sequencing (NGS) platforms such as Roche 454 and Illumina or traditional Sanger sequencing. Each platform produces reads of different lengths and has different error models. 454 sequencing platforms produce reads of $450 nt; errors are usually insertions and deletions (indels) in homopolymer regions. Illumina platform currently generates sequences of length $150 nt with substitutions constituting almost all errors. Sanger sequencing produces reads that may contain both types of errors, and the read length is $900 nt. Before gene calling, quality control methods are used to reduce errors on raw reads (e.g. trimming the error prone 2025 nt in Illumina 3 0 read ends). Short reads are assembled into longer (shotgun) sequences and contigs. In assembled sequences, the per nucleotide error rate can be reduced from 0.5% in raw reads to as low as 0.005%. Still, errors may affect $3% to $4.5% of genes in assembled sequences (). Even several thousand nucleotides long meta genomic sequences do not carry enough sequence data to accurately estimate parameters of statistical models for protein coding and non-coding regions. Moreover, the performance of conventional tools of gene prediction and annotation are impaired by indels in protein coding regions (). On the other hand, tools of comparative genomics that have certain power in detection of frame shifts interrupting evolutionary conserved regions rely entirely on comparison with sequences from existing databases; these tools would not help to analyse novel genes and genes having low similarity with known genes (). Previously we have developed an algorithm and software program gene tack (), an ab initio tool for finding frame shifts in prokaryotic genomes. Since gene tack requires a species specific statistical model, it can not work with sequences shorter than several hundred kilobases. The long enough sequence is necessary for self training of gene marks (), the gene finder providing model parameters and gene predictions to gene tack. Here we introduce an ab initio frameshift finder, meta gene tack designed for meta genomic sequences. meta gene tack uses a heuristic method () to infer model parameters suitable for analysis of a short sequence at hand (e.g. 400 nt). A recently developed ab initio gene finder, frag genes can (), is also able to detect frame shifts in short sequences. We have assessed the performance of meta gene tack in tests on short sequences from 18 prokaryotic species. We have shown that meta gene tack performs comparably or better in frameshift detection than frag genes can
conclusion the new software program, meta gene tack addresses the challenging question of predicting frame shifts in protein coding regions of meta genomic sequences without extrinsic knowledge. An advantage of ab initio approach is the ability to detect frame shifts in genes of orphan proteins that do not have known homologs. We have shown that the accuracy of meta gene tack is comparable or better than the accuracy of the ab ini to gene prediction tool frag genes can. Most of the frame shifts predicted by meta gene tack are supposed to result from sequencing errors; still like gene tack the program is also able to detect frame shifts caused due to in del mutations and ones related to recoding (programmed frame shifts involved in gene regulation). meta gene tack could be integrated into pipelines of meta genomic sequence annotation.
