Motivation: Metabolic pathway analysis is crucial not only in metabolic engineering but also in rational drug design. However, the biosynthetic biodegradation pathways are known only for a small portion of metabolites, and a vast amount of pathways remain uncharacter-ized. Therefore, an important challenge in metabolomics is the de novo reconstruction of potential reaction networks on a metabo lome scale. Results: In this article, we develop a novel method to predict the multistep reaction sequences for de novo reconstruction of metabolic pathways in the reaction filling framework. We propose a supervised approach to learn what we refer to as multistep reaction sequence likeness, i.e. whether a compound compound pair is possibly converted to each other by a sequence of enzymatic reactions. In the algorithm, we propose a recursive procedure of using step specific classifiers to predict the intermediate compounds in the multistep reaction sequences, based on chemical substructure fingerprints/ descriptors of compounds. We further demonstrate the usefulness of our proposed method on the prediction of enzymatic reaction networks from a metabo lome scale compound set and discuss characteristic features of the extracted chemical substructure transformation patterns in multistep reaction sequences. Our comprehensively predicted reaction networks help to fill the metabolic gap and to infer new reaction sequences in metabolic pathways.

introduction metabolic pathway analysis is crucial not only in systematic metabolic engineering () but also in rational drug discovery (). For example, 48.6% of cancer drugs are either natural products or their direct derivatives (), and many pharmaceutically useful compounds are produced by microbes, fungi and plants (). It is estimated that plants produce at least 1 060 000 metabolites (), and the total number of natural products is undoubtedly much larger if microbes and fungi are also considered. However, the biosynthetic biodegradation pathways are known only for a small portion of metabolites, and a vast amount of pathways remain uncharacterized even in human (). For example, International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology recognizes only $6000 enzymatic reactions (). Therefore, in silico prediction of unknown pathways is expected to support the experimental characterization, leading to benefit not only drug discovery and health care but also agricultural and environmental issues. There have been many successful studies on computational reconstruction of metabolic pathways in organisms or in specific conditions of cellular processes. The most traditional approach is reference based framework', where enzyme genes are mapped to appropriate positions in the predefined reference pathways using orthologous and other information across different organisms or conditions (). This framework is dependent on the predefined reference pathways, i.e. the collection of characterized substrate product relationships that have been described in the literature or experimentally validated. Thus, this is not applicable to predicting unknown substrate product relationships or completely new metabolic pathways. In contrast, a variety of computational methods have been developed for de novo reconstruction of new metabolic pathways based on chemical structure data of metabolites. The goal is to elucidate novel reactions (absent from the reference pathway maps in the reference based framework) based on our current knowledge about known reactions and chemical transformations (to be used as training data). The previous methods are mainly classified into compound filling framework' and reaction filling framework'. The compound filling framework generates the chemical structures of the intermediates even if they are not present in databases. The users input the start (source) compound and or the goal (target) compound, and the methods predict intermediates and reactions between the two compounds *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion this study provided a general method to predict the number of reactions to connect two metabolites. The more the number of known reactions increases, the better the predictive performance would become. However, the recursive strategy chooses the smallest number of steps with the fewest numbers of intermediates for given start goal compounds. There are some known cases where different organisms synthesize the same compounds using different pathways with different number of steps. The further extension will be needed to obtain possible longer pathways with keeping the computation efficiency. This study used a predefined set of chemical substructures (KCF-S); however, it is known that some metabolic pathways use their characteristic chemical substructures. This may imply that when the users want to predict pathways for a specific group of metabolites, using the common substructures in multiple metabolites () would detect the metabolite group specific substructures, leading to the improvement of the specific pathways. The preparation of positive and negative examples is crucial in this study. In the study of enzymatic reaction likeness (1-step likeness), distinction of positive negative is relatively clear; positive if a compound pair corresponds to a known substrate product pair and negative otherwise. In the study of multiple reaction sequence likeness, reversibility of reaction may affect the distinction of positive negative. Enzymatic reactions are generally reversible in vitro, but they are sometimes irreversible in vivo depending on the physiological condition. These reversi bilities are merely described in databases, making it difficult to distinguish positive negative multistep reaction sequences. Recent metabolomics studies enable metabolite driven approaches for understanding previously unknown biosynthetic mechanisms at the gene level for genome sequence d plants (). We believe that this study will contribute to the understanding and the identification of metabolites and genes in the biosynthetic machinery.
