Motivation: meta analysis of summary statistics is an essential approach to guarantee the success of genome wide association studies g was. Application of the fixed or random effects model to single marker association tests is a standard practice. More complex methods of meta analysis involving multiple parameters have not been used frequently, a gap that could be explained by the lack of a respective meta analysis pipeline. meta analysis based on combining p values can be applied to any association test. However, to be powerful, meta analysis methods for high dimensional models should incorporate additional information such as study specific properties of parameter estimates, their effect directions, standard errors and covariance structure. Results: We modified method for the synthesis of linear regression slopes recently proposed in the educational sciences to the case of multiple logistic regression, and implemented it in a meta analysis tool called meta inter. The software handles models with an arbitrary number of parameters, and can directly be applied to analyze the results of singles np tests, global haplotype tests, tests for and under gene– gene or gene environment interaction. Via simulations for two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) models we have shown that the proposed meta analysis method has correct type I error rate. Moreover, power estimates come close to that of the joint analysis of the entire sample. We conducted a real data analysis of six g was of type 2 diabetes , available from db gap (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap). For each study, a genome wide interaction analysis of all SNP pairs was performed by logistic regression tests. The results were then meta analyzed with meta inter. Availability: The software is freely available and distributed under the conditions specified on http://metainter.

introduction the need to summarize the results of related genome wide association studies g was has encouraged the rapid development of new meta analytic methods and tools, see e.g. (;). meta analysis of summary statistics is expected to deliver new susceptibility loci without additional genotype and phenotype data being required (). Application of the general fixed effects model () to single marker 1 degree of freedom (df) association tests has become a standard practice. More complex models involving multiple parameters have been used much less frequently, presumably in view of power issues but also because of the absence of a respective meta analysis pipeline. The need for meta analysis multiple parameter methods has been recognized in the field (), and new approaches for performing meta analysis of rare variant association tests have recently been described in (). Fisher's combination test (), stouffer s method (or inverse normal method;) and stouffer s method with weights () are common approaches for combining p values. However, by design, they do not take advantage of additional information available in high dimensional models. Results of multiple regression analysis, such as parameter estimates, their standard error and covariance, have rarely been used in meta analysis owing to the complexities underlying the process of their synthesis. In this context, a method for the synthesis of linear regression slopes has been proposed in the educational sciences (). The method has been recognized to be useful in Genetic Epidemiology and has been adapted for linear regression 2 df gene environment tests in (). The method by () involves model parameter estimates and their correlation and provides the overall meta analytic estimates of regression slopes together with meta analysis p values. Here, we elaborate the method by () for multiple logistic regression model. We introduce the analysis tool meta inter which, besides Fisher's and stouffer s methods, implements the method by () for an arbitrary number of model parameters. Thereby, meta inter enables meta analysis for instance, of the single marker 2 df association test, global haplotype tests and tests for and under gene gene or gene environment interaction. The synthesis of regression slopes () relies on the availability of the covariance matrix of the model parameters. Because the covariance matrix is not always provided by genetic analysis tools, we support the analysis framework presented here with an update of our own genetic interaction *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com analysis tool inter snp () to avoid the potential unavailability of the covariance matrix. We conducted a simulation study for two single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) models and evaluated the data with 8 df logistic regression test under interaction and 4 df logistic regression test for interaction. We show that the method for the synthesis of regression slopes (MSRS) has correct type I error. Moreover, its power is nearly equal to that of the analysis of the joint sample with covariate parameters indicating sub-study membership. Furthermore, we performed a real data analysis of six g was of type 2 diabetes (T2D), available from db gap (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/gap). At first, we conducted a genome wide interaction analysis (GWIA) with 8 and 4 df logistic regression tests in each study, and then meta analyzed the results with meta inter
discussion new methods to meta analyze genetic data are obviously of growing demand (). meta analysis of summary statistics of single marker tests applied in g was is an established standard, which however needs to be extended to more complex multiple parameter testing strategies. In context of rare variant analysis, which typically addresses multiple parameters from a genomic region, an important improvement of p values combination methods has recently been made by (). The method presented there is based on the correlation structure of single variant test statistics, and, in terms of power, comes close to power of the rare variant analysis of the combined sample. The method for the synthesis of linear regression slopes () has been applied to meta analyze the results of a linear regression gene environment interaction test (). Here, we presented a general framework that enables application of MSRS to meta analysis of both linear and logistic multiple regression models. In addition, a test that assesses across study heterogeneity can easily be formulated within MSRS framework and is a part of our implementation. The method can be used to filter out signals that are driven by p fisher is p value of the Fisher's method; pst ouf is p value of the stouffer s method with weights; pst ouf dir is p value of the stouffer s method with weights and effect directions; pm srs is p value of the MSRS; p i is p value of the sub-study i in the primary analysis, i=1;. .. ; 6; p joints is p value of the regression test in the joint sample analysis; p H is p value of a test of homogeneity of model parameters across sub studies p fisher is p value of the Fisher's method; pst ouf is p value of the stouffer s method with weights; pst ouf dir is p value of the stouffer s method with weights and effect directions; pm srs is p value of the MSRS; p i is p value of the sub-study i in the primary analysis, i=1;. .. ; 6; p joints is p value of the regression test in the joint sample analysis; p H is p value of a test of homogeneity of model parameters across sub studies. just a few studies alone, thereby it captures the main advantage of random effects models. Via application to six T2D g was we could demonstrate that the implementation of MSRS in meta inter allows efficient computation. meta analysis of 2.2 million SNP pairs analyzed in six studies took meta inter 23 min. We supported the analysis by updating our inter snp tool (). inter snp provides now the necessary covariance matrix of parameter estimates in multiple regression models. The implementation of MSRS in meta inter allows efficient meta analysis for multiple linear and logistic regression models. However, the method should be used with caution, if the evidence of strong dependence between predictor variables exists. The phenomenon of multicollinearity can manifest itself, for example, when the inverse covariance matrix has to be computed. If the model is well specified in each sub-study, there should be no strong multicollinearity. Otherwise model reduction can be useful to get around this problem. For g was with small samples and for SNPs with low allele frequencies (e.g. both 502 or for one SNP 50.05) a test with fewer parameters, for instance, 3 df allelic test under interaction, might be a reasonable choice. MSRS assumes that the multicollinearity issue was checked in sub studies and that any of them is relatively free from this problem. If the covariance matrix is non invertible for a particular SNP pair (or SNP, or SNP set) in a sub-study, meta inter will exclude the sub-study from the meta analysis for the respective pair. MSRS is an appropriate generalization of the existing techniques in the following sense: in case of one parameter models, the method is equivalent to the fixed effect model, and in the multiple parameter case its power comes close to that of the analysis of the joint sample, as we have shown in our simulation study. Moreover, power comparison of MSRS with the Fisher's and the stouffer s methods re emphasizes the importance of going beyond p value based meta analysis for higher dimensional models.
