During the past years we have witnessed the rapid development of new meta genome assembly methods. Although there are many benchmark utilities designed for single genome assemblies, there is no well recognized evaluation and comparison tool for meta genomic specific analogues. In this article, we present meta quast a modification of QUAST, the state of the art tool for genome assembly evaluation based on alignment of contigs to a reference. meta quast addresses such meta genome datasets features as (i) unknown species content by detecting and downloading reference sequences, (ii) huge diversity by giving comprehensive reports for multiple genomes and (iii) presence of highly relative species by detecting chimeric contigs. We demonstrate meta quast performance by comparing several leading assemblers on one simulated and two real datasets. Availability and implementation: http://bioinf.spbau.ru/metaquast.

introduction meta genomics studies genetic material taken directly from environmental samples. NGS technologies allow for extracting short reads even from low abundant organisms without cloning. However, the data produced in such experiments tend to be enormous, noisy, and contain fragments from thousands of species highly varying in abundance and homology. Those challenges led to a new computational problem of meta genome assembly, followed by a diversity of methods (), which demands a standard benchmark procedure. Most existing assembly evaluation approaches are not designed to work with meta genomes. However there exist methods which count read likelihoods with respect to the assembly (), or determine single copy conservative ubiquitous gene content (). Unfortunately, none uses contig alignments to a closely related reference genome. In this article we present meta quast a meta genomic specific improvement over QUAST (). QUAST detects errors based on alignments to a given closely related reference genome, and also reports and plots contig statistics like N50 and gene content which gives an overview of constituent species even without user supplied reference sequences. To address meta genome assemblies, meta quast adds several new features: (i) ability of using an unlimited number of reference genomes, (ii) automated species content detection, (iii) detection of chimeric contigs (interspecies mis assemblies and (iv) significantly redesigned visualizations.
