microbio me researchers frequently want to know how abundant a particular microbial gene or pathway is across different human hosts, including its association with disease and its co occurrence with other genes or microbial tax a. With thousands of publicly available meta genomes these questions should be easy to answer. However, computational barriers prevent most researchers from conducting such analyses. We address this problem with meta query a web application for rapid and quantitative analysis of specific genes in the human gut microbio me. The user inputs one or more query genes, and our software returns the estimated abundance of these genes across 1267 publicly available fecal meta genomes from American, European and Chinese individuals. In addition, our application performs downstream statistical analyses to identify features that are associated with gene variation, including other query genes (i.e. gene co-variation), tax a clinical variables (e.g. inflammatory bowel disease and diabetes) and average genome size. The speed and accessibility of meta query are a step toward democratizing meta genomics research, which should allow many researchers to query the abundance and variation of specific genes in the human gut microbio me. Availability and implementation: http://metaquery.

introduction a number of large scale shotgun meta genomics projects have been made publicly available, enabling researchers to investigate the functional composition of microbial communities from the human body and how microbial functions correlate with disease or other traits (). A common goal of many microbio me studies is to quantify the abundance of specific genes across these publicly available datasets. In most cases, this task involves (1) downloading meta genomes from public repositories, (2) mapping reads to a reference database and (3) estimating gene abundances. For example, this was the approach used by to estimate the abundance of 14 000 biosynthetic gene clusters in the human microbio me. However, this approach is time consuming and computationally demanding requiring large amounts of storage space and processing power and is therefore not practical for many research groups. In an attempt to address this issue, several microbio me studies have made their functional annotations publicly available. For example, the Human microbio me
