meta vir is a web server dedicated to the analysis of viral meta genomes vi romes. In addition to classical approaches for analyzing meta genomes (general sequence characteristics, taxonomic composition), new tools developed specifically for viral sequence analysis make it possible to: (i) explore viral diversity through automatically constructed phylogenies for selected marker genes, (ii) estimate gene richness through rarefaction curves and (iii) perform cross comparison against other vi romes using sequence similarities. meta vir is thus unique as a platform that allows a comprehensive vi rome analysis. Availability: meta vir is freely available online at:

introduction describing environmental viral communities is a major challenge for environmental microbiology. Viruses are known to intervene in a broad spectrum of processes spanning population regulation, horizontal gene transfer and major biogeochemical cycles (). However, the study of environmental viral communities is made difficult by the fact that only a tiny fraction of their hosts has been cultivated. Moreover, as no single gene is common to all viral genomes, environmental viral communities can not be studied via approaches based on ribosomal RNA sequencing (). One way around these limitations is to directly sequence the viral communities. Such meta genomic approaches can provide insights into the viral diversity of environments of interests and are progressively gaining wider uses (). Existing bioinformatics tools implemented on web servers dedicated to meta genome analyses are not specific to particular biological entities (). Yet, viral meta genomes vi romes are by nature significantly different from bacterial meta genomes. Indeed, very little is known about viral communities and the strong sequence divergence and broad gene richness found in vi romes indicate a tremendous genetic diversity (). Yet this diversity remains * To whom correspondence should be addressed. very poorly characterized as the databases lack annotated viral sequences. Most vi rome sequences (i.e. reads) therefore differ from previously described sequences (). However, direct comparisons of vi rome sequences from disparate locations often exhibit significant overlap, indicating that, although our knowledge on viral genes remains sparse, the same genes are seen everywhere (). The unknown fraction of the reads (between 65% and 95%) usually left aside in classical meta genomic analyses represents extremely valuable data for vi rome analysis. Furthermore, different marker genes describing the different viral families are needed to further describe viral diversity and none of these markers are available on existing 'generalist' web servers. To our knowledge, ph accs (Phage Communities from Contig Spectrum;) is the only tool designed for viral community sequencing, but it focuses on assessing the structure of uncultured viral communities in terms of ecological parameters. Here we present meta vir an interactive web server that performs a comprehensive analysis of vi romes. Classical analyses are available (sequence characteristics, taxonomic composition). Marker genes selected for each major viral families can be used in a custom designed procedure to perform phylogenetic analysis on vi rome reads. The automatically generated phylogenetic trees allow biologists to explore the viral diversity in a deep and precise manner. Finally, specific tools have been developed to efficiently deal with the vast unknown fraction. The gene richness of a vi rome can be assessed and compared to other vi romes and vi romes can also be compared in terms of sequence similarity.
