meta net xorg is a website for accessing, analysing and manipulating genome scale metabolic networks gsm s as well as biochemical pathways. It consistently integrates data from various public resources and makes the data accessible in a standardized format using a common namespace. Currently, it provides access to hundreds of gsm s and pathways that can be interactively compared (two or more), analysed (e.g. detection of dead end metabolites and reactions, flux balance analysis or simulation of reaction and gene knockouts), manipulated and exported. Users can also upload their own metabolic models, choose to automatically map them into the common namespace and subsequently make use of the websites functionality. Availability and implementation: meta net xorg is available at http://

introduction genome scale metabolic networks gsm s consist of compartmentalized reactions that consistently combine biochemical, genetic and genomic information. When also considering a biomass reaction and both uptake and secretion reactions, gsm s are often used to study genotype phenotype relationships, to direct new discoveries and to identify targets in metabolic engineering (). However, a major difficulty in GSM comparisons and reconstructions is to integrate data from different resources with different nomenclatures and conventions for both metabolites and reactions. Hence, GSM consolidation and comparison may be impossible without detailed biological knowledge and programming skills. Therefore, community approaches in form of jamboree meetings were introduced to collect and integrate data to generate consensus reconstructions (). Furthermore model repositories, such as correlation groups (). For simulations, meta net xorg provides a tool set to study reaction fluxes, in particular with respect to biomass production and biomass production after performing single reaction or single gene knockouts, which are commonly used for model validation. In the context of model development, a dedicated section of meta net xorg allows one to combine gsm s with respect to their reaction or protein sets or with respect to the results of previously performed analyses. For example, it is possible to create a minimal functional model where every reaction is able to carry a flux at steady state, i.e. a model without zero flux reactions. All available and newly generated networks as well as the results of their analyses and predictions can be exported as sbml or flat files for documentation and further analyses/ modifications in external tools such as the COBRA toolbox (). We believe that meta net xorg could become a valuable resource for accessing, analysing and manipulating gsm s especially for users with limited programming skills, or as a resource for independent validation and testing. We expect that the rigorous format requirements enable a standardized way to define and exchange models and that they allow for an effective and efficient benchmark process for future method development projects b. Main features of meta net xorg. (a) Flowchart illustrating the structure of meta net xorg the website with its common namespace and user workspace connects the repository of publicly available gsm s or user defined gsm s reaction sets with the tools section, as well as the view and export functions that enable the users to interactively analyse their results inside or outside of meta net xorg. (b) Interactive applet viewer showing the network neighbourhood of ethanol across several compartments in a selected Escherichia coli model. (c) Comparison of three selected E. coli models (top) using the meta net xorg workspace: present () or absent () reactions (bottom)
