Motivation: A key component of the analysis of microbio me datasets is the identification of OTUs shared between multiple experimental conditions, commonly referred to as the core microbio me. Results: We present a web platform named meta comet that enables the discovery and visualiza-tion of the core microbio me and provides a comparison of the relative abundance and diversity patterns between subsets of samples within a microbio me dataset. meta comet provides an efficient and interactive graphical interface for analyzing each subset defined by the union or disjunc-tion of groups within the Venn diagram, and includes a graphical taxonomy summary, alpha diversity metrics, Principal Coordinate analysis, abundance based heat maps and a chart indicating the geographic distribution of each sample. Availability and Implementation: meta comet is a user friendly and efficient web platform freely accessible at

introduction a common goal in amplicon based microbio me analysis is the identification of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) that are either shared between or distinct among multiple experimental conditions (treatments, environments, time points, etc.). The term core microbio me has been used to describe these shared microbes () and is typically defined as the set of OTUs common among the microbial communities from different but related conditions or habitats. Commonly occurring components within complex microbial assemblages are of interest for a variety of reasons, and may well be critical to the general function of those communities (). Although some web tools, like meta rep silva ngs and VAMPS provide analysis and visualization functions for microbio me datasets, they provide limited tools for the identification of the core microbio me and these tools focus primarily on the presence or absence of OTUs within the data. Here, we present a web platform named meta comet that enables the easy discovery and visualization of the core microbio me using one of three alternative methods and the comparison of relative abundance and diversity patterns for subsets of the data as defined by the core analysis. table, and is based on the presence and absence of OTUs among the different micro biomes being compared (Supplementary). If an OTU is observed at a level greater than the user specified absolute or relative abundance threshold within any of the samples representing a specific group, it is counted as being a member of that group. This method is helpful for cases when the minimal membership core is expected to be small, or when the presence of a microbe alone may indicate a shift in microbio me function, for instance in the detection of micro be mediated disease. The Composition method places OTUs within the Venn diagram based on relative abundance, rather than presence absence (Supplementary). In this method, each OTU is automatically assigned membership to the group for which it has the highest relative abundance, and membership in other groups is assigned if the relative abundance of that OTU is similar as defined by a user specified threshold. This method ensures that every OTU will be included in the final analysis, and will only appear in a single overlap within the Venn diagram. This method of analysis may be helpful when there is a large or complete overlap in OTUs that are observed across different groups, but also substantial differences in the relative abundance of these OTUs in the groups being compared that could drive important functional differences. The Persistence method enables the identification of OTUs that are consistently detected within a microbio me experiment (). In this method, we consider that the OTU should be present within a user specified fraction of the samples within the group, in order to be counted as belonging to that group (Supplementary). This method can be useful for tracking OTUs that are stable across experimental replication, or across time in longitudinal studies. After applying the methods described above for core microbio me discovery, meta comet generates a new OTU table for each overlapping region of the Venn diagram, and allows for interactive visual exploration of these OTU tables through commonly used statistical techniques. Example analyses that help illustrate the utility of meta comet are available for data from a recent study of the rice microbio me ().
