Motivation: Semantic annotations of the biochemical entities constituting a biological reaction network are indispensable to create biologically meaningful networks. They further heighten efficient exchange, reuse and merging of existing models which concern present day systems biology research more often. Two types of tools for the reconstruction of biological networks currently exist: (i) several sophisticated programs support graphical network editing and visualization. (ii) Data management systems permit reconstruction and curation of huge networks in a team of scientists including data integration, annotation and cross referencing. We seeked ways to combine the advantages of both approaches. Results: met an nogen which was previously developed for network reconstruction, has been considerably improved. From now on, met an nogen provides SBML import and annotation of networks created elsewhere. This permits users of other network reconstruction platforms or modeling software to annotate their networks using met an no gens advanced information management. We implemented word autocompletion multi pattern highlighting, spell check, brace expansion and publication management, and improved annotation, cross referencing and team work requirements. Unspecific enzymes and transporters acting on a spectrum of different substrates are efficiently handled. The network can be exported in SBML format where the annotations are embedded in line with the MIRIAM standard. For more comfort,

introduction the first version of met an nogen () was used exclusively to reconstruct metabolic networks as in the case of whole-cell model hepato net (). The program * To whom correspondence should be addressed. features of this early version are comparable to other programs like the recently published met net maker () or memo sys (). However, limitations became apparent with respect to information management, exchange of networks and representation of unspecific transport processes in eukaryotic cells which forced us to substantially improve met an nogen
