Motivation: Recent advances in mass spectrometry and related metabolomics technologies have enabled the rapid and comprehensive analysis of numerous metabolites. However, biosynthetic and biodegradation pathways are only known for a small portion of metabolites, with most metabolic pathways remaining uncharacterized. Results: In this study, we developed a novel method for supervised de novo metabolic pathway reconstruction with an improved graph alignment based approach in the reaction filling framework. We proposed a novel chemical graph alignment algorithm, which we called PACHA (Pairwise Chemical Aligner), to detect the regio isomer sensitive connectivities between the aligned substruc-tures of two compounds. Unlike other existing graph alignment methods, PACHA can efficiently detect only one common subgraph between two compounds. Our results show that the proposed method outperforms previous descriptor based methods or existing graph alignment based methods in the enzymatic reaction likeness prediction for isomer enriched reactions. It is also useful for reaction annotation that assigns potential reaction characteristics such as EC (Enzyme Commission) numbers and PIERO (Enzymatic Reaction Ontology for Partial Information) terms to substrate product pairs. Finally, we conducted a comprehensive enzymatic reaction likeness prediction for all possible uncharacterized compound pairs, suggesting potential metabolic pathways for newly predicted substrate product pairs.

introduction understanding cell metabolism is essential in a wide range of fields, e.g. metabolic engineering, synthetic biology, drug discovery and clinical treatments of metabolic disorders (). Recent advances in mass spectrometry and related metabolomics technologies have enabled the rapid and comprehensive analysis of numerous metabolites. However, biosynthetic and biodegradation pathways are only known for a small portion of metabolites, with the majority of pathways remaining uncharacterized (). For example, it is estimated that at least 1 060 000 metabolites are produced within all plants, for which most chemical transformations remain to be identified (). Elucidation of potential metabolic pathways in plants would provide a significant benefit for environmental, agricultural, pharmaceutical and public health matters. Experimental determination of metabolic pathways is difficult, expensive and time consuming (); thus automatic pathway reconstruction on a metabo lome scale is a challenging issue in current computational biology. The traditional in silico method for metabolic pathway reconstruction is the predefined pathway approach, where enzyme coding genes are mapped onto appropriate positions in the predefined pathway diagrams based on gene gene sequence similarities (). This method has been used for analyzing metabolic pathways in fully sequenced organisms or in specific conditions of cellular processes (). Another method in the predefined

discussion we developed a novel method for supervised de novo metabolic pathway reconstruction with an improved graph alignment algorithm called PACHA. Our proposed PACHA enabled us to detect regio isomer sensitive connectivities between aligned substructures of two compounds. The novelty of our proposed method lies in the detection of a unique graph alignment, scalability for analyzing a vast amount of compounds on a metabo lome scale and applicability to many tasks in metabolic pathway reconstruction. We showed the usefulness of the PACHA descriptors for enzymatic reaction likeness prediction and reaction annotation with a sparsity induced classifier. This study addressed the importance of the distinction of regio isomers for metabolic pathway analysis. Although a popular approach for representing compounds is to use chemical descriptors that deal with many small chemical substructures, they can not correctly consider the substructure connectivity. Thus, the comparison of two chemical descriptors is insufficient to generate atom atom mapping, which makes it impossible for all descriptor based methods to describe sensitive chemical changes in a single enzymatic reaction, as illustrated in. sim comp (), the most related previous graph based method, was designed for searching similar compounds in databases by allowing some small common substructures. The common procedure in sim comp and PACHA is to generate an association graph, where the vertices (association nodes) represent the atom atom pairs of two compounds and obtain common subgraph(s) considering adjacency. The difference between sim comp and PACHA lies in the definition of 'adjacency' in the association graph. PACHA defines the association nodes as being adjacent to each other only when the corresponding atoms are adjacent in both compounds; therefore, only one common subgraph occurs and the second common subgraph is not allowed. sim comp defines the association nodes to be adjacent either when the corresponding atoms are adjacent in both compounds or when they are not adjacent in both compounds. The adjacency in the sim comp association graph often generates multiple common subgraphs, which are integrated afterwards; however, in some cases, the integrated subgraph contains many gaps. Having such gaps is not an issue when finding similar compounds, e.g. for pharmaceutical purposes. However, it is of crucial importance for metabolic pathway analysis, because most reactions generate or eliminate only a few chemical bonds. Therefore, the number of gaps affects the prediction accuracy of enzymatic reaction likeness. Our proposed PACHA algorithm solved this problem successfully as demonstrated by significant improvement of the de novo pathway reconstruction, especially in the analysis of isomer enriched data. Future extensions would involve the detection of frequent substructure changes and stereo inversions which requires more sophisticated tuning of PACHA.
