Analysis of high throughput metabolomics experiments is a resource intensive process that includes pre-processing, pre-treatment and post-processing at each level of experimental hierarchy. We developed an interactive user friendly online software called Metabolite Data Analysis Tool met dat for mass spectrometry data. It offers a pipeline of tools for file handling, data pre-processing, univariate and multivariate statistical analyses, database searching and pathway mapping. Outputs are produced in the form of text and high quality images in real time. met dat allows users to combine data management and experiment centric workflows for optimization of metabolomics methods and metabolite analysis.

introduction metabolomics experiments conducted using mass spectrometry produce spectral outputs amounting to gigabytes of data. This is a result of elaborate experimental set-ups with several replicates, time series studies and different types of treatment parameters for a single sample. Datasets from such experimental set-up can be very complex. Querying information from several subsets of complex datasets and deriving meaningful biological interpretation is very challenging. To overcome this problem in data handling and analysis, the metabolomics research community has recommended a minimal set of reporting standards and general guidelines for data analysis, interpretation and exchange of metabolomics experiments (). Data pre-processing generally involves removal of noise and reduction of baseline of the raw data. The resulting data are normalized and scaled for univariate and multivariate statistical analysis. Visualization of the resultant output helps to understand and interpret experimental results. A number of standalone data analysis tools for preprocessing, statistical analysis and pathway mapping mz mine x cms mass trix met explore Bioconductor) are freely available on the web (). Currently, these available data analysis tools do * To whom correspondence should be addressed. not have the means to include information from experiment such as hierarchical data structure. As a result, meaningful inferences based on comparisons at the various levels of data structure are not straightforward and their associated effects are not easily interpreted. Most of the available tools require continuous interaction with users in the programs leading to delayed output. Here, we present Metabolite Data Analysis Tool met dat to address gaps in the currently available software for mass spectrometry data analysis in a systems centric approach. met dat is a web based tool with an open and integrated system that performs data preprocessing, analysis followed by database searches with filters to refine the output. met dat also provides interactive and customizable modules and user driven analysis of data at hierarchical levels.
