The public availability of high throughput molecular data provides new opportunities for researchers to advance discovery, replication and validation efforts. One common challenge in leveraging such data is the diversity of measurement approaches and platforms and a lack of utilities enabling cross platform comparisons among data sources for analysis. We present a method to map DNA methylation data from bisulfite sequencing approaches to CpG sites measured with the widely used Illumina methylation bead array platforms. Correlations and median absolute deviations support the validity of using bisulfite sequencing data in combination with Illumina bead array methylation data. Availability and Implementation: https://github.com/Christensen-Lab-Dartmouth/methyLiftover includes source, documentation and data references.

introduction the public availability of high throughput molecular data provides new opportunities for researchers to advance discovery, replication and validation efforts. One common challenge in leveraging such data is the diversity of measurement approaches and platforms () and a lack of utilities enabling cross platform comparisons among data sources for analysis. We introduce the methyl ift over utility, which allows simple and rapid remapping of DNA methylation data collected with bisulfite sequencing approaches to CpG sites measured with the widely used Illumina bead array platforms. The methyl ift over utility was developed to increase the utility and comparability of the growing number of whole genome bisulfite sequencing w gbs and reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) data sets for the large number of researchers that collect and analyze methylation data from Illumina human methylation 450K array. Bisulfite sequencing approaches to measure DNA methylation remain costly due to additional read depth and alignment issues associated with the reduced complexity of the bisulfite modified genome (). Though multiple large scale epi genome characterization efforts using RRBS and w gbs continue to produce additional data, the research community will benefit from more readily available access and comparability of these data with much more widely used (and far less expensive) bead array platforms from Illumina.

conclusion the use of w gbs and RRBS data in tandem with 450K methylation may help to expand the sample sizes available for cell type specific and independent analyses. The methyl ift over utility will enhance the field of epi genomic research by expanding the comparability of DNA methylation data in the absence of the common Illumina 450K methylation data. The methyl ift over tool contains functions to subset and map w gbs and RRBS data to the CpG sites specific to the Illumina 450K array, both individually and as a whole directory, and create merged data sets from two user defined methylation data files (e.g. Illumina 850K annotation).
