We present methyl c track, an efficient mechanism for visualizing single base resolution DNA methylation data on a genome browser. The methyl c track dynamically integrates the level of methylation, the position and context of the methylated cytosine (i.e. CG, CHG and CHH), strand and confidence level (e.g. read coverage depth in the case of whole genome bisulfite sequencing data). Investigators can access and integrate these information visually at specific locus or at the genome wide level on the WashU epi genome Browser in the context of other rich epi genomic datasets. Availability and implementation: The methyl c track is part of the WashU epi genome Browser, which is open source and freely available at http://epigenomegateway.wustl.edu/browser/. The most up-to-date instructions and tools for preparing methyl c track are available at

introduction dna methylation is a well studied epigenetic mark. It plays crucial roles in development, gene regulation, chromatin structure, imprinting and many diseases (). DNA methylation primarily occurs as 5 methyl cytosine in the CpG context. In specific cell types, such as embryonic stem cells (ESCs), 5 methyl cytosine sometimes occurs in the context of CHG and CHH (H is A, T or C) (). Usually CpG methylation is symmetrical between the two DNA strands, but hemi methylation where only one strand is methylated, can be observed. Several modern techniques measure DNA methylation at single base resolution, including whole genome bisulfite sequencing w gbs or methyl cseq reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS;) and Illumina Infinium arrays. Bisulfite sequencing based methods can provide information including non cpg menthyl ation strand specific methylation and confidence level (read depth;) and are considered the gold standard in the field. arrays only CG methylation level is necessary. Data files are compressed, indexed by tab ix () and hosted on Web servers. The bed graph file URLs are organized into a single methyl c track using JSON () and displayed via the data hub mechanism (http://epigenomegateway.wustl.edu//hub). To illustrate the different visualization options, we displayed Infinium, RRBS and w gbs of ESC H1 (H1 ESC) and w gbs of IMR90 cells in, the sparseness of Infinium and RRBS is visually obvious, and unmethylated CpGs are visually distinct from CpGs with no value. Compared with Infinium and RRBS data, w gbs clearly reveals more dynamics of DNA methylation across the regions and between the samples. Both H1 ESC and IMR90 are lowly methylated over the hox a gene cluster. A region with elevated methylation in IMR90 is marked by a black box. It lies at the boundary of two chromatin domains (Supplementary). The methylation increase correlates with the bipartite histone modification pattern over hox a cluster in IMR90 ().shows the w gbs data with two DNA strands combined displays a zoomed out view after combining data of the two strands, where the prevalence of non cpg methylation in H1 ESC can be easily appreciated.

conclusion the methyl c track on WashU epi genome Browser contributes simple but powerful innovations for visually exploring genome wide single base resolution DNA methylation data. The track is easy to prepare using standard bed graph format files and is compatible with most common genomics tools. The track design is highly flexible and can be easily extended to incorporate new aspects of DNA methylation including allelic methylation, hydroxy methylation and other complex genomics datasets.
