Identification of metabolites using high resolution multi-stage mass spectrometry (MS n) data is a significant challenge demanding access to all sorts of computational infrastructures. met i tree is a user friendly web application dedicated to organize, process, share, visualize and compare MS n data. It integrates several features to export and visualize complex MS n data, facilitating the exploration and interpretation of metabolomics experiments. A dedicated spectral tree viewer allows the simultaneous presentation of three related types of MS n data, namely, the spectral data, the fragmentation tree and the fragmentation reactions. met i tree stores the data in an internal database to enable searching for similar fragmentation trees and matching against other MS n data. As such met i tree contains much functionality that will make the difficult task of identifying unknown metabolites much easier. Availability: met i tree is accessible at

introduction metabolite identification is a challenging but essential step for the interpretation and understanding of many biological processes for an increasing number of applications such as biomarker discovery, drug discovery or nutritional studies. The feasibility of using multi-stage mass spectrometry (MS n ) for identification of metabolites has been shown before (). The complexity of the data generated demands new computational infrastructures to organize the data and to extract relevant information. Recently, databases have been set up for storing fragmentation spectra such as MS n data (e.g. mass bank and tools have been developed to process MS n data (e.g. the MEF tool; rojas cher tot al., 2011), or to compare MS n data (e.g. Mass Frontier; Thermo Fisher Scientific). In this article we present a web application called met i tree with the novelty that it combines the processing of high resolution MS n data with a personal local library to organize the fragmentation data. Furthermore, it allows the comparison of MS n data to help the researcher with the identification of metabolites. met i tree is available at http://www.MetiTree.nl together with some test MS n data.

conclusion the growing interest in metabolite identification has increased the need to create computational and visual tools for MS n analysis. met i tree which gathers several in house developed tools, is an easy to use web application that combines processing, sharing, visualizing and querying MS n data to help researches to identify metabolites of interest and decrease the time consuming task of identifying metabolites.. Overview of the met i tree process flow. After the user submits MS n spectra, met i tree will process these according to a set of parameters. Afterwards, the processed data can be stored in an internal library and labeled as a reference compound using the inch i identifier. The results are presented in different formats and viewers, which facilitates the exporting of text and figures for their use in reports and publications (A). Finally, MS n data can be queried to find similar MS n data in the library (B) and the query results are presented in a list
