met ms line represents a complete collection of functions in the R programming language as an accessible GUI for biomarker discovery in large scale liquid chromatography high resolution mass spectral datasets from acquisition through to final metabolite identification forming a backend to output from any peak picking software such as x cms. met ms line automatically creates subdirectories, data tables and relevant figures at the following steps: (i) signal smoothing, normalization, filtration and noise transformation preproc qcl scr (ii) pc a and automatic outlier removal auto p car (iii) automatic regression, biomarker selection, hierarchical clustering and cluster ion artefact identification auto mv regress r (iv) biomarker msms fragmentation spectra matching and fragment neutral loss annotation auto msms match r and (v) semi targeted metabolite identification based on a list of theoretical masses obtained from public databases db annotate r. Availability and implementation: All source code and suggested parameters are available in an un encapsulated layout on http://wmbedmands.github.io/MetMSLine/. Readme files and a synthetic dataset of both x variables (simulated LC–MS data), y variables (simulated continuous variables) and metabolite theoretical masses are also available on our git hub repository.

introduction untargeted metabolite profiling is a promising approach to discover novel risk factors for chronic diseases and biomarkers for disease diagnosis (). Liquid chromatography coupled to high resolution mass spectrometry lc hrms instrumentation is being more routinely used for data acquisition for meta bolo mic analyses in large scale studies (e.g. 300 samples). Raw data need to be processed via computational tools to extract relevant information and meaningful biological conclusions. Processing of lc hrms raw data is currently facilitated by softwares such as x cms mz mine metabo analyst and Maven (). However, an automated software pipeline with minimal manual interaction for efficient, reproducible and objective large scale meta bolo mic data analysis is also desirable. Software tools can systematically perform all downstream aspects of meta bolo mic analysis following peak picking. Development of such a workflow in the R language can offer several advantages such as availability of modular packages for functional programming and graphics and the ease of accessibility of a GUI for non specialists. We have developed novel software, met ms line coded in the R language which automates the process of untargeted meta bolo mic data analyses of large datasets from acquisition of data from lc hrms platforms through to unknown biomarker identification.

conclusion met ms line presents a complete data processing method; it is easy to use as a GUI and should be very beneficial to researchers to rapidly process large scale lc hrms dataset. It potentially requires minimal manual interaction with the software, when compared with the high manual interaction required by commonly used softwares for lc hrms datasets such as metabo analyst MAVEN, apl cms mz mine and ide om (). The rapidity of the process allows great scope for parameter optimization and the subsequent ability to dedicate more time to result interpretation.
