Numerous meta genomics projects have produced tremendous amounts of sequencing data. Aligning these sequences to reference genomes is an essential analysis in meta genomics studies. large scale alignment data call for intuitive and efficient visualization tool. However, current tools such as various genome browsers are highly specialized to handle intraspecies mapping results. They are not suitable for alignment data in meta genomics which are often interspecies alignments. We have developed a web browser based desktop application for interactively visualizing alignment data of meta genomic sequences. This viewer is easy to use on all computer systems with modern web browsers and requires no software installation. Availability: http://weizhongli

introduction the advances of Next Generation Sequencing technologies () have promoted big waves of meta genomic projects in study of micro biomes under different environments such as ocean () and human body (). An essential step in meta genomic data analysis is to align the sequencing reads against the available microbial genomes. Visualization is an intuitive way to analyze large scale alignment data in genomic studies. There are many visualization tools available. Some are web browser based such as UCSC genome browser (), look seq () and j browse (). Some are standalone programs such as Tablet (), genome view (), map view (), i gb (), IGV (), sam scope () and so on. However, these sophisticated visualization tools are specialized in handling intraspecies alignment results (i.e. query and reference are same species). They are not suitable for interspecies alignments from meta genomic datasets, where query and reference can be from different species. There are fundamental differences between intraspecies and interspecies alignments. The former only involves one reference genome and represent features like single nucleotide polymorphism and alternative splicing. But the latter involves multiple (often 10 3 ) reference microbial genomes. To visualize interspecies alignments, a tool needs to show the wide range of alignment similarities (100% to as low as 50% for DNAs and 30% for proteins) and to handle thousands of reference genomes. The Global Ocean Sampling study () first introduced fragment recruitment plots to illustrate the meta genomic alignment data. However, its underlying software is not available to the public. Here, we present meta genomic Alignment Viewer mga viewer a platform independent web browser based tool for visualizing alignment data. It does not rely on web server and relational database for image generation and data retrieval. It can be simply used as a standalone desktop program to analyze local data. It can also be included in a web server like other web based genome browsers.
