Motivation: high throughput transcript omics proteomics and metabolomics methods have revolutionized our knowledge of biological systems. To gain knowledge from comparative omics studies, strong data integration and visualization features are required. Knowledge gained from these studies is often available in the form of graphs, and their visualization is especially useful in a wide range of systems biology topics, including pathway analysis, interaction networks or gene models. Especially, it is necessary to compare biological models with measured data. This allows the identification of new models and new insights into existing ones. Results: We present MGV, a versatile generic graph viewer for multi omics data. MGV is integrated into may day batt ke et al., 2010). It extends may days visual analytics capabilities by integrating a wide range of biological models, high throughput data and meta information to display enriched graphs that combine data and models. A wide range of tools is available for visualization of nodes, data aware graph layout as well as automatic and manual aggregation and refinement of the data. We show the usefulness of MGV applied to several problems, including differential expression of alternative transcripts, transcription factor interaction, cross study clustering comparison and integration of transcript omics and metabolomics data for pathway analysis. Availability: MGV is a open source software implemented in Java and freely available as a part of may day at http://www.microarray-analysis.org/mayday. Contact:

introduction the current focus of life science research is to achieve a systems based view of processes, organisms and ecosystems. To this end, biological activity is studied using a variety of tools: gene expression on transcription level is measured using microarrays and next generation sequencing. Furthermore, gas chromatography and mass spectrometry methods are applied to measure protein and metabolite concentrations. This leads to large and complex datasets containing potentially tens of thousands of measured species from hundreds of experiments. These data are then used to build a comprehensive view of biological processes, with exhaustive formal models of the systems as one of the ultimate aims. Analysis and interpretation * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of such data call for visualization at every step to be successful. Visualization tools like box plots and heat maps support the choice of methods for quality control and normalization, as well as during statistical analysis. The identification of relationships in the data and hypothesis generation often require graph based visualizations. This includes biological pathways, regulatory and interaction networks, as well as gene models. The full extent of systems biology data is only utiliza ble if analysis tools can keep up with the data. Current datasets require classical visualization tools, a genome based view as well as strong network visualization features. Especially for the latter, smart layout and data analysis tools as well as interactivity is necessary and extensibility is important to cope with new data formats and analysis methods. Network visualization is most useful if it is combined with measured data, as this allows to compare predictions with actual results. Therefore, extensible tools for visualizing and analyzing enriched networks are desirable. Additionally, the integrative bioinformatics paradigm calls for seamless integration and processing of data from a multitude of sources. Here, we introduce a generic, integrative graph viewer called MGV (short for may day Graph Viewer). MGV is based on the versatile may day platform () and offers a comprehensive set of tools for analysis and visualization of graphs. As an extensible, feature rich () tool for multiple omics data analysis, may day is flexible about the data analyzed. A recently published major extension to may day called may day sea sight (), allows working with high throughput sequencing data. MGV is designed to work on any kind of measured data, and it can import different graph and pathway data formats. A large variety of different configurable tools are available for displaying measured data at nodes, along with layout methods that use data properties of the nodes. Several biological and all purpose graph file formats can be imported. MGV also allows to visually organize and analyze biological data. To this end, we investigated new ways of exploring, organizing and summarizing systems biology data in graphs. While the extent of systems biology data expands, so does our knowledge of the organisms, processes and molecules under investigation. Much of that knowledge is condensed in databases of biological pathways. As a conceptual representation, they are essential for understanding data and putting it into context: pathways are the building blocks of our understanding of life at its basis. Several common sources of biological pathways are available, for example KEGG (), MetaCyc (), Pathway Commons (), wiki pathways () or Reactome (). One of the most useful concepts for working with pathways is a graph representation. It allows to view the components Page: 2249 22482255

discussion in this article, we have introduced MGV, a new versatile and extensible graph viewer for systems biology data. We combined the successfully implemented concepts of graph based visualization of biological knowledge with the concept of using small multiples () for visualization of quantitative data. In order to demonstrate the feasibility of our implementation of this concept, we used data from different sources and contexts and applied MGV to investigate common questions on it. For regulatory networks, MGV provides an integrated view of the network and of the expression data, in different levels of detail. In general, the levels of detail can easily be configured via the many rendering options for nodes. Possible details range from zero values (showing only the shape of the node) to several hundred values (via heat maps and profile plots). The latter case can suffer from over plotting when many probes are displayed. In this case, summaries of the probes, e.g. box plots can be used. This is an application of the visual analytics concept: data are summarized (or omitted, e.g. by filtering out nodes or edges) in order to identify interesting regions in the graph. Then the level of details can be vastly increased, by zooming in and adding meta information to the nodes. Versatility is a design goal for MGV also in the context of data integration. MGV brings together quantitative data with annotation data and textbook knowledge. The integration of expression data with gene models allows to simultaneously visualize two levels of differential activity: splicing and transcription, which is especially interesting in larger rnase q studies, where different classes of samples are compared. The most useful rendering strategy for exon nodes are heat maps and profile plots. Circular plots are less useful here, as it is necessary to keep the width of the node constant. MGV can work on a wide variety of data and is able to join data between different sources and studies. This encompasses several studies at the same level, e.g. two microarray studies as well as the comparison of transcript omics (or proteomics) with metabolomics studies. We have illustrated this with the p aeruginosa data, in the context of a metabolic pathway in the BioPax format, giving both an overview and details of the process. A direct comparison of the metabolomics and transcript omics data though is not possible, since the studies differ in several criteria. Still, these studies are comparable enough to demonstrate the use of MGV for this application. Furthermore, to our knowledge, there is no comprehensive multi omics dataset publicly available with whole genome transcription data and a large number of measured and identified metabolites. As technology advances, such datasets will eventually be made available and MGV is well suited to work on them, as demonstrated. A further cross study visualization feature is the clustering comparison tool of MGV. It allows to investigate overlaps of probe groupings between datasets. In this way, properties of the probes in each partition can be compared, as in the chemostat and wine fermentation data. This allowed us to identify overlaps between fermentation related genes and nutrient or oxygen dependent genes, without using external annotations. Further applications include comparing profiles of groups in closely related studies and investigating the stability of clusterings among studies. MGV not only assists in exploratory analysis of pathways, but can also help in formulating new and confirmed hypothesis. For this purpose, new graphs can be easily built in MGV. The resulting graphs can be used to illustrate such a hypothesis, which can be then combined with the underlying data in an interactive environment based on may day MGV is integrated into a well established framework, connected with many analysis and visualization tools. We consider this to be beneficial because the workflow of data analysis requires several data integration and analysis steps before the high level analyses and visualizations that MGV is designed for. New methods emerge continuously. Therefore, we consider it to be important that all key features of MGV, node rendering, graph layout, data import, graph manipulation and filtering, are extensible. We are continuously extending MGV to provide new methods for all these purposes. While extensibility and breadth of functionality were in the focus of development, MGV is able to process large sparse graphs with thousands of genes. Further research is necessary on the questions of graph drawing and visualization of dense datasets, especially in the context of how to use the data properties of a node. For the latter topic, a thorough user study should evaluate assets and liabilities of the current and future approaches. Enhancements of the rendering options and speed are also planned. cross study comparison methods are also of increasing interest. A large variety of methods for data integration has been proposed, some of which require careful review and integration into MGV. The development of MGV will continue in these directions. For graph drawing, methods as suggested by for large graphs or for handling unconnected graphs can greatly enhance MGV. Further extensions in usability, e.g. a scripting feature for automation and performance enhancements are planned.
