Motivation: reverse phase protein arrays rpp as allow sensitive quantification of relative protein abundance in thousands of samples in parallel. Typical challenges involved in this technology are antibody selection, sample preparation and optimization of staining conditions. The issue of combining effective sample management and data analysis , however, has been widely neglected. Results: This motivated us to develop MIRACLE, a comprehensive and user friendly web application bridging the gap between spotting and array analysis by conveniently keeping track of sample information. Data processing includes correction of staining bias, estimation of protein concentration from response curves, normalization for total protein amount per sample and statistical evaluation. Established analysis methods have been integrated with MIRACLE, offering experimental scientists an end to end solution for sample management and for carrying out data analysis. In addition, experienced users have the possibility to export data to R for more complex analyses. MIRACLE thus has the potential to further spread utilization of rpp as as an emerging technology for high throughput protein analysis. Availability: Project URL: http://www.nanocan.org/miracle/

introduction reverse phase protein arrays are typically nitrocellulose covered glass slides on which crude lysates of tissue samples or treated cell lines are spotted. Each single slide can carry several thousand spots. Only small amounts of lysate in the range of a few cell equivalents are required for each spot. Consequently, several hundred slide copies can be created at minimal sample consumption, each of which can be interrogated with a different protein specific antibody. This allows high throughput measurement of the relative abundance of proteins in up to several thousand samples. Parallel processing of large sample numbers discerns rpp as from forward phase arrays, where probes are immobilized on a slide, and mass spectrometry, which are suitable for analysis of many proteins in small sample numbers the field of rpp as has shown steady growth since its introduction in 2001 () (). Several studies applied this technology successfully to protein and signaling pathway analyses in cancer (), as well as for cancer subtype classification and prognosis of disease progression (). The relevance of rpp a data for multi omics and high throughput projects is also highlighted by its inclusion into the Cancer Genome Atlas, where, for instance, measurements of 171 antibodies for 4400 samples of breast cancer patients are available (Atlas, 2012).

discussion rpp as are a promising technology that finds growing application in both, basic and clinical research. While many of the challenges of this technology are similar to those of traditional microarrays, rpp a specific challenges arise and have to be addressed. In our efforts to adapt this technology as secondary readout to high throughput genome wide RNAi screens, we identified a lack of a comprehensive tool incorporating all necessary tasks, such as experimental design, sample tracking and data analysis. To fill this gap, we developed MIRACLE, a web based tool with deep integration of R for efficient data analysis. Using a database driven web application, such as MIRACLE, for sample management offers a number of advantages. Due to relational tables, all data are kept in a concise and consistent format, where changes and updates are automatically propagated. In contrast to file based storage solutions, no experimental information is lost upon turnover of laboratory staff and no problems arise from cryptic and inconsistent sample terminology. Collaboratively creating experimental data is significantly more convenient in web based applications, as concurrency issues, such as file locks, can be avoided. In addition, all information can be located quickly, using full text search, which additionally increases efficiency. With regards to sample management, both the super curve package and RIMS provide a graphical user interface for specifying slide layouts, but it does not address sample tracking from plate to slide level and does not allow for multiple levels of sample information. Moreover, they lack the virtual spotting and layout editing features of MIRACLE that enable researchers to enter all sample related information already on the plate level and before the complexity of the layout is increased by the array generation. This saves a significant amount of time and effectively avoids mistakes due to manual data processing. The R packages super curve and rpp analyzer provide experienced R users with a wealth of options to analyse rpp a data. The results of these methods are relative protein concentration estimates. A logical next step could be to investigate how significant relative differences in protein levels are and how well results correlate, e.g. between slides used for normalization or between individual slides and plate based readout. Only rpp analyzer reports on slide to slide correlation (). Significance analysis is not part of any existing solution. Moreover, replicates are typically merged during data processing to increase confidence of the results, but thereby making them unavailable for subsequent significance analysis. In contrast, r miracle processes replicates individually and offers a comprehensive evaluation of significance and correlation. A number of analysis methods, such as serial dilution curve () have been published as R code, but have not been adapted to a user friendly format, thereby limiting their application for experimental researchers. Experienced R users, on the other hand, need the flexibility of the R environment to perform deeper analysis of the data. r miracle strives to serve both target groups by incorporating a broad number of published methods on rpp a data analysis in both, command line and web interface. Additionally, r miracle can be used completely independently of the MIRACLE web application, requiring only a local installation of R. Notably, the web application RIMS followed similar goals as MIRACLE, but did not include scenarios where more sophisticated data processing, e.g. quantification and normalization of the signal intensities, is necessary (). Moreover, RIMS is not actively developed or available at the moment, stressing the need for a solution like MIRACLE.

conclusion in recent years, the application of rpp a technology has matured considerably. Along with this progress, suitable computational methods have been developed to address issues in data processing. To further promote acceptance of this technology, fully integrated tools like MIRACLE are indispensable. Furthermore, it can be expected that standardization of rpp a data in a common framework can substantially aid the development of novel algorithms and allow better integration at the level of network biology and other multi omics data. It is our hope that MIRACLE will attract contributions from both, users and developers, which will help to strengthen the entire field. To this end, we have established a git hub repository (https:// git hub com nano can miracle and established a demo application (http://www.nanocan.org/miracle/demo) containing biological sample data. Further documentation and a step by step user guide are available online (Supplementary File 2).
