multi image Genome (MIG) viewer is a web based application for visualizing, querying and filtering many thousands of genome browser regions as well as for exporting the data in a variety of formats. This methodology has been used successfully to analyze chips eq data and rnase q data and to detect somatic mutations in genome resequencing projects.

introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies are producing vast amount of data for analyses. It is usual for a typical chips eq rnase q or genome resequencing experiment to produce millions of sequence reads that are subjected to various iterations of analysis. Once the reads are mapped to a reference genome, they can be visualized in a genome browser such as the UCSC genome browser (), GBrowse (), IGV () or i gb (), often in combination with a number of associated tracks such as gene structures, expression graphs, conservation plots and other quantitative data. Depending on the experiment, the data are then stored in a variety of file formats, queried and filtered using a variety of bespoke tools and languages to produce spreadsheets, web pages and overview plots and visualizations. Bioinformatics tools for analysis of such large amounts of data are still immature, have a wide range of parameters and often produce confusing results. A key issue is to verify the findings by linking filtered results to the original mapped data. For example, in a typical chips eq experiment, one would map the reads and isolate regions of enrichment using a peak finding algorithm such as MACS (). Peak finding is often dependent on antibody quality and experimental conditions. Choosing suitable cut off parameters such as p values false discovery rate, density of sequences and fold enrichment is difficult; hence, verification of the results is often done by visual inspection. Once a set of satisfactory peaks are identified, the next stage is to look for overlaps with various genomic features, such as CpG islands, genes, promoters and regions of conserved sequences. Many biologists are overwhelmed by the volume of the data and find it difficult to query and manipulate the output. An alternative use case might be in filtering somatic variant calls following NGS the ninth column defines a 'facet' for the feature that can subsequently be queried using MIG's web interface. Accessory scripts have been written to aid the construction of the input GFF3 files. Facets may be added using a perl script, annotate pl which uses cis genome () for annotating region overlaps with various 'standard' gene feature classes such as introns, exons, intragenic and intergenic regions. Gene ontologies () are also mapped using the nearest gene. Additionally, a second script, intersect append pl can be used to integrate data from other resources (e.g. CpG islands, areas of histone modification, peak calls from other chips eq experiments). This script wraps bed tools () and allows regions to be classified as overlapping true false each of the features in the set. Both annotate pl and intersect append pl append a name/ value pair to the ninth column of the source GFF3 file. These tools are available for download on the web site. MIG has been used to analyze a combined dnase seq chips eq and rnase q dataset (). As an example of MIG's use with chips eq data, we use a dataset generated with an antibody recognizing the transcriptional activator, ERF (). Examples of data querying using the MIG interface can be seen in and also within MIG itself at https://mig.molbiol.ox.ac.uk/mig. Tutorials on the web site are also available based on this dataset. In summary, we see MIG as a compelling method to investigate NGS data and other large datasets by bringing a powerful and intuitive web based interface to the biologist. MIG allows the user to generate these collections in an automated way, and store multiple projects in the MIG database. These collections can also be shared with other MIG users so that whole groups can perform analysis on the same data.
