Motivation: Pathway diagrams from PubMed and World Wide Web (WWW) contain valuable highly curated information difficult to reach without tools specifically designed and customized for the biological semantics and high content density of the images. There is currently no search engine or tool that can analyze pathway images, extract their pathway components (molecules, genes, proteins, organelles, cells, organs, etc.) and indicate their relationships. Results: Here, we describe a resource of pathway diagrams retrieved from article and web page images through optical character recognition, in conjunction with data mining and data integration methods. The recognized pathways are integrated into the biological networks research environment linking them to a

introduction biological pathways provide intuitive views of the myriad of interactions involved in biological processes. A typical signaling pathway, for example, can represent receptor binding events, protein complexes, phosphorylation reactions, translocations and transcriptional regulation, usually depicted with a set of symbols, with lines and arrows. Automated detection of genes and proteins and inference of signaling network architecture and dynamics from general () as well as domain specific () imaging data, has been of increasing interest during last years. These sophisticated methods were implemented only for a specific domain and do not provide public services for extracted pathways analysis or a software for a broader use. Thus in spite of the importance of collecting and maintaining pathway information, with the attendant biological annotations and experimental data, pathways construction, curation and integration * To whom correspondence should be addressed with public databases and experimental data remain a tedious and time consuming task (). A small number of systems have considered the issue of figure retrieval: Sub-cellular Location Image Finder () that retrieves fluorescence micrograph images from a single journal corpus; bio text () and Yale Image Finder y if () that performs text queries of figures legends. None of these methods analyzes information embedded in the image itself, nor do they compare with and supplement knowledge available in public databases and pud med. Here we present the system that addresses the problems of extraction, comparison, searching and managing biological knowledge embedded in pathway imaging data. The system provides a repository of freely available pathways recognized from imaging data. The repository allows biologists to explore, search over pathway components in open access publications and World Wide Web (WWW) and construct user's pathways and interaction networks. These pathways can be visualized and dynamically analyzed in concert with data integrated from other public databases and literature.
