Motivation: Most functions within the cell emerge thanks to protein protein interactions pp is yet experimental determination of pp is is both expensive and time consuming. PPI networks present significant levels of noise and incompleteness. Predicting interactions using only ppi network topology (topological prediction) is difficult but essential when prior biological knowledge is absent or unreliable. Methods: Network embedding emphasizes the relations between network proteins embedded in a low dimensional space, in which protein pairs that are closer to each other represent good candidate interactions. To achieve network denoising, which boosts prediction performance , we first applied minimum curvilinear embedding (MCE), and then adopted shortest path (SP) in the reduced space to assign likelihood scores to candidate interactions. Furthermore, we introduce (i) a new valid variation of MCE, named non centred MCE nc mce (ii) two automatic strategies for selecting the appropriate embedding dimension ; and (iii) two new randomized procedures for evaluating predictions. Results: We compared our method against several unsupervised and supervised ly tuned embedding approaches and node neighbourhood techniques. Despite its computational simplicity, ncmc esp was the overall leader, outperforming the current methods in topological link prediction. Conclusion: Minimum curvilinear ity is a valuable non-linear framework that we successfully applied to the embedding of protein networks for the unsupervised prediction of novel pp is. The rationale for our approach is that biological and evolutionary information is imprinted in the non-linear patterns hidden behind the protein network topology, and can be exploited for predicting new protein links. The predicted pp is represent good candidates for testing in high throughput experiments or for exploitation in systems biology tools such as those used for network based inference and prediction of disease related functional modules.

introduction detection of new interactions between proteins is central to modern biology. Its application in protein function prediction, drug delivery control and disease diagnosis has developed alongside a deeper understanding of the processes that occur within the cell. One key task in systems biology is the experimental detection of new protein protein interactions pp is. However, such experiments are time consuming and expensive. Because of this, researchers have developed computational approaches for predicting novel interactions (), intended also to guide wet lab experiments. The topological prediction of new interactions is a novel and useful option based exclusively on the structural information provided by the PPI network pp in topology. This option for prediction is particularly convenient when the available biological information on the proteins being tested for interaction (seed proteins) is incomplete or unreliable. One of the most efficient approaches is the Functional Similarity Weight (FSW) (). Such method belongs to the large and well established family of predictors that are referred to as node neighbourhood techniques (), because to assign a likelihood score to any candidate interaction (i.e. a pair of non connected proteins in the observed pp in they rely on the topological properties of the seed proteins' neighbours. The set of candidate interactions is then ranked. The main problem with these techniques is that their performance is poor when applied to sparse and noisy networks ().proposed a method for geometric denoising of p pins. The algorithm is based on the use of multidimensional scaling (MDS) to preserve the shortest paths (SP) between nodes in a low dimensional space. The predicted interactions are scored according to their Euclidean distance (ED) in the low dimensional space, following the principle that the closer two proteins are, the higher the likelihood that they interact (). Although it is not explicitly mentioned in the article, the embedding method adopted by is equivalent to iso map (). In an independent study proposed a hybrid strategy based on network embedding to assign prediction scores to candidate interactions. They exploited the notion that a pp in or theoretically, any network lies on a low dimensional manifold shaped in a high dimensional space. The shape of the manifold and the associated topology are determined by the constraints imposed on the protein interactions through biological evolution. You et al. used a renowned manifold embedding algorithm, iso map (), to *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
