Motivation: It has been known that mature transfer RNAs (tRNAs) that are encoded in the nuclear genome give rise to short molecules, collectively known as tRNA fragments or tr fs. Recently, we reported that, in healthy individuals and in patients, tr fs are constitutive, arise from mitochondrial as well as from nuclear tRNAs, and have composition and abundances that depend on a persons sex, population origin and race as well as on tissue, disease and disease subtype. Our findings as well as similar work by other groups highlight the importance of tr fs and presage an increase in the community s interest in elucidating the roles of tr fs in health and disease. Results: We created mint base a web based framework that serves the dual purpose of being a content repository for tr fs and a tool for the interactive exploration of these newly discovered molecules. A key feature of mint base is that it deterministically and exhaustively enumerates all possible gen-omic locations where a sequence fragment can be found and indicates which fragments are exclusive to tRNA space, and thus can be considered as tr fs this is a very important consideration given that the genomes of higher organisms are riddled with partial tRNA sequences and with trna lookalikes whose aberrant transcripts can be mistaken for tr fs. mint base is extremely flexible and integrates and presents tRF information from multiple yet interconnected vantage points (vistas). Vistas permit the user to interactively personalize the information that is returned and the manner in which it is displayed. mint base can report comparative information on how a tRF is distributed across all anticodon amino acid combinations, provides alignments between a tRNA and multiple tr fs with which the user can interact, provides details on published studies that reported a tRF as expressed, etc. Importantly, we designed mint base to contain all possible tr fs that could ever be produced by mature tRNAs: this allows us to report on their genomic distributions, anticodon amino acid properties, alignments, etc. while giving users the ability to at will investigate candidate tRF molecules before embarking on focused experimental explorations. Lastly, we also introduce a new labeling scheme that is trf sequence based and allows users to associate a tRF with a universally unique label trf license plate) that is independent of a genome assembly and does not require any brokering mechanism. Availability and Implementation: mint base is freely accessible at

introduction transfer RNA (tRNA) molecules serve as the bridge between the messenger RNA that is being translated and the newly synthesized polypeptide chain, and, thus, are an integral part of the translation process, as described by the central dogma of biology (). Not surprisingly, tRNAs have long been considered to serve as housekeeping molecules. In recent years, the use of next generation sequencing to investigate cellular transcriptome s has uncovered ample evidence that a tRNA can also be a source of a rich repertoire of non-coding RNAs nc rnas (). These derivative molecules are referred to as trna derived fragments or tr fs are generally short, correspond to segments of variable length and their functions are largely unknown. It is important to note that tr fs are not restricted to human biology; indeed, they have been reported in multiple organisms (). Earlier work () recognized four structural types of molecules originating from the mature tRNA: 5 0 halves 3 0 halves 5 0-tRFs and 3 0-tRFs (). The 5 0 halves and 3 0 halves result from angio gen in cleavage of the mature tRNA at the anticodon loop, and are typically 33 nucleotides (nt) in length. The 5 0-tRFs and 3 0-tRFs are of variable length, shorter than halves ( 30 nt) and originate from cleavage of the mature tRNA at the D and T arms, respectively. In recent work, we described a previously unreported fifth structural type of tr fs the internal tr fs or it rfs (). The sequences of it rfs are wholly contained within the span of the mature tRNA sequence (). In terms of length, it rfs are a typical in that they can be as short as 5 0-tRFs/3 0-tRFs (e.g. 17-mers) and at least as long as 5 0-halves/3 0 halves (e.g. 33-mers) (). We also found that the 5 0-tRF and 3 0-tRF types have richer diversity than previously known, comprising molecules with many distinct and quantized lengths. In addition, we showed that the tRNAs of the mitochondrial genome mitochondrial ly encoded') are a very rich source of both halves and tr fs just like the tRNAs that are encoded by the nuclear genome nu clearly encoded'). Interestingly, the length distribution and other properties of all five structural types of fragments that are derived from mitochondrial ly encoded tRNAs differ from those of the fragments arising from nu clearly encoded tRNAs (). In terms of function, tr fs are diverse. Not only has loading on argonaut e (Ago) and participation in transcriptional repression been associated with tr fs (), but it is also a cell type dependent process as we reported in (). The regulation of translation initiation (), the formation of stress granules (), and the displacement of mRNAs from rna binding proteins by the newly discovered it rfs () are also among the tr fs emerging roles. Recently, our group also showed that the structural type of trna half can adopt multiple active instances that are distinguished by differences in their 3 0 terminus modifications (e.g. a cyclic phosphate group instead of the typical hydroxyl), that the expression of these modified tRNA halves shot rnas can depend on sex hormones, and that their silencing impedes cell proliferation (). Working with transcriptome s from human tissues, instead of cell lines, we were able to generate evidence of intriguing associations involving tRNA fragments. In particular, we showed that the expression profiles of 5 0 halves 3 0 halves 5 0-tRFs, 3 0-tRFs and it rfs from mitochondrial ly and nu clearly encoded tRNAs depend on tissue, tissue state, disease subtype and on an individual's sex, population origin and race (). Moreover, we showed that these molecules are produced constitutively (). Our discoveries of the existence of richer categories of 5 0-/3 0tRFs and of the previously unrecognized it rfs our finding that mitochondrial ly encoded tRNAs are also sources of tRNA fragments with profiles that differ distinctly from those of their nu clearly encoded counterparts as well as the numerous dependencies on tissue, disease and an individual's attributes, which we uncovered, generate an acute need for an integrated and multi-faceted access to this knowledge. The current solutions, e.g. (), only partially meet this need while also offering limited search and user interaction capabilities. Moreover, by considering short sequences (e.g. 14-nt, 15-nt, 16-nt, etc.) in a probabilistic search scheme whose performance is known to be influenced by the length of the query (), instead of employing a deterministic and exhaustive approach such as the one we described in (), the current schemes increase the likelihood that aberrant transcripts will be misreported as tr fs (). Compounding these limitations are several facts that pertain to the idiosyncrasies of tRNA sequences and impose very concrete limitations on how one must go about identifying tRNA fragments among the reads of next generation sequencing datasets. As we detailed at length in (), and more recently in (), the. This is a pictorial summary of the five structural categories of tRNA fragments that are now known to arise from mature tRNAs, both mitochondrial ly and nu clearly encoded ones mapping of such reads must be deterministic and exhaustive, should not permit replacements or insertions deletions and, most importantly, take into account the fact that the human genome is riddled with partial tRNA sequences and with trna lookalikes (). Here, we present a knowledge repository and interactive framework for the exploration of mi-tochondrial and n-uclear tr fs mint base. mint base recognizes that distinct iso decoders of the same anticodon comprise sequence segments that can differ ever so slightly from one another. Consequently, mint base does not group together instances of a structural type across iso decoders of the same anticodon (e.g. the 5 0 halves from all asp gtc iso decoders if we were to allow such a grouping, we would hinder the user's ability to elucidate the differences of these distinct instances in terms of transcription and of genomic distribution. Instead, mint base treats each such tRF as a molecule that can be studied independently in its own right. mint base also introduces and adopts a second labeling scheme, one that associates each tRF with a unique label trf license plate') that is derived from the tr fs nucleotide sequence. The uniqueness of the label ensures that a trf license plate corresponds to a unique nucleotide sequence. This new labeling approach complements the genome centric labeling scheme that we introduced in (), and which is also used by mint base. mint base comprehensively embraces this newly discovered complexity of the tRF biology, incorporates the latest discoveries in this field, brings about the various interconnections among tr fs and provides access to what is already known via goal oriented displays while also remaining flexible enough to easily accommodate future discoveries. mint base is freely accessible at http://cm.jefferson.edu/ mint base. Codes for generating trf license plates and for converting them back to nucleotide sequences are available at https:// cm jefferson edu mint codes
discussion we presented mint base a novel framework for studying fragments that arise from mitochondrial and nuclear mature tRNAs. mint base is an easy to use resource for accessing information on tr fs and interactively studying them from diverse vantage points using one or more of the five available vistas. Each vista provides distinct functionalities and its output is interconnected to some of the other four vistas, which in turn enables exploration of the active results from multiple angles at any time. The output pages provide filtering and sorting capabilities thereby permitting an interactive study and further filtering of the active results by the user. For example, the user can easily group the results to investigate possible connections to a type of tRF, a specific source tRNA, number of instances in tRNA space, etc. Additionally, several output pages also include links to external databases (e.g. the UCSC Genome Browser, PubMed, etc.) aimed at providing the user with other easily accessible information. mint base offers several advantages. First, it addresses the need for a database that includes the most recent discoveries in the field of tr fs and tRNA biology. The discoveries of the new structural type of it rfs of tr fs produced from mitochondrial tRNAs and of shot rnas represent recent advances that are already part of mint bases knowledge repository. Second, three of the five vistas that mint base makes available are meant to capture and highlight the inherent complexity of the space of mature tRNAs while illustrating at the same time the ambiguity among parental tRNA genes: the 'Genomic Loci' vista provides a detailed perspective on the possible genomic origins of a tRF whereas the 'RNA Molecule' and 'tRF Summary' vistas summarize the distribution of each tRF molecule across the various anticodon siso decoders from which it could arise. Thereby, mint base allows the user to retrieve information in multiple ways while also keeping at the forefront the complexity of the tRNA space throughout the user's interactive session. Third, mint base has been built to incorporate the spectrum of all possible tr fs (currently up to 50 nt in length longer tr fs can be accommodated trivially) that can ever arise from a mature tRNA, whether it is mitochondrial ly or nu clearly encoded. Our intent was to design a tool that can further promote research activities in the field of tr fs. Thus, in addition to listing molecules with known expression, mint base can optionally provide detailed information on fragments that could potentially derive from mature tRNAs and for which no information exists yet in the public domain. Such candidate tr fs can serve as the subject of focused experimental studies by mint bases users. Lastly, mint base permits users to add their own datasets to the repository. This is done easily through the use of a submission conduit that we also provide. Save a mandatory manual verification of the provided information the process is entirely automated. In summary, we hope mint base will prove a useful framework for researchers who study tRNAs and tr fs by providing quick access to the available knowledge, by juxtaposing relevant information in order to enable comparative analyses, by adopting and using both genome centric and sequence centric labeling schemes and by enabling web based exploratory studies through its user friendly trna centric interface.
