Molecular inversion probes (MIPs) enable cost effective multiplex targeted gene resequencing in large cohorts. However, the design of individual MIPs is a critical parameter governing the performance of this technology with respect to capture uniformity and speci-ficity. mip gen is a user friendly package that simplifies the process of designing custom MIP assays to arbitrary targets. New logistic and svm derived models enable in silico predictions of assay success, and assay redesign exhibits improved coverage uniformity relative to previous methods, which in turn improves the utility of MIPs for cost effective targeted sequencing for candidate gene validation and for diagnostic sequencing in a clinical setting. Availability and implementation: mip gen is implemented in C++. Source code and accompanying Python scripts are available at

introduction while rare variants and de novo mutations contribute to the genetic basis of complex diseases including intellectual disability (), autism spectrum disorders (O'), epilepsy () and congenital heart disease (), the implication of individual genes in these phenotypes typically requires sequencing of large numbers of cases and controls. Molecular inversion probes [MIPs, also known as padlock probes (have proven successful in a broad range of applications, including targeted genotyping (), DNA sequencing (O'), assessing copy number and content (), methylation patterns (), RNA all elo typing () and detection of bacteria in clinical samples (). MIPs boast low amortized cost per sample and high scalability o characteristics that may allow it to replace Sanger sequencing for clinical genetic testing (). We recently built upon the MIP assay with the introduction of single molecule MIPs or sm mips MIPs with molecular tags to track independent capture events (). However, while genotyping accuracy and sensitivity for detecting low frequency alleles have been enhanced, sm mips do not address a key limitation: non-uniformity of capture efficiencies within probe sets. Early large scale experiments () that attempted to optimize targeting arm melting temperatures demonstrated substantial non-uniformity across target sites, with longer exons and GC extremes frequently failing capture. Dosing MIPs to compensate for dropout, known as re pooling enables significantly enhanced coverage (), but collecting the empirical data for re pooling lowers assay turnaround time and expends sequencing resources. Previous studies with MIP () and long padlock probe (LPP) () assays were limited in their exploration of possible design remedies, including choosing only high performing nucleotides at the MIP ligation junction, preferring low copy targeting arm sequences and prioritization based on oligonucleotide melting temperatures. Work by incorporated DNA folding metrics into the neural network driven framework pp designer and suggests that further modifications to MIP design and capture protocols could yield additional gains in coverage uniformity. Here we describe an empirically trained design algorithm for MIP design that attains our goal of optimizing performance and reducing reliance on empirical testing for developing successful smm ip assays.
