Although small non-coding RNAs, such as microRNAs, have well established functions in the cell, long non-coding RNAs ln crnas have only recently started to emerge as abundant regulators of cell physiology, and their functions may be diverse. A small number of studies describe interactions between small and ln crnas with ln crnas acting either as inhibitory decoys or as regulatory targets of microRNAs, but such interactions are still poorly explored. To facilitate the study of microrna l ncrna interactions, we implemented mir code a comprehensive searchable map of putative microRNA target sites across the complete gen code annotated transcriptome, including 10 419 l ncrna genes in the current version.

introduction large scale studies in recent years have revealed that mammalian genomes encode thousands of long (200 nt) transcripts that lack coding capacity, but are otherwise messenger rna like. These are collectively referred to as long non-coding RNAs ln crnas (). Although their overall biological importance has been debated, early functional examples were discovered more than 20 years ago, notably H 19 () and XIST (). Novel ln crnas are now being uncovered at an increasing rate, with molecular functions that include recruitment of histone modifying complexes to chromatin [e.g. hot air and hot tip (] and modulation of transcription and splicing by molecular interaction with relevant factors [e.g. GAS5 and MALAT1 (. A small number of studies describe interactions between small and ln crnas with ln crnas acting either as inhibitory decoys of microRNAs () or as regulatory targets. In humans, miR-671 targets an antisense transcript of the human CDR1 gene (), and miR-29 can regulate the l ncrna MEG3 in hepatocellular cancer, although only indirectly (). Long non-coding transcripts that derive * To whom correspondence should be addressed. from ultra conserved regions tu crs have also been suggested to be microRNA targets (). In plants, the IPS1 l ncrna inhibits miR-399 through a sponge decoy effect (). herpesvirus encoded RNAs can bind and inhibit human host miR-27 (), and the hul c l ncrna can bind and sequester miR-372 in liver cancer (). A pseudogene of the PTEN tumor suppressor can compete for microRNA binding with its coding counterpart (), and microRNA inhibition by ln crnas is important during muscle differentiation (). The decoy hypothesis is further supported by the observation that microRNAs with many targets in the cell tend to have a diluted effect on each individual target (). A recent study used lentiviral small hairpin RNAs to silence 147 ln crnas at an average efficacy of 75% (), demonstrating that ln crnas in general are susceptible to regulation by argonaut e small RNA complexes despite frequent nuclear localization. However, existing web accessible microRNA target prediction databases, such as pic tar (), miRanda () or targets can (), are focused on 3 untranslated region (UTR) of coding genes and fail to provide predictions for the long non-coding transcriptome. To simplify the study of microrna l ncrna interactions, we here describe mir code a comprehensive map of putative microRNA target sites across the gen code long non-coding transcriptome (10 419/15 977 ln crnas genes transcripts in the current version based on gen code V11). mir code is designed to be an easy to use, web based tool, with search functionalities to aid hypothesis generation starting from a l ncrna or microRNA of interest. Custom genome browser views and downloadable tab delimited files are also accessible through the mir code web interface. mir code additionally covers other gen code gene classes, including 12 549 pseudogenes and 19 999 coding genes both in typical (3-UTR) and a typical (5-UTR and CDS) positions.
