Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of endo genes derived from a precursor pre mirna and involved in post-transcriptional regulation. Experimental identification of novel miRNAs is difficult because they are often transcribed under specific conditions and cell types. Several computational methods were developed to detect new miRNAs starting from known ones or from deep sequencing data, and to validate their pre mirnas. Results: We present a genome wide search algorithm, called MIReNA, that looks for miRNA sequences by exploring a multidimensional space defined by only five (physical and combinatorial) parameters characterizing acceptable pre mirnas. MIReNA validates pre mirnas with high sensitivity and specificity, and detects new miRNAs by homology from known miRNAs or from deep sequencing data. A performance comparison between MIReNA and four available predictive systems has been done. MIReNA approach is strikingly simple but it turns out to be powerful at least as much as more sophisticated algorithmic methods. MIReNA obtains better results than three known algorithms that validate pre mirnas. It demonstrates that machine learning is not a necessary algorithmic approach for pre mirnas computational validation. In particular, machine learning algorithms can only confirm pre mirnas that look alike known ones, this being a limitation while exploring species with no known pre mirnas. The possibility to adapt the search to specific species, possibly characterized by specific properties of their miRNAs and pre mirnas is a major feature of MIReNA. A parameter adjustment calibrates specificity and sensitivity in MIReNA, a key feature for predictive systems, which is not present in machine learning approaches. Comparison of MIReNA with mir deep using deep sequencing data to predict miRNAs highlights a highly specific predictive power of MIReNA. Availability: At the address

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) are a class of endo genes of 1825 nt in length and they occur in a precursor pre mirna with a * To whom correspondence should be addressed. characteristic hairpin secondary structure. miRNAs are involved in post-transcriptional regulation of protein coding genes in animals and plants by sequence complementarity within the corresponding messenger RNA. Since the discoveries of lin-4 and let-7 () in Caenorhabditis elegans, the number of mirna pre mirna pairs found in mir base (), the reference database collecting all known miRNAs from 115 species, has grown to more than 10000 (11488 in version 14.0). Experimental identification of novel miRNAs is difficult because they might be transcribed under specific conditions and cell types. Only the half (6166 out of 11488) of mir base pre mirna mirna pairs have been experimentally validated. Several computational methods were developed to detect miRNAs in genomes (see, for a review). A first family of methods tests specific physical and geometrical characteristics of the associated pre mirnas (); these properties concern the hairpin structure of sequences that are similar to experimentally known pre mirna sequences. A second family is constituted by de novo methods that use thermodynamic stability of pre mirna hairpins and characteristic patterns of sequence conservation () to predict pre mirnas. To confirm pre mirna sequences and their structures, tools that are based either on machine learning algorithms () or on ranking euclidean distances in a multidimensional space constructed from more than 30 parameters () have been developed. A third approach to miRNA prediction is based on deep sequencing data. A computational tool, named mir deep predicting pre mirna mirna pairs by combining experimental data to a Dicer processing model has been introduced (). We propose a new tool, named MIReNA, designed for answering several questions on miRNAs and pre mirnas. MIReNA searches for miRNAs and pre mirnas at genome scale, and computationally validates pre mirnas. It can be used in four different ways, depending on available data: known miRNAs, deep sequencing reads, potential miRNAs occurring in long sequences and putative pre mirnas containing potential miRNAs. It has been compared to four existing computational tools: mip red () that classifies sequences from real or pseudo pre mirnas by using a random forest prediction model with combined features, mirabel a () that uses an ab initio approach to identify clustered miRNAs based on the validation of pre mirnas by a page 2227 22262234

discussion mirena is a platform that helps to test new hypothesis on miRNAs and pre mirna structures. Across organisms, it might be that the characteristic length of miRNA sequences might vary slightly and a tool like MIReNA, allowing for length calibration, can help in silico investigation of the existence of miRNA sequences with nonstandard properties. Similar considerations might be extended to unusual characteristics of pre mirna structures as hairpin multiple branching, contrary to what has been usually assumed (). Experimentally validated multiple branched pre mirnas exist (Supplementary) and in mir base they constitute the 10% (671 over 6166) of experimentally validated pre mirnas. Many other properties of miRNAs and pre mirnas can be fine tuned in MIReNA giving the opportunity to the biologist to perform an in silico identification of miRNA sequences (possibly with non-standard features) in experimentally unexplored genomes. MIReNA does not search for structurally similar pre mirnas. In consequence, its results are different from those obtained by most page 2233 22262234
