Exploring microRNA (miRNA) regulations and protein– protein interactions could reveal the molecular mechanisms responsible for complex biological processes. Mirin is a web based application suitable for identifying functional modules from protein– protein interaction networks regulated by aberrant miRNAs under user defined biological conditions such as cancers. The analysis involves combining miRNA regulations, protein protein interactions between target genes, as well as mRNA and miRNA expression profiles provided by users. Mirin has successfully uncovered on com irs and their regulatory networks in various cancers, such as gastric and breast cancer. Availability and implementation: Mirin is freely available at http://

introduction micrornas (miRNA) are short non-coding RNA molecules that repress target gene expression at the post-transcriptional level. miRNAs regulate critical biological processes such as cell growth, tissue differentiation and embryonic development. Therefore, corrupted miRNA and dysfunctional miRNA biogenesis may lead to various disorders, such as cancer. Most miRNAs regulate a large number of genes, and so it is difficult to determine the primary function of a given miRNA. Previous studies report that complexity of miRNA regulation and topological characteristics of protein protein interaction networks (PINs) are correlated (). Therefore, the interacting proteins targeted by a given miRNA can reveal its function. Additionally, because PINs are dynamic in cellular systems, they have frequently been integrated with mRNA expression profiles to expose conditional network modules under a biological state (). Consequently, integrating miRNA regulations with PINs and expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs could provide opportunities to identify mirna regulated PINs and their function under specific biological conditions, such as cancer versus normal samples (). Here, we designed a web application, Mirin, to identify disturbed miRNA regulatory subnetworks and their functions under user specified biological conditions. Mirin takes advantage of miRNA targets and protein protein interactions pp is as well as incorporating gene expression data, to create condition specific mirna mediated PINs. Although there already exists a similar tool, mirc on nx (), it does not incorporate pp is. The core analytic procedure of Mirin has been used to successfully identify cancer associated mirna regulated PIN modules in gastric () and breast cancer (). Besides exploring individual mirna regulated subnetworks, Mirin also takes the co regulations of multiple miRNAs into consideration to conduct a more comprehensive analysis of miRNA regulatory networks.

discussion to demonstrate the capabilities of Mirin, we applied it to invasive carcinoma of the breast. Expression profiles of miRNAs and mRNAs were obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (Supplementary Tables S4 and S5). After executing the analysis pipeline of Mirin, we identified the top 20 DE miRNAs (9 downregulated and 11 upregulated) in breast cancer tissue (Supplementary). According to mir2 disease (), 6 and 10 of the 20 miRNAs are associated with breast and other cancers, respectively. We focused on miR-210 regulatory modules and found some interesting GO terms, such as 'response to estrogen stimulus' and 'positive regulation of canonical wingless receptor signaling pathway', which are associated with the carcinogenesis (Supplementary). From a network view, we can see that miR-210 might inhibit caveolin 1 and modulate estrogen receptor 1, which are estrogen responsive genes described as tumor suppressors in breast cancer () (Supplementary). Furthermore, by using Gene expression based Outcome for Breast cancer Online (), we found that the expression levels of genes involved in the miRNA regulatory networks identified by Mirin can significantly affect breast cancer patient survival rates (Supplementary). This case study exhibits how Mirin could be used to help identify miRNA regulatory networks associated with user specified conditions.. Overview of Mirin functions. Through integrating user uploaded expression profiles with built in miRNA regulation and PIN information, Mirin can identify miRNA regulatory networks and provide (A) summary tables describing statistical information about DE miRNAs and their regulatory networks, (B) results from functional enrichment analysis that visualize functional modules and summarize enriched functions, (C) the activities of miRNA regulatory modules under specific biological conditions and (D) co regulations between DE miRNAs and their co regulatory networks modules
