Plant microRNA prediction tools that use small rna sequencing data are emerging quickly. These existing tools have at least one of the following problems: (i) high false positive rate; (ii) long running time; (iii) work only for genomes in their databases; (iv) hard to install or use. We developed mir prefer (miRNA PREdiction From small rnase q data), which uses expression patterns of miRNA and follows the criteria for plant microRNA annotation to accurately predict plant miRNAs from one or more small rnase q data samples of the same species. We tested mir prefer on several plant species. The results show that mir prefer is sensitive, accurate, fast and has low memory footprint. Availability and implementation: https://github.com

introduction plant microRNAs (miRNAs) are 21nt long non-coding RNAs that play important roles in transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression (). Recently developed genome wide miRNA annotation tools all use small rnase q data to quantify the expression of annotated miRNAs and to predict novel ones (). These tools suffer from several of the following problems. First, these tools usually have variable sensitivity and high false positive (FP) rate when applied to different species. Second, most of existing ngs based tools are slow. Third, most existing command line based tools are not user friendly. web server tools, such as mir analyzer (), are easy to use. But they usually only work for genomes in their databases, which inhibit users to analyze new genomes. In addition, most of web server tools also have other problems listed here. Thus, there is a need for a plant miRNA prediction tool that has good performance (high sensitivity, low FP rate and accurate), works for all plant genomes, runs fast, has a small memory footprint and is easy to use. mir pfe fer uses expression patterns of miRNAs and follows the criteria for plant microRNA annotation () to accurately predict plant miRNAs from one or more small rnase q data samples. It has high sensitivity and low FP rate. mir prefer is much faster and uses less memory than existing tools. Using mir prefer requires minimum informatics expert ize it has low dependency on other programs; there is no need to compile or install the pipeline; it provides a checkpoint feature, which makes it easy to continue an unfinished job from where it was stopped; and the documentation is publicly available. The mir prefer pipeline is in the process of being incorporated into the maker p genome annotation engine (). job running on a high performance computing system is killed because of resource limits, or the laptop that the user works on runs out of battery. By restarting a job from the latest checkpoint other than starting it from the beginning, a lot of time resources can be saved for long running jobs on large plant genomes. As far as we know, mir prefer is the first microRNA prediction tool that provides such a useful feature.
