Motivation: Determining the interaction partners among protein domain families poses hard computational problems, in particular in the presence of paralogous proteins. Available approaches aim to identify interaction partners among protein domain families through maximizing the similarity between trimmed versions of their phylogenetic trees. Since maximization of any natural similarity score is computationally difficult, many approaches employ heuristics to evaluate the distance matrices corresponding to the tree topologies in question. In this article, we devise an efficient deterministic algorithm which directly maximizes the similarity between two leaf labeled trees with edge lengths, obtaining a score optimal alignment of the two trees in question. Results: Our algorithm is significantly faster than those methods based on distance matrix comparison: 1 min on a single processor versus 730 h on a supercomputer. Furthermore, we outperform the current state of the art exhaustive search approach in terms of precision, while incurring acceptable losses in recall.

introduction the vast majority of cellular functions are exerted by combinations of interacting gene products. As a result, 'preservation of functionality' among proteins and other gene products typically implies 'preservation of interactions' across species. It is well established that protein protein interactions (both physical interactions as well as co occurence of domains) are preserved through speciation events [see Lovell and Robertson 2010 and the references therein]. A major implication of this is that the evolutionary trees behind two interacting protein families can look near identical. As interacting proteins have a tendency to co evolve it may be possible to assess the potential of two or more proteins (or other gene products) being interaction partners by measuring how similarly they evolve across related species. For this purpose, a number of computational strategies have been developed. Such strategies aim to compare the phylogenetic trees of two (or more) protein or protein domain families, where paralogs and orthologs are represented with leaves with appropriate labels and internal vertices can be interpreted as either speciation or duplication events. Among these strategies we will focus on mirror tree approaches, which explicitly or implicitly map leaves of a pair of trees (belonging to two distinct proteins or gene products) onto one another such that the leaves that are mapped to each other would be identified as potential interaction partners. mirror tree approaches aim at an overall quantification of 'family similarity' via a measure of tree similarity. Typically, these approaches do not aim to modify the specific topology of the underlying phylogenetic trees and thus are different from tree reconciliation approaches (). They are also distinct from phylogenetic profiling methods (), which aim to measure the phylogenetic profiles of proteins or domains to check for potential interaction partners. The first mirror tree approach was proposed to discover protein protein (rather than domain domain interactions and was based on comparing the distance matrices 1 resulting from the multiple alignment members of each protein family (). Note that one can interpret this as mapping leaves onto one another, as will be explained below. Since this study, a number of mirror tree approaches have been developed; almost all of these approaches are again based on comparing distance matrices rather than the trees directly (see the introductory paper by and Pazos and Valencia (2008) for more references). In fact, direct comparison of gene trees has been considered as '... a problem yet to be fully resolved.' (. In this article, we consider a fresh approach to the problem of predicting protein or other gene product interactions by comparing gene trees directly, without the aid of a distance matrix. Note that such a distance matrix is a by product of the underlying phylogenetic tree: popular multiple sequence alignment methods typically align sequences in the order imposed by their phylogenetic tree and the 'distances' in the matrix correspond to the distances in the phylogenetic tree. As a result our method should be considered as a more direct approach to mirroring trees. In the case where there are no paralogs of any gene, assessing tree similarity is both computationally straightforward and reliable (). More specifically, if there is at most one family member per species, the mapping problem reduces to

discussion runtime. The possibly most striking advantage of our topology based approach is the drastic reduction of runtime we can compute mappings for the 488 interacting domain families in roughly 1 min on a single cpu in comparison to 730 h on mare nostrum 4 needed for the Metropolis search performed by (). Note that there are rapidly growing large scale phylogenetic databases such as ENSEMBL (http:// ensembl org or phylo medb (http://phylomedb.org), whose growth is further accelerated by next generation sequencing projects (as of 12th August, 2011, phylo medb contains 482274 phylogenetic trees). The reduction in runtime delivered by our approach certainly overcomes a major obstacle we render large scale mapping and, as a consequence, comparison of paralog rich gene trees feasible. Note that this reduction has become possible by imposing both computationally and biologically reasonable constraints on the search space while at the same time allowing for an efficient scheme to find the global optimum within these constraints. Search space size recall. Comparing C Opt with the method of () (heuristic) overall, clearly achieve best recall. As pointed out above, this comes as no surprise since we can not explore pairings that contradict the topologies of the paired trees. Quite surprisingly though, although usage of tree topology and neighbor joining trees in particular have been discussed rather controversially (), we find that still the majority of pairings (54.6% with the strictest constraints and 61.2% for allowing isolated and parallel deletion) can be determined by a topology based approach. These numbers may put usage of neighbor joining tree topology in mirror tree approaches into a general perspective. Moreover, note that the fraction of correct domain pairs computed by our method over that of the heuristic search method is 0.7 (= TP(C opt tp heuristic = recall c opt recall heuristic =
