Motivation: A crucial problem in genome assembly is the discovery and correction of mis assembly errors in draft genomes. We develop a method called mis sequel that enhances the quality of draft genomes by identifying mis assembly errors and their breakpoints using paired end sequence reads and optical mapping data. Our method also fulfills the critical need for open source computational methods for analyzing optical mapping data. We apply our method to various assemblies of the loblolly pine, Francisella tularensis, rice and budgerigar genomes. We generated and used stimulated optical mapping data for loblolly pine and f tularensis and used real optical mapping data for rice and budgerigar. Results: Our results demonstrate that we detect more than 54% of extensively mis assembled con-tigs and more than 60% of locally mis assembled contigs in assemblies of f tularensis and between 31% and 100% of extensively mis assembled contigs and between 57% and 73% of locally mis assembled contigs in assemblies of loblolly pine. Using the real optical mapping data, we correctly identified 75% of extensively mis assembled contigs and 100% of locally mis assembled contigs in rice, and 77% of extensively mis assembled contigs and 80% of locally mis assembled contigs in budgerigar. Availability and implementation: mis sequel can be used as a post-processing step in combination with any genome assembler and is freely available at

introduction comparing genetic variation between and within a species is a fundamental activity in biological research. For example, there is currently a major effort to sequence entire genomes of agriculturally important plant species to identify parts of the genome variable in a given breeding program and, ultimately, create superior plant varieties. Robust genome assembly methods are imperative to these large sequencing initiatives and other scientific projects () because scientific analyses frequently use those genomes to determine genetic variation and associated biological traits. At present, the majority of assembly programs are based on the Eulerian assembly paradigm (), where a de Bruijn graph is constructed with a vertex v for every k  1-mer present in a set of reads and an edge v; v 0  for every observed km er in the reads with k  1-mer prefix v and k  1-mer suffix v 0. A contig corresponds to a non branching path through this graph. We refer the reader to for a more thorough explanation of de Bruijn graphs and their use in assembly. SPAdes (), i dba (), euler sr (), Velvet zer bino and Birney 2008), soap de novo (), ABySS () and all paths () all use this paradigm and follow the same general outline: extract km ers from the reads, construct a de Bruijn graph from the set km ers simplify the graph and construct contigs. One crucial problem that persists in Eulerian assembly (and genome assembly, in general) is the discovery and correction of mis assembly errors in draft genomes. We define a mis assembly error as
