DNA methylation is one of the most commonly studied epigenetic modifications due to its role in both disease and development. The Illumina human methylation 450 bead chip is a cost effective way to profile 450 000 CpGs across the human genome, making it a popular platform for profiling DNA methylation. Here we introduce miss methyl an R package with a suite of tools for performing normalization, removal of unwanted variation in differential methylation analysis, differential variability testing and gene set analysis for the 450K array. Availability and implementation: miss methyl is an R package available from the Bioconductor project at www bioconductor org
introduction dna methylation, one of the most widely studied epigenetic modifications, is crucial for normal embryonic development and is often disrupted in disease. Epigenetic marks can be modified by environmental exposures and are dramatically altered in cancer. Since epigenetic changes are potentially reversible, DNA methylation is an attractive therapeutic target and remains an important area of research. There are several array and sequencing based technologies available for profiling DNA methylation. While sequencing costs have declined, it remains expensive for large DNA methylation studies, making arrays a cost effective alternative. illumina s human methylation 450 (450K) bead chip is currently the most popular platform, having been used in many large studies such as The Cancer Genome Atlas, as well as in many epi genome wide association studies. Here, we present the miss methyl R package, which contains dedicated tools for performing a range of analyses primarily targeted at 450K arrays. These methods include normalization, removal of unwanted variation (RUV) such as batch effects in a differential methylation analysis, differential variability testing and gene set analysis. Software packages for reading in raw data, pre-processing and differential methylation analysis include min fi (), methyl kit () and methyl umi. However, miss methyl provides more specialized analysis methods not available elsewhere.

conclusion the miss methyl R package contains a suite of functions to perform novel analyses for 450K array data, with new functions likely to be added as they are developed. The functions have been written to complement the limma package and are compatible with data objects from min fi methyl umi and edgeR. In addition, miss methyl is well documented and freely available from Bioconductor.
