Motivation: exo me capture kits have capture efficiencies that range from 40 to 60%. A significant amount of off target reads are from the mitochondrial genome. These unintentionally sequenced mitochon-drial reads provide unique opportunities to study the mitochondria genome. Results: mi to seek is an open source software tool that can reliably and easily extract mitochondrial genome information from exo me and whole genome sequencing data. mi to seek evaluates mitochondrial genome alignment quality, estimates relative mitochondrial copy numbers and detects hetero plas my somatic mutation and structural variants of the mitochondrial genome. mi to seek can be set up to run in parallel or serial on large exo me sequencing datasets.

introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) has enabled high throughput production of sequencing data at a low cost. Projects such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the 1000 Genomes Project have generated huge amounts of sequencing data. NGS data are rich and informative and contain many off target reads that are often ignored but which may be biologically relevant. Sequencing data outside capture regions can produce reliable variation data (). Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences are recoverable in exo me sequencing data (), even when the mtDNA is not included in the target region. Picardi and Pesole (2012) also provided scripts for assembling mitochondrial genome exo me sequencing data. Based on those findings, we designed and implemented a tool, mi to seek for high throughput secondary mitochondrial data mining from exo me sequencing data or whole genome sequencing data. mi to seek extracts mitochondrial information from exo me sequencing data and performs analyses on four major mitochondrial factors: hetero plas my somatic mutations, relative copy number variation and large structural changes.

discussion owing to the limitation of exo me sequencing data, mi to seek is not capable of calculating absolute copy number of mtDNA, only relative mtDNA copy number. Also, owing to noise in the sequencing data, mi to seek is more suited to detecting large copy number variation rather than small copy number variation. mi to seek is designed to work with paired end sequencing data rather than single end sequencing data given the large abundance of paired end sequencing data. mi to seek is designed with accessibility in mind. It considers many unique parameters that have not been implemented by other genome analysis tools. It is the only sequencing analysis tool that reports allele counts separately by forward and reverse strands, critical information for assessing strand bias (). mi to seek creates opportunities for high throughput mitochondrial sequencing data mining from existing large exo me sequencing databases.
