We describe mit rata the first web based tool for microRNA Truncation and Tailing analysis the analysis of 3 0 modifications of microRNAs including the loss or gain of nucleotides relative to the canonical sequence. mit rata is implemented in Python (version 3) and employs parallel processing modules to enhance its scalability when analyzing multiple small RNA (sRNA) sequencing datasets. It utilizes mir base currently version 21, as a source of known microRNAs for analysis. mit rata notifies user(s) via email to download as well as visualize the results online. mitra tas strengths lie in (i) its biologist focused web interface, (ii) improved scalability via parallel processing and (iii) its uniqueness as a web tool to perform microRNA truncation and tailing analysis. Availability and implementation: mit rata is developed in Python and PHP. It is available as a web based application from https://wasabi.dbi.udel.edu/apps/ta/.

introduction revolutionary changes in next generation sequencing and its ever decreasing cost have driven a growing need for bioinformatics tools and algorithms. Molecular analysis of plant microRNAs (miRNAs) has demonstrated their 3 0 protection by action of the methyltransferase HUA enhance r1 (HEN1), which adds a 2 0o methyl group to the 3 0 terminal ribose of miRNAs and other small RNAs (). Such 3 0 modification protects plant miRNAs from uri dy lation [addition of uridine (U) nucleotides] (). We and others have previously demonstrated via sequencing studies and comparative analysis that miRNAs in a hen1 mutant (and to a much less extent in wild type Arabidopsis) demonstrate an array of 3 0 modifications, include loss of nucleotides (truncation) and an addition of one to several non templated nucleotides, predominantly uridine s (U) (). Previous reports described varying degrees of 3 0 modifications that differ among miRNA families yet are conserved for a given miRNA across plant species (). With advancements in highly productive forward and reverse genetics approaches, additional genes important to 3 0 modifications of small RNAs are being characterized. Deep sequencing in these mutants is providing insights into the mechanisms by which these genes function, or at least fail to function in the mutants. For example, analysis of the hen1/heso1 double mutant revealed a reduction in 3 0 uri dy lation relative to hen1 (). Recent genetic analysis identified a HESO1 ortholog, URT1, with a similar but non-redundant role as a nucleo tidy l transferase that uri dy lates miRNAs (). Thus both genetic analysis and sequencing have demonstrated the complexity of 3 0 truncation and tailing (). Interestingly, these 3 0 end modifications can alter the nature of interaction with a target, while the pairing of a miRNA with its targets has been proposed to play critical role in the V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com extent of 3 0 modifications (). Further insights into these mirna target interactions and the influence of 3 0 modifications could be gained via a new generation of computational tools () In analysis of 3 0 ends from sRNA sequencing data, computational tools separate the template miRNA from the non templated additions, while also assessing truncation. Yet, there are no online, web based tools for these measurements theyre run from a command line. Hence, we aimed to provide biologists with an automated, parallelized, web based tool for these analyses in plants and animals mit rata for microRNA Truncation and Tailing Analysis).

discussion new algorithms are emerging in the study of 3 0 modifications of srn as. For example, end seq () is an experimental protocol for high throughput sequencing of RNAs in which the 3 0 modifications of the captured RNA is sequenced separately from the 5 0 end. This technique is partnered with an algorithm, AppEnD () that describes these 3 0 end modifications from the end seq derived data. Our approach differs from that of in that our algorithm uses standard sRNA sequencing data, it characterizes the extent of 3 0 truncation (a common 3 0 modification of srn as and it generates a graphical output for the results of each miRNA or sRNA of interest. Another tool may be a better comparison to ours: Tailor () is specialized for sRNA 3 0 analyses, and it characterizes both biological alterations (such as RNA editing events) and technical confounding factors (such as sequencing errors). Although poor quality nucleotides will be removed by fast q processing, our approach does not characterize sequence polymorphisms generated by RNA editing; however, we have emphasized truncation, as this 3 0 modification is a common source of variation in srn as and a unique graphical output. Finally, to make our tool less prone to the inclusion of sequencing errors and make more easily accessible, we provided users with a standalone and python based fast q processing script to produce the 'tag count' formatted files required as input to our web tool. The processing script performs trimming and chopping, taking the raw fast q file(s) (single or paired end) and a set of user defined parameters that include adapter sequences that may vary from default Illumina adapters. The parameter file also determines whether the fast q processing yields a fast qc report, and whether it generates the graphs after trimming and chopping (for which the genome sequence must be provided). These details are described in a README file. This processing script is available from the web page or can be downloaded from (https://github.com/atulkakrana/helper. git hub git. In summary, we have built a biologist friendly web tool that provides easy access to our previously described algorithm for
