Motivation: Inferring the taxonomic profile of a microbial community from a large collection of anonymous DNA sequencing reads is a challenging task in meta genomics. Because existing methods for taxonomic profiling of meta genomes are all based on the assignment of fragmentary sequences to phylogenetic categories, the accuracy of results largely depends on fragment length. This dependence complicates comparative analysis of data originating from different sequencing platforms or resulting from different preprocessing pipelines. Results: We here introduce a new method for taxonomic profiling based on mixture modeling of the overall oligonucleotide distribution of a sample. Our results indicate that the mixture based profiles compare well with taxonomic profiles obtained with other methods. However, in contrast to the existing methods, our approach shows a nearly constant profiling accuracy across all kinds of read lengths and it operates at an unrivaled speed. Availability: A platform independent implementation of the mixture modeling approach is available in terms of a matlab octave toolbox at http://gobics.de/peter/taxy. In addition, a prototypical implementation within an easy to use interactive tool for Windows can be downloaded.

introduction meta genomics provides a holistic approach to the analysis of microbial communities that overcomes the necessity of isolating single organisms for cultivation (). Investigating a mixture of genetic material from the whole spectrum of organisms, researchers can now obtain comprehensive descriptions even of highly diverse communities. Further, comparative meta genomics offers new possibilities for studying the distinguishing characteristics of a wide range of ecosystems, which are shaped by specific combinations of microorganisms. In particular, research on the human microbio me has begun to elucidate the community structures associated with the human body. Important medical perspectives, for instance, arise * To whom correspondence should be addressed. from comparing gut microbio me profiles to differentiate between healthy and diseased states (). To investigate the taxonomic composition of meta genomes many studies focus on sequencing the 16S rRNA gene (), which currently provides the best resolution in terms of the available number of operational taxonomic units in the reference databases (). Besides the selectivity of primers (), another difficulty for quantitative analysis arises from the varying copy number of the 16S rRNA gene (). A pure 16S analysis, however, completely neglects the functional potential encoded in the meta genome. In contrast, whole meta genome sequencing allows simultaneous taxonomic and functional profiling, which provides a deeper insight into the structure of a microbial community. The taxonomic profiling of whole meta genome sequencing reads is a challenging task, and several techniques have been developed to extract the phylogenetic signal encoded in the sequenced material. To date, all approaches rely on the classification of sequencing reads. In most cases, a supervised binning of sequences according to an assignment to predefined taxonomic categories is performed. Although an unsupervised binning is possible for longer contigs (), the comparison of meta genomes becomes difficult with the inclusion of unlabeled bins. Methods for the classification of sequencing reads have been based either on homology using sequence similarity or on genomic signatures in terms of oligonucleotide composition. homology based methods include the taxonomic evaluation of BLAST hits () and phylogenetic analyses of particular marker genes (von) or protein domains (). signature based approaches have been realized based on the correlation of oligonucleotide frequencies (), machine learning techniques () and probabilistic models (). All these methods are highly dependent on read length. For homology based approaches, the number of significant similarity hits decreases considerably for shorter reads (). Additionally, the estimation of genomic signatures in sequencing reads becomes increasingly difficult for decreasing read lengths. For sequence lengths below 1000 bp, earlier approaches showed a sharp breakdown in accuracy (), which has been improved with recent tools (). All methods require a minimum read length in order to be applicable. In many cases, this condition restricts the use of ultrashort read techniques for meta genome profiling. As a consequence Page: 1619 16181624

discussion as do all other methods for taxonomic profiling of whole meta genome sequences, our method crucially depends on the range Page: 1623 16181624
