Motivation: Sample mix ups can arise during sample collection, handling, genotyping or data management. It is unclear how often sample mix ups occur in genome wide studies, as there currently are no post hoc methods that can identify these mix ups in unrelated samples. We have therefore developed an algorithm mix up mapper that can both detect and correct sample mix ups in genome wide studies that study gene expression levels. Results: We applied mix up mapper to five publicly available human genetical genomics datasets. On average, 3% of all analyzed samples had been assigned incorrect expression phenotypes: in one of the datasets 23% of the samples had incorrect expression phenotypes. The consequences of sample mix ups are substantial: when we corrected these sample mix ups we identified on average 15% more significant cis expression quantitative trait loci cise qtls. In one dataset, we identified three times as many significant cise qtls after correction. Furthermore, we show through simulations that sample mix ups can lead to an underestimation of the explained heritability of complex traits in genome wide association datasets.

introduction genome wide studies have identified many disease associated variants for a wide plethora of complex human diseases () [such as celiac disease (), type 1 diabetes () and type 2 diabetes (), Crohn's disease (, and complex continuous phenotypes [such as lipid levels (), body mass index (BMI) () and height (. Many of these studies () also assess the effect of the identified genetic variants on gene expression variation [i.e. genetical genomics (, by mapping expression quantitative trait loci e qtl. As such, these studies involve many steps before actual analysis of the data, during each of which samples could be accidentally swapped. Since these studies are pushing toward larger sample sizes in order to be able to identify ever smaller effects, the presence of sample mix ups becomes almost unavoidable. It is known from simulations that sample mix ups can have an effect on the power to detect genetic associations in genome wide studies (), which may present a problem to detect variants with small effects. However, it is unclear how often such sample mix ups actually occur in studies investigating gene expression. The common method to detect sample mix ups in genome wide association studies g was is to check for heterozygous genotypes for x chromosomal markers in males. However, this procedure will not identify sample mix ups between samples of identical gender. While it is also possible to use multiple phenotypes that can be well predicted based on genetic markers [such as eye color and hair color () and ABO blood group (, we are not aware of any study where this has been applied to identify sample mix ups in g was. It is obvious that if there would be a considerable number of such phenotypes available, identification of nearly all sample mix ups should become feasible. Another method to prevent sample mix ups that is commonly used in GWA studies involves the genotyping of a small number of variants prior to hybridization to the chip. Post hoc concordance analysis then allows to resolve mixed up samples, although this method does not resolve mix ups that might have been introduced during phenotyping. Although these methods are tailored for g was they are also applicable to genetical genomics datasets. This however does not apply to gene expression data, for which to our knowledge no methods to detect sample mix ups currently exist. Our method mix up mapper uses gene expression levels for genes, which are influenced by genetic variation located near these genes cise qtls. On the basis of such cise qtl effects, our

discussion we have identified sample mix ups in four out of five genetical genomics studies by applying a novel method mix up mapper. On average, 3% of all samples were mixed up. After correction for these sample mix ups by our method, we detected on average 15% more cise qtls. Correcting mix ups in one dataset in which 23% of the samples were incorrect led to three times as many significant cise qtls being detected. The consequences of only Page: 2110 210421113% sample mix ups on the heritable fraction that can be explained by significantly associated variants can also be substantial. For some simulated complex traits with a moderate to high heritability, the explained heritability of the genome wide significant variants increased 1.24-fold, when these sample mix ups could be detected and corrected. A considerable proportion of the heritability of complex diseases and traits is currently 'missing'. There is debate on whether the missing heritability problem is caused by rare variants with a large effect, by many more common variants, each with a very small effect size, by overestimation of the heritability estimates or through other means (). As current genome wide studies are pushing toward associating ever smaller effect sizes, sample sizes have to increase substantially to discover loci with smaller effect sizes (). Our results indicate that especially for these small effect size loci, sample mix ups could have consequences on the power to detect such loci for both genetical genomics studies as well as g was. As such, a proportion of the missing heritability could possibly be explained by the presence of sample mix ups in genome wide datasets. However, it remains a question whether the frequency of sample mix ups we observed in genetical genomics samples is a realistic estimate for other types of genome wide datasets. Different types of genome wide datasets require many different handling steps, and therefore their frequencies for the presence of sample mix ups may differ. For example for case control g was the cases and controls are often collected and processed separately from each other. Therefore, the frequency and hence the consequence of sample mix ups in such case control studies might be lower compared to the studies presented here. As such, g was in general might contain fewer sample mix ups. In the case of genetical genomics datasets, more cise qtls could be detected in each of the datasets after correction, although the number of included samples had actually decreased for three of these datasets. This effectively demonstrates that increasing the sample size is not the only way of increasing statistical power for determining complex traits; increasing the phenotypic accuracy can be equally helpful. In addition to the method described here, phenotypic accuracy may be increased by, for example, including relevant co-variates in g was or by using principal components). Although these methods are helpful in increasing the phenotypic accuracy, they do not help to identify or overcome sample mix ups. One possible problem with mix up mapper is that it depends on an initial set of cise qtls that can be detected in the data. Although our method generally shows high sensitivity and specificity when large proportions of samples are mixed up in an extreme scenario, where all genotyped samples are randomly assigned to the gene expression samples, the mix ups can not be resolved since no cise qtls will be initially detectable. However, if a set of cise qtls has been independently identified in another set of samples for the particular expression platform used, it is also be possible to resolve these problems (data not shown). We feel it is important to emphasize that the sample mix ups that we detected in the five public datasets do not in any way discredit these studies. To our knowledge, we are the first to describe a method to identify mix ups for these kinds of datasets. If the authors had been aware of the existence of these mix ups they would have certainly corrected them, as their goal was to find as many e qtls as possible. Since we observed a substantial overlap of detected cise qtls in the three HapMap populations before correction of sample mix ups we assume the detected cise qtls in these datasets are still valid. We are convinced that the results and conclusions drawn from these datasets () remain appropriate. Although our method is intended for genetical genomics datasets, it can also be applied to other types of genome wide datasets, as long as there are sufficient numbers of different phenotypes available per individual that are each (strongly) determined by genetic variants or combinations of variants. This requirement will likely be met with the growing interest in population based cohort studies in which hundreds of phenotypes are collected from the participants. As a consequence, identifying sample mix ups will then become possible for these datasets as well. Our results clearly indicate that sample mix ups occur in many laboratories (including ours). Although a great deal of quality control is conducted in g was it is very difficult to prevent the accidental mislabeling of some samples. This is particularly problematic in studies of unrelated individuals where inheritance patterns can not be investigated. Nevertheless, these accidental human mistakes or experimental problems can sometimes have far reaching consequences. We therefore recommend rigorous quality control of the laboratory and administrative processes in order to prevent sample mix ups from happening. We conclude that fewer sample mix ups will increase the power to detect significant genetic associations substantially and might resolve a part of the missing heritability.
