Motivation: The two major epigenetic modifications of cytosine s 5 methyl cytosine (5-mC) and 5 hydroxymethyl cytosine (5-hmC), coexist with each other in a range of mammalian cell populations. Increasing evidence points to important roles of 5-hmC in demethyla-tion of 5-mC and epi genomic regulation in development. Recently developed experimental methods allow direct single base profiling of either 5-hmC or 5-mC. Meaningful analyses seem to require combining these experiments with bisulfite sequencing, but doing so naively produces inconsistent estimates of 5-mC or 5-hmC levels. Results: We present a method to jointly model read counts from bisulfite sequencing, oxidative bisulfite sequencing and tet assisted Bisulfite sequencing, providing simultaneous estimates of 5-hmC and 5-mC levels that are consistent across experiment types.

introduction dna methylation is an important epigenetic mark in mammals. In addition to the extensively studied 5 methyl cytosine (5-mC) modification, its oxidation product, 5 hydroxymethyl cytosine (5-hmC), has been observed at substantial levels in both somatic and embryonic stem cells (). Recent studies of 5-hmC in mouse TET knock-out models (), mouse zygotic development () and multiple cell types () suggest that 5-hmC is involved in epigenetic regulation. The current most comprehensive and accurate method for profiling cytosine methylation is bisulfite sequencing bs seq. Treatment with sodium bisulfite converts unmethylated cytosine s to uracil s but does not distinguish between 5-mC and 5-hmC (), and consequently the yield of methylation from bs seq is the sum of 5-mC and 5-hmC levels. Two recently developed techniques, oxidative bisulfite sequencing ox bs seq () and tet assisted Bisulfite sequencing tabs eq (), provide high throughput single base resolution measurements of 5-mC and 5-hmC, respectively. Any two of bs seq tabs eq or ox bs seq can be combined to profile both the 5-mC and 5-hmC methyl omes of a cell population, and especially when studying 5-hmC, proper interpretation of results depends on having some estimate of the 5-mC level. However, naive manipulation of read count frequencies from independent sequencing experiments often produces two kinds of 'overshoot' problems in estimating 5-mC and 5-hmC levels. When combining bs seq with tabs eq the 5-mC level at a given CpG site can be estimated by subtracting the 5-hmC level tabs eq from the combined 5-mC  5-hmC level bs seq. The result can be negative, because of random sampling (or systematic error) in each experiment. Similarly, combining tabs eq and ox bs seq could lead to estimates of 5-mC and 5-hmC levels exceeding 100%. These overshoot sites may constitute a substantial proportion. In one dataset based on ox bs seq technology, 17% of CpG sites captured by reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) and ox rrbs experiments exhibited overshoot (). To fully leverage the information in these data requires some method for making consistent estimates of 5-mC and 5-hmC levels. We present maximum likelihood methylation levels mlml for simultaneous estimation of 5-mC and 5-hmC, combining data from any two of bs seq tabs eq or ox bs seq or all three when available. Our estimates are consistent in that 5-mC and 5-hmC levels are non-negative, and never sum over 1. In an important subset of cases, our estimates are not only consistent but also show significantly greater accuracy at sites with lower coverage.
