Motivation: Understanding the patterns of association between polymorphisms at different loci in a population (linkage disequilibrium, LD) is of fundamental importance in various genetic studies. Many coefficients were proposed for measuring the degree of LD, but they provide only a static view of the current LD structure. Generative models (GMs) were proposed to go beyond these measures, giving not only a description of the actual LD structure but also a tool to help understanding the process that generated such structure. GMs based in coalescent theory have been the most appealing because they link LD to evolutionary factors. Nevertheless, the inference and parameter estimation of such models is still computationally challenging. Results: We present a more practical method to build GM that describe LD. The method is based on learning weighted Bayesian network structures from haplotype data, extracting equivalence structure classes and using them to model LD. The results obtained in public data from the HapMap database showed that the method is a promising tool for modeling LD. The associations represented by the learned models are correlated with the traditional measure of LD D. The method was able to represent LD blocks found by standard tools. The granularity of the association blocks and the readability of the models can be controlled in the method. The results suggest that the causality information gained by our method can be useful to tell about the conserv ability of the genetic markers and to guide the selection of subset of representative markers. Availability: The implementation of the method is available upon request by email. Contact: maciel sc us pbr
introduction the detection of linkage disequilibrium (LD), the non-random association of alleles at different loci in a population, and the assessing of its intensity, extent and distribution is a fundamental step in many genetic studies. In association studies, for example, the search for the locus (or loci) responsible of a particular trait or disease is narrowed to regions of high LD (LD blocks) where genotyped genetic markers were observed to be associated with the studied phenotype (). In population genetic, LD patterns has been widely used to study the evolutionary and demographic processes in a variety of animal and plant populations, such as admixtures, migration and natural selection (). LD information was also useful to learn more about the architecture of the human genome and its biology of recombination (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed. A variety of coefficients have been proposed to quantify the intensity of LD (see Mueller, 2004 for a review). Pairwise LD measures were the first ones reported for this purpose, which measure the overall allele association between two loci. Popular examples of such measures are D and r 2 (). Subsequently, multi-locus LD coefficients were proposed to measure simultaneous allele associations among multiple loci. Classical examples are the I A index and the coefficient H (). Recently, information theory was used to develop new LD coefficients. Some examples are: the co efficent , based in entropy (); the normalized mutual information (MIR) coefficient (); and the normalized relative entropy (ER) coefficient (). This active search of LD coefficients has been accompanied with the development of various tools that display LD measures in a comprehensive way. Examples of those tools are: gold surfer (), haplo view () and ld compare (). This remarkable interest in developing new measures and tools for studying LD can be explained by the dramatic increase of public genotype data [from the HapMap project (), for example], which at the same time enabled association studies in a whole genome scale that presented new statistical and computational challenges due to the vast quantity of data collected. Although some of the aforementioned LD measures and tools were useful in characterizing LD at various genomic regions of several populations, they are limited to provide a static view of the LD structure in the studied region. In an attempt to go beyond these measures some generative models (GMs) were proposed (). GMs are useful because they model the process that generate the observed data, providing the machinery to do inferences and simulations of yet unobserved situations or to help understanding the underlying generative process. Models based in coalescent theory () have been the most appealing GMs because they relate LD to evolutionary factors, such as recombination rate, migration and mutation. However, the parameter estimation and inference in such models is still computationally challenging and only applicable to short regions (). A more practical alternative to model LD is to learn probabilistic graphical models (PGMs) directly from the observed genotype or haplotype data, as proposed by Thomas and Camp (2004). PGM are a type of GMs that have proven to be useful in modeling a variety of complex real world problems mainly due to the following reasons: intuitive interpretability of the models, their ability to encode the joint probability distribution with a reduced number of parameters () and the existence of efficient methods to learn PGM from data and to make inferences. Because the learning page i633 i632i637
