Motivation: Despite huge prognostic promises, gene expression based survival assessment is rarely used in clinical routine. Main reasons include difficulties in performing and reporting analyses and restriction in most methods to one high risk group with the vast majority of patients being un assessed. The present study aims at limiting these difficulties by (i) mathematically defining the number of risk groups without any a priori assumption; (ii) computing the risk of an independent cohort by considering each patient as a new patient incorporated to the validation cohort and (iii) providing an open access Web site to freely compute risk for every new patient. Results: Using the gene expression profiles of 551 patients with multiple myeloma, 602 with breast cancer and 460 with glioma, we developed a model combining running log rank tests under controlled chi-square conditions and multiple testing corrections to build a risk score and a classification algorithm using simultaneous global and between group log rank chi-square maximization. For each cancer entity, we provide a statistically significant three group risk prediction model, which is corroborated with publicly available validation cohorts. Conclusion: In constraining between group significances, the risk score compares favorably with previous risk classifications.

introduction prediction of cancer patients' survival is one of the most challenging tasks in daily practice in oncology. Gene expression profiling (GEP) has been used in cancer to look for cancer heterogeneity and predict for corresponding classification outcome. While the main clinical prognostic factor of multiple myeloma (MM) is the International Staging System (ISS) based on serum b2 microglobulin and serum albumin (), two high risk scores have combined GEP with overall survival (OS) as input data and outcome issue (). Several other gep based signatures using either tumor progression or cell cycle associated indexes at diagnosis or relapse have been published (). Gene expression microarrays were early used to identify breast carcinoma subtypes () and outcome (van 't), intrinsic molecular groups (), recurrence, metastasis and survival re is. Gene expression based profiling of malignant gliomas has been recognized to produce a more robust classification than the conventional histological diagnosis () and also to directly predict for survival (). Despite a huge prognostic promise in a wide range of malignant diseases, GEP is rarely used in clinical routine to assess outcome. Main reasons include difficulties in performing the analysis and reporting of the data in clinical practice, inability of direct application of defined groups and frequently arbitrary assumptions in expression based scores, e.g. risk group size and number. Most gep based risk scores in MM delineate a group of patients with adverse prognosis, but using arbitrary quartile cutoffs on gene expression or index calculation. Most reports of breast cancer survival prediction still consider only two risk classes using semi supervised predictive methods (). We present here a novel survival prediction model (termed RS for risk score) built on gene expression profiles of patients suffering from MM (n  551), breast cancer (n  602) or glioma (n  460). Prognostic genes were selected without arbitrary cutoffs. A score summing up the risk information of these prognostic genes identified the maximum number of patients' groups showing a statistically significant different OS, without a priori assumption. The RS score allowed successfully classification within three groups of two independent cohorts of patients with MM, breast cancer or glioma, and correlated with classification features like conventional prognostic factors, molecular subtypes or pathological grades in both training and validation cohorts. Finally, we provide an open access Web site to compute risk (RS) for any novel patient.

discussion the aim of this study was to create an easy to use gene expression based score allowing a multi group stratification for OS while minimizing a priori assumptions. One mandatory assumption is that GEP of a tumor sample can predict for risk provoked by a whole tumor. In addition, tumor samples contain tumor cells but also cells of the tumor environment, except for cancers such as MM, for which tumor cells can be easily purified. This bias in using a sample partly representative of the whole tumor to assess risk can not be easily cleared owing to ethical and economical reasons avoiding multiple tumor samples harvesting and introduces artifactual variation in GEP, weakening the risk information. Another assumption is that gene expression could feature risk stratification. It is clear that the best approach will be to monitor protein function, which is a consequence of gene transcription, translation and further protein modifications. Likely, the method to measure gene expression with microarrays will be shortly greatly improved using RNA sequencing and lead to a better model of risk stratification. But the principles developed here will still be applicable whatever the method used to generate the score scale. Despite these biases, the current method made it possible to classify independent cohorts of patients with MM, breast cancer, or glioma into three risk groups defined by different OS between two consecutive groups. The number of risk groups that could be predicted is dependent on the number of patients in the training cohorts. In the current study, we used publicly available cohorts of 200300 patients with GEP and prognostic information as well as a several year follow-up, leading to the finding of three prognostic groups. Both the cohort size and the homogeneity of the treatments per disease influenced the cutoffs stability. Larger series of previously untreated patients should provide more information about molecular heterogeneity and allow investigating how the RS methodology will translate this heterogeneity into additional groups of patients with different OS, particularly in). Interestingly, considering homogeneous populations like healthy bone marrow plasma cells or human myeloma cell lines, the s score was as expected at low risk (RS1) for healthy plasma cells or at high risk (RS3) for myeloma cell lines (Supplementary). For building RS score, prognostic probe sets were identified by splitting training cohorts into two prognostic groups maximizing a log rank statistics. The selection of this probe set list could be further refined according to the final criteria, here three significant prognostic groups, using, for instance, backward selection. The fact that the proportion of patients to split the cohort was not fixed arbitrarily may explain why the currently identified prognostic RS genes poorly overlap with previously published prognostic genes. In MM, half of the 19 RS genes were relevant to cell cycle and mitosis (Supplementary). Only one of these genes was common to the 70 genes risk signature from UAMS GEP70 () and none with the 15 intergroup e Francais du my elo me (IFM) genes (). Comparably, none of the 70 genes of the seminal signature of poor prognosis breast cancer (van 't) was found in the current 65 RS genes. This lack of overlap was confirmed with subsequent signatures (). In the same way, none to only one of the prognostic genes reported for glioma were shared with the present 34 RS genes (). Moreover, training and validation cohorts were swapped to test for overfitting, and the whole process including initial normalization, batch correction and survival significant probe set selection was run again. Noteworthy, new 74-, 98 and 28-gene signatures (Supplementary Tables S8S10) were obtained, respectively, for MM, breast cancer and glioma. Although these signatures shared no common gene, except one (PHF15) for breast cancer and three (FKBP9, mt pap and RAB18) for glioma, with the initial ones, they could predict for three significantly different risk groups, close to the ones before swapping, both in the training and validation cohorts supplementary and. This is in line with MicroArray Quality Control comments emphasizing that prognostic genes are mainly useful to build scores to identify patients with various risks, but are not relevant to understand tumor biology in vivo ma qc. The prognostic genes, the computation of the RS and cutoffs are valuable only for patients treated with therapy lines, which have been validated in the current study. These parameters will likely change according to treatment improvement and should be updated regularly with publication of new data. However, RS score remains significant in MM treated with novel agents (Supplementary). It is important to stress that GEP raw files and patients' clinical data used in various publications should be publicly available according to MIAME recommendations (Minimum Information About a Microarray Experiment; http://www.mged.org/Workgroups/MIAME/miame_2.0.html). Another advantage of the present methodology is that RS score was validated without using gene expression variance or structure information from the validation cohorts, except for batch correction. Each patient of a validation cohort was considered as a single patient, data normalization computed and batch adjusted using Affymetrix parameters from the training cohort and RS score and risk groups computed using cutoffs defined with the training cohort. This is another major difference with previously published transcriptome based RS. In MM, the GEP70 score was delineated on the TT2 cohort using expression quartiles and was validated on their more recent, treatment improved TT3 cohort using an adapted cut off value (). The same holds true for IFM score, which was validated arbitrarily using the top 25% of patient scores on TT2 cohort (). Finally, RS remained significant when compared with the currently used ISS RS in MM, both in terms of multivariate analysis () and survival expression, especially for RS3 populations (Supplementary). GEP has largely been used in breast cancer over the past decade in search for classification patterns and survival signatures re is. Most studies have sought a dicho to mic risk in bulk patient populations without addressing disease complexity. Although built using different gene sets, most be have similarly in outcome prediction (). A few used tumor subtypes to create survival indexes from clinical and molecular data, namely, the risk of relapse () and the recurrence (). Both studies delineated a globally significant three group model, but with pre-specified cut off points and no evidence for between group significance. Our RS score, based on mathematical criteria only, also allowed delineating three risk groups in both training and validation breast carcinoma cohorts: a high risk group of up to 10% and two similarly sized intermediate and low risk groups with significant successive differential survival. Although a number of four group models were delineated in MM and breast cancer training cohorts (not shown), the number of patients with simultaneously available clinical and microarray data has not permitted to validate survival models beyond three groups for these diseases. When affecting the molecular taxonomy to the various RS groups of the training cohort, we found a survival distribution perfectly consistent with the clinical outcome and respecting the disease heterogeneity (). The poor outcome intrinsic bas l and map o subtypes constitute the RS3 high risk group and part of the intermediate RS2 group. The latter encompasses most of the ER  /HER2  , poor prognosis lum c and ER  lumB, whereas the good prognosis normL and lumA subtypes constitute most of the low risk RS1 group. Of note, this remarkable correlation between molecular classification and prognosis was achieved without a proliferative signature; our 65 gene list containing none of the supposedly necessary proliferation components re is to the exception of MKI67. A gene enrichment analysis was unable to correlate with previously described pathways whatever the significance threshold (data not shown). This tight subtype outcome association was propagated to the validation cohort just using the training s score cut off points. The RS3 poor prognosis group contains the subtypes I (ER-/HER2  ) and II (ER-/HER2  ), equivalent, respectively, to the bas l and map o subtypes; the HER2  subtype III is included in RS2 and the ER  subtypes V and VI again constitute the good prognosis RS1 group. Thus, the present algorithm delineates a comprehensive OS model, and suggests that with a large enough number of documented patients, both the molecular heterogeneity and its outcome prediction could be simultaneously addressed. Gliomas, the most common primary brain tumors, are currently classified according to largely variable interpretations of histopathological features, and graded following the WHO classification (), from the grade I best prognosis astrocytic tumor through the anaplastic transformation between grades II and III to the highly malignant grade IV glioblastoma. In both training and validation glioma cohorts, our method perfectly depicts this hierarchy in detecting a majority of highly malignant glioblastomas in the RS3 group, glioblastoma and grade III anaplastic gliomas in RS2, but still some glioblastomas and a comparable number of grade II and III gliomas in RS1, reflecting the weakness of the current classification to clearly separate intermediate grade iii ii gliomas. Thus our classification brings benefit to a fraction of grade III and IV gliomas, which may present a better outcome than expected. Contrarily to MM and breast carcinoma, a four group survival model was significantly delineated in the training glioma cohort and applied to the validation cohort with marginal significance (not shown). In this case, the large high risk glioblastoma containing group with a median OS of 1520 months was further split into a small very poor prognostic group with an 512 month survival and a better one with a median OS of 2 years. Glioblastoma subtypes have been defined by gene expression signatures (). Implications like a differential expression in the MGMT enzyme () repairing chemotherapy induced DNA damage could be tested with larger data. Meanwhile, fitting a regression model on the survival of training and validation cohorts and their combination in every tumor type allow to approximate the life expectancy of patients in each risk group, namely, from high to low risk: 2, 8 and 13 years for myeloma; 4, 16 and 425 years for breast cancer and 1, 3 and 6 years for gliomas (Supplementary). Finally, we think it is essential to provide easy to use tools that will allow clinicians to compute individual gep based RSs without heavy computation. A molecular classification of glioma is already provided with a similar input (). Thus, we provide the open access prog no web Web site to automatically compute the RS score for any single oncology patient with available Affymetrix files. Any report about a gep based RS should provide such an open access, helping to integrate, as currently developed (), the molecular prognosis assessment into the standard investigations at diagnostic or relapse. But the user has to be aware that the way to compute the RS and the cutoffs is valuable only for patients treated with therapy lines, which has been validated in the current study. The computation of RS and cutoffs will change likely according to treatment improvement. This recommendation is indicated in the Web site.
