Motivation: Recent experimental advancements allow determining positions of nucleosomes for complete genomes. However, the resulting nucleosome occupancy maps are averages of heterogeneous cell populations. Accordingly, they represent a snapshot of a dynamic ensemble at a single time point with an overlay of many configurations from different cells. To study the organization of nucleosomes along the genome and to understand the mechanisms of nucleosome trans-location, it is necessary to retrieve features of specific conformations from the population average. Results: Here, we present a method for identifying non-overlapping nucleosome configurations that combines binary variable analysis and a Monte Carlo approach with a simulated annealing scheme. In this manner, we obtain specific nucleosome configurations and optimized solutions for the complex positioning patterns from experimental data. We apply the method to compare nucleosome positioning at transcription factor binding sites in different mouse cell types. Our method can model nucleosome translocations at regulatory genomic elements and generate configurations for simulations of the spatial folding of the nucleosome chain. Availability: Source code, precompiled binaries, test data and a web based test installation are freely available at http://bioinformatics. fh stralsund den uc pos
introduction the DNA of eukaryotic organisms is wrapped around a histone octamer, forming nucleosomes, the basic DNA packing unit of chromatin. Nucleosomes can impede the binding of transcription factors to DNA. Therefore, the positions of nucleosomes control local DNA accessibility and can directly affect the readout of DNA sequence information at regulatory genomic elements, thus regulating gene expression. The genome wide study of nucleosome positions has been made possible by high throughput DNA sequencing techniques that identify the nucleosomal DNA isolated after digestion of the linker DNA between nucleosomes with micro cocc al nuclease m nase seq (). However, obtaining nucleosome positions based on these m nase seq data is fraught with difficulties: nucleosome positions have an intrinsic biological variability. Some nucleosomes, such as the 1 nucleosome at the transcription start site, are known to be positioned with high precision in yeast (), but the positions of other nucleosomes can vary substantially (). In addition, the results reflect the experimental methodology used. First, although m nase preferentially digests the linker DNA between the nucleosomes, the nucleosomal DNA fragments obtained in this manner display some length variation from the precise boundaries of the nucleosome. Second, the proportion of the nucleosomal DNA fragments that can be identified is affected by m nase concentration and incubation time (). Third, the experiments probe a population of typically 10 5 to 10 7 cells. Each cell contributes its individual nucleosome configuration to this average, which is potentially incompatible with other configurations. Accordingly, experimental nucleosome occupancy maps contain overlapping and ambiguous nucleosome positions at many locations. Several approaches and tools have been proposed to extract nucleosome positions from m nase seq data, such as the following: peak calling on smoothed coverage data (), hidden Markov models (), template filtering (), mixture models () and sliding window statistics (). Many of these approaches need an elaborate parameterization or can not extract non-overlapping nucleosome configurations and decide between overlapping peaks. The sole identification of local occupancy maxima determines the average nucleosome positions of a cell ensemble but does not cope with the steric al incompatibilities arising from averaging many, usually unsynchronized cells. If different configurations lead to overlapping occupancy peaks, it is impossible to represent the data with a single configuration of non-overlapping nucleosomes. Here, we address these issues with two approaches going beyond peak calling. We apply a binary variable approach that generates an ensemble of nucleosome configurations that, when combined with each other, reproduce the input data with *To whom correspondence should be addressed. minimal error. Ambiguous peak data can be dissected into source components, including non-overlapping nucleosome configurations. This allows quantification of the dynamics of nucleosome positioning and of the relative occlusion of DNA by nucleosomes. For some applications, like 3D modeling of the nucleosome chain or combinatorial transcription factor binding, a single optimal configuration of non-overlapping nucleosomes is desirable, even though the data are ambiguous. We address this by applying a Metropolis Monte Carlo (MMC) algorithm that generates a dynamic population of non-overlapping nucleosomes. Our simulation algorithm yields an ensemble of nucleosome configurations that reproduces the distribution of the input data. To find an optimized placement of nucleosomes, we combine Monte Carlo simulation with a simulated annealing protocol. Our approach compares favorably to existing peak calling methods and it was applied to the analysis of promoter and enhancer regions in mouse embryonic stem cells (ESCs), and neural progenitor cells (NPCs) as well as embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) derived from these (). The three cell types have identical genomes but differ in their differentiation state. Comparing them by using our method allowed quantification of differences in nucleosome patterns and dynamics at binding sites for transcription factors that have important roles in cell differentiation. Furthermore, we analyzed the nucleosome density at the Samd4 locus for the three cell types, as an example of a gene that shows changes in gene expression during differentiation.
