Motivation: Contamination of a cancer tissue by the surrounding benign (non-cancerous) tissue is a concern for molecular cancer diag-nostics. This is because an observed molecular signature will be distorted by the surrounding benign tissue, possibly leading to an incorrect diagnosis. One example is molecular identification of the primary tumor site of metastases because biopsies of metastases typically contain a significant amount of benign tissue. Results: A model of tissue contamination is presented. This contamination model works independently of the training of a molecular pre-dictor, and it can be combined with any predictor model. The usability of the model is illustrated on primary tumor site identification of liver biopsies, specifically, on a human dataset consisting of microRNA expression measurements of primary tumor samples, benign liver samples and liver metastases. For a predictor trained on primary tumor and benign liver samples, the contamination model decreased the test error on biopsies from liver metastases from 77 to 45%. A further reduction to 34% was obtained by including biopsies in the training data.

introduction several studies have considered molecular predictors for primary tumor site identification (see). All these studies report misclassification percentages of $10% in predicting the primary tumor site from primary tumor samples, which is consistent with our findings (see Section 3). However, the performance of molecular predictors on metastatic samples is less clear. Most studies assess the performance of their predictor using a combination of primary tumor and metastatic samples, with an unbalanced metastatic sample set. Metastases are often more difficult to classify by conventional diagnostics, compared with primary tumors. Yet, samples of metastatic cancers are generally underrepresented in the validation. To correctly validate the performance of a predictor, the validation samples must be representative of the samples that the predictor is intended to be used on. For the majority of patients with metastatic cancer, identification of the primary tumor site relies on small formalin fixed paraffin embedded ff pe needle biopsies (core biopsies) from metastatic lesions. Hence, we argue that a molecular predictor designed to assist in the diagnostic work up of patients with metastatic cancer must be compatible with, and validated on, ff pe core biopsies from metastatic lesions. To develop such a predictor for primary tumor site identification of metastases, it would seem preferable to train it exclusively on core biopsies constituting metastatic tissue. However, it may be difficult to obtain a sufficient amount of metastatic biopsies of known primary tumor origin. Furthermore, a larger technical variation because of the smaller amount of processed material and the varying tumor content make it difficult to rely on core biopsies only. Therefore, previous studies, as well as ours, have relied on primary tumor samples as a predominant part of the training set. These considerations lead to the central problem that we address in this article: when core biopsy samples are scarce or completely absent, how can we best adapt primary tumor samples to build a molecular predictor able to identify the primary tumor site of metastatic tumor samples? Such an adaptation is generally referred to as a domain adaptation. The problem being that the distribution of the cases to be predicted (the target domain) differs from the distribution of the cases used for training (the source domain) (see e.g.). To overcome this problem, we explicitly model how the target domain is related to the source domain, and use this model to train a predictor. A central difference between the source and target domains in our setting is caused by the fact that a core biopsy is often contaminated by tissue surrounding the tumor cells, that is, benign tissue from the biopsy site unrelated to the tumor (see). Another difference can arise if the molecular signature of the metastatic tumor deviates from the signature of the primary tumor; see, eg or for a discussion of the biology of metastases. Recent findings by suggest that tissue contamination may result in a decline of performance for molecular predictors. The results presented in the present article *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors. demonstrate that tissue contamination hampers primary tumor site identification of non microdissected metastatic liver core biopsies. We developed our contamination model to correct this. However, our suggested methodology is not specific to primary tumor site identification, the biomarkers used in our case microRNA (miRNA) expression or the technological platform. It is a general computational model, which is broadly applicable whenever sample contamination constitutes a problem. We found that a non adapted primary tumor site predictor, trained solely on miRNA expression measurements from primary tumors and benign liver samples, misclassified 60% of the liver core biopsies in our sample set. Notably, the performance of the predictor was even worse for the subset of liver core biopsies constituting metastases. By applying our contamination model and suggested domain adaptation procedure, this performance was improved. For a predictor based on 50 miRNAs, the contamination model decreased the misclassification percentage for metastatic liver core biopsies from 77 to 45%. A further improvement was obtained by combining the contamination model with a few biological metastatic liver core biopsies. This combined approach reduced the misclassification percentage for metastatic liver core biopsies down to 34%.

discussion contamination of samples can affect the performance of molecular predictors. This has been reported in other studies (e.g.). In the present article, we have seen that normal liver contamination hampers primary tumor site identification of liver biopsies. This was seen regardless, whether multinomial group lasso or ANOVA  PAM was used. Several molecular predictors for identification of the primary tumor site have been published, which include fer racin et al in the present article, we show, how an ANOVA  PAM predictor exclusively trained on primary tumor, normal and cirrhotic liver samples, results in a misclassification percentage of 77% when validated on the 53 metastatic liver core biopsies. Hence, the ANOVA  PAM predictor is, like the multinomial group lasso predictor, not able to generalize well from the primary tumor samples to non microdissected metastatic liver core biopsies with a heterogenous tumor content distribution. We did not find that any of the previous studies systematically addressed the problem of identifying primary tumor site of non microdissected core biopsies. Addressing this problem, we found that novel methodology was needed to explicitly incorporate tissue contamination. We have developed a computational approach that deals with tissue contamination from surrounding tissue, and we have shown that the method improves the performance of the molecular predictor. Notably, training of such predictors does not require metastatic samples from the specific biopsy site, e.g. liver. Comparable improvements could be obtained by including liver core biopsies in the training data for each of the non liver related classes. Moreover, including liver core biopsies in combination with the contamination model was shown to reduce the error even further. With a sufficiently large number of metastatic liver core biopsies, the improvement because of the contamination model is likely to be small. However, an advantage of the contamination model is that it reduces the number of metastatic samples from the specific biopsy site needed for training. Combining the contamination model with 20 core biopsies, the misclassification percentage of the non microdissected metastatic liver core biopsies was reduced to 34%. Although we only considered liver core biopsies in the present article, it is natural to assume that our contamination model will work for other biopsy sites as well. With a limited number of benign tissue resections, representing the biopsy site of interest, our contamination model could easily be used to develop a predictor adapted to core biopsies of other metastatic sites. In addition, even though we only address tissue contamination, our contamination model has the potential to be used to model background contamination in other types of samples.
