Motivation: Oncogenes are known drivers of cancer phenotypes and targets of molecular therapies; however, the complex and diverse sig-naling mechanisms regulated by oncogenes and potential routes to targeted therapy resistance remain to be fully understood. To this end, we present an approach to infer regulatory mechanisms downstream of the HER2 driver oncogene in SUM-225 metastatic breast cancer cells from dynamic gene expression patterns using a succession of analytical techniques, including a novel MP grammars method to mathematically model putative regulatory interactions among sets of clustered genes. Results: Our method highlighted regulatory interactions previously identified in the cell line and a novel finding that the HER2 oncogene, as opposed to the proto-oncogene, upregulates expression of the E2F2 transcription factor. By targeted gene knockdown we show the significance of this, demonstrating that cancer cell matrix adhesion and outgrowth were markedly inhibited when E2F2 levels were reduced. Thus, validating in this context that upregulation of E2F2 represents a key intermediate event in a HER2 oncogene directed gene expression based signaling circuit. This work demonstrates how predictive modeling of longitudinal gene expression data combined with multiple systems level analyses can be used to accurately predict downstream signaling pathways. Here, our integrated method was applied to reveal insights as to how the HER2 oncogene drives a specific cancer cell phenotype, but it is adaptable to investigate other oncogenes and model systems. Availability and implementation: Accessibility of various tools is listed in methods; the log gain Stoichiometric Stepwise algorithm is accessible at http://www.cbmc.it/software/Software.php.

introduction cancer cells demonstrate unlimited and unmitigated proliferation and resistance to anti-proliferative and cell death cues, phenotypes that set them apart from normal cells. Underlying these cancer specific phenotypes are aberrant ly activated reconfigured signaling networks that control malignant growth and survival (). cancer specific signaling networks and carcinogenesis are governed by the activation of key cancer driver genes, termed oncogenes. Based on this understanding, much progress has been made to develop anti-cancer drugs, with great clinical gains made through efforts to target oncogenes that possess kinase function; including the epidermal growth factor receptor family member HER2 in the treatment of breast cancer (BC;). The advantages of molecularly targeted systemic treatments over traditional chemotherapy are clear: targeted treatments yield improved patient outcomes and lesser side effects (). Despite advancements made to improve cancer treatments, targeted therapies eventually fail for patients, leading to developed drug resistance and cancer recurrence. A number of molecular mechanisms are described to underlie de novo and developed resistance to drugs. Included among them is the event of an activating mutation in an effector protein downstream of the targeted oncogenic kinase (). The complexity of oncogene activation and the prevalence of resistance underscore the fact that although it is appreciated that activated oncogenes are the dominant drivers of malignant progression in cancer, it remains unclear how activated oncogenes regulate the expression of transformed phenotypes. Beyond well studied biochemical signaling pathways, it is especially true for yet unknown transcriptional regulatory networks. Clearly, elucidating the signaling networks regulated by oncogenes that result in cancer specific phenotypes will provide insight to improve therapeutic strategies and overcome resistance. To this end, biological processes are increasingly being described by network modeling of gene expression data. Various approaches have been used for purposes of investigating transcription networks to identify expression based classifiers for cancer subtypes (); or to integrate dna level genetic variation and expression data to infer *To whom correspondence should be addressed. causality (); or to model before and after perturbation expression data to infer causality (). In step with these efforts, an ever increasing variety of formalisms have been proposed for modeling and simulating gene interaction networks (). Here, we developed a multi pronged approach to investigate HER2 oncogene signaling mechanisms using perturbed, time dependent gene expression data from microarray analysis. At this stage in the development of our modeling system, clustering of genes was required to reduce the dimensionality or complexity of the data. Our working premises were that genes displaying similar dynamic patterns of expression are similarly regulated and functionally related, a concept supported in the literature (), and furthermore, that the expression level changes of a gene or genes in one cluster impacts the expression level changes of genes in another. We started with a method to cluster genes displaying similar expression dynamics after HER2 oncogene signaling was inhibited in the HER2 amplified metastatic BC cell line SUM-225 (). Then we derived mathematical models to support predicted regulatory relationships among clusters using a novel MP grammars method, which identifies algebraic notation that can simulate the dynamics of one cluster as a function of the gene expression level changes displayed by another cluster (). Here, we have adapted the application of P systems that was developed for the purpose of expressing metabolic systems in discrete mathematical terms (). A promoter analysis reinforced indications for relationships between clusters. A pathway impact analysis was used to identify cancer pathways functions specific to a clustered gene set. All told, the analysis predicted a key intermediary role for the E2F transcription factor 2 (E2F2) in HER2 oncogene signaling. In follow-up functional studies to test the prediction, targeted E2F2 expression knockdown and 3D on top Matrigel assays showed that matrix adhesion and outgrowth, which is indicative of cancer cell potential for metastatic colonization (), was significantly inhibited in SUM-225 cells when E2F2 levels were reduced.

discussion the success of driver oncogene targeted therapeutic strategies can be attributed to the fact that oncogene directed signaling promotes the many phenotypes that define the patho-biology of cancer cells, termed the hallmarks of cancer that include among others unrestricted growth, immune system evasion, metabolic transformation, cancer cell tumorigenicity and the various stages of metastases (). The challenge remains to understand the specifics for oncogene directed signaling processes that contribute to each of these phenotypes. In earlier work using engineered cell lines to identify genes whose expression is regulated by the driver HER2 oncogene versus the proto-oncogene, we explored gene expression dynamics using a Bayesian clustering method (). This previous analysis revealed overlapping and unique clusters of genes for each condition, suggesting that driver oncogenes engage unique regulatory mechanisms that cause distinguishing gene expression dynamics and signaling circuits in cancer cells. The work presented here represents considerably advanced efforts to discover unknown regulatory paths in transcription programs. The use of cell lines, where the the effect of E2F2 knockdown in SUM-225 cells cultured on Matrigel. E2F2 knockdown caused a marked reduction in viable colony numbers and size (4 magnification). The figure is representative of two independent experiments, in triplicate. Viable cells were stained dark purple with MTT 345dimethylthiazol2yl25 diphenyl tetrazolium bromide) reagent. (C) Quantitation of the effect of E2F2 knockdown in SUM-225 cells cultured on Matrigel. The graph shows the total number of viable transduced colonies per well of a 96 well plate. Results are the mean of three biological replicates and representative of replicated experiments (bars, SD). gene annotated her2 oncogene regulated signaling circuits predicted by the proposed network model. The indicated genes and their role in HER2 oncogene signaling are supported by previously published data (blue), or as in the case of E2F2, they are supported by computational and in vivo cell biology experiments presented in this study (orange). Black arrows indicate that according to our data, the gene expression was upregulated (up arrow) or downregulated (down arrow) by HER2 signaling functional status of HER2 is known, is necessary to distinguish and model gene expression features that were regulated, directly or indirectly, by HER2 driver oncogene function. time course perturbation studies were used because rigorous statistical analyses of gene expression changes over time can be applied to filter noise (); also, algorithms that reverse engineer gene networks from dynamic gene expression data outperform classic clustering algorithms (). Polynomial models were used for the purpose of curve fitting analysis and were also used in the calculation of the eight clusters, all necessary to reduce data complexity. This methodology might be improved by using more complex clustering algorithms based on machine learning techniques such as hidden Markov models or Support Vector Machines, which hold potential to distinguish more refined clusters. Nevertheless, in the present iteration, our approach using simple polynomial models to investigate HER2 oncogene signaling networks in SUM-225 BC cells resulted in a model with features that were concordant with both previous reported results and data from patient tumors. The integration of various analytical tools such as Impact Factor analysis, biobase explain and on co mine with the results of MP grammar modeling supported specific predicted regulatory circuits and pointed to novel insights surrounding oncogene regulation of P38MAPK, ALDH1A3 and E2F2 genes in the her2 amplified bc derived cell line. Definitive contributions of this study are that HER2 driver oncogene signaling upregulated the expression of E2F2, and that E2F2 potentiated the HER2 oncogene signal for maintaining a transformed phenotype. The overwhelming focus of existing literature surrounding the E2F family of transcription factors has characterized their function as master regulators of cell proliferation, but Chen and his colleagues are correct to point out that knowledge is lacking as to the biological processes that they collectively or individually regulate in cancer (). Among the limited literature specifically on E2F2 and its aberrant role in BC, work by showed that an E2F2 activation signature correlates with resistance to anti-estrogen treatment for estrogen receptor alpha er positive BC (). The study herein now indicates the importance of E2F2 in a novel HER2 oncogene directed signaling pathway where HER2 oncogene regulated E2F2 expression impacts cell matrix adhesion function, with potential consequences for metastatic colonization (). Another consideration arising from our study surrounds the nature of oncogene activation and the status of HER2 as a driver oncogene. Simply overexpressing the HER2 oncogene in the non transformed MCF10A cell did not cause the dominant regulatory effect for HER2 action on E2F2 expression as seen in SUM-225 cells. These observations support the concept that the status and function of a driver oncogene is not simply the result of signal amplification but that additional context dependent variables are involved to evoke aberrant pathway signaling.
