Motivation: Disease progression is driven by dynamic changes in both the activity and connectivity of molecular pathways. Understanding these dynamic events is critical for disease prognosis and effective treatment. Compared with activity dynamics, connectiv-ity dynamics is poorly explored. Results: We describe the m module algorithm to identify gene modules with common members but varied connectivity across multiple gene co-expression networks (aka m modules. We introduce a novel metric to capture the connectivity dynamics of an entire m module. We find that m modules with dynamic connectivity have distinct topo-logical and biochemical properties compared with static m modules and hub genes. We demonstrate that incorporation of module con-nectivity dynamics significantly improves disease stage prediction. We identify different sets of m modules that are important for specific disease stage transitions and offer new insights into the molecular events underlying disease progression. Besides modeling disease progression, the algorithm and metric introduced here are broadly applicable to modeling dynamics of molecular pathways. Availability and implementation: m module is implemented in R. The source code is freely available at

introduction complex diseases like cancer involve a continuum of molecular events that starts with early initiation events through progression and catastrophic end stage events. Analyzing and understanding disease stage specific molecular events are critical for understanding disease etiology and development of therapeutic interventions. Network biology has proven to be a powerful tool for representing and analyzing complex molecular networks. Previously, several lines of investigations have leveraged dynamic changes in molecular networks to predict disease outcomes. Focusing on hub genes in human protein interactome, several groups have shown that they can be categorized into different types based on topological measures such as degree and modularity (). It was further demonstrated that such topological features of hub genes can be used to improve the prognosis of breast cancer patients (). Chuang et al. used a different strategy by examining the differentially expressed subnetworks (instead of hub genes) between two cohorts of breast cancer patients (). They demonstrated that subnetworks with differential expression levels are effective markers for breast cancer metastasis. Besides nodal changes in a molecular network, several studies have shown that gene protein connectivity is also highly dynamic during disease development and stress response showed that there is a higher degree of physical connectivity between proteins whose genes are mutated in the same disease state found a large fraction of cases in which a single gene is linked to multiple disorders via distinct interactions, which they call edge tic perturbations discovered widespread changes in gene gene interactions among yeast kinases, phosphatases and transcription factors as the cell responds to DNA damage. A common theme in these pioneering studies is the dicho to mization of the disease development, either for the onset or the severity of the disease. Those methods analyze each condition individually to determine which hub genes, subnetworks or edge sets are significantly associated with one of the two conditions, instead of collectively modeling and analyzing omics data from patient samples as a single continuum. This inability to account for dependence among pathways at different time points limits our ability to observe changes at a pathway level during disease progression. Computational methods for joint analysis of multiple networks have been developed before. They fall into two categories in terms of their purposes: (i) studying conservation of multiple protein protein interaction networks across species (), and (ii) functional gene interaction modules across multiple networks of the same species under various conditions (). Neither approach has been applied to study subnetwork dynamics during disease progression. To address this critical gap, we have developed a general framework to reveal subnetwork dynamics by joint analysis of multiple gene co-expression networks during disease progression. We introduce a novel measure to capture changes in the connectivity of a subnetwork. Using breast cancer as an example, we demonstrate that adding information about network connectivity dynamics significantly improves the classification accuracy of multiple stages of the disease. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion our current knowledge about the dynamics of gene networks during disease progression is rather limited. Conceptually, the A B. Module connectivity dynamics improves disease stage classification. Results are based on 50 independent 5-fold cross validations. (A) Classification accuracy of breast cancer stages using different feature sets, including randomly selected genes (RG, N = 50 features, 50 genes), differentially expressed genes (DG, N = 50 features, 50 genes), TC modules (N = 1573 features, 1601 genes), SC (91 features, 7737 genes), CC (100 features, 7737 genes), joint clustering (JC, 110 features, 7690 genes), significant 4 modules (SM, 50 features, 635 genes) and weighted 4 modules (wSM, 50 features, 635 genes). Accuracy is defined as the number of patient samples correctly classified. Y-axis, mean accuracy. Error bar, standard deviation. (B) Receiver operating characteristic curves for SVM classifiers trained with different feature sets. AUC values are in parenthesis problem of understanding network dynamics can be divided into two subproblems: (i) identifying the subnetworks that exhibit structural changes in response to different growth or developmental events or different spatial location; and (ii) quantifying the dynamic changes in the subnetwork structure. Our framework addresses both subproblems. To identify subnetworks that change over multiple conditions, many previous approaches first perform all pairwise network comparisons and then identify a unified subnetwork that partially overlaps with pairwise comparisons (). In contrast, the JC, TC and the m module algorithms analyze multiple gene networks simultaneously. By doing so, the latter approach can reduce noises as well as capture subtle but consistent changes in the subnetworks. The three latter methods use different objective functions to identify shared subnetworks. JC uses the modularity measure (), whereas TC uses frequent dense subgraphs. The modularity measure is known to have a resolution limit that prohibits the discovery of small modules (). On the other hand, strictly relying on network density prevents the discovery of subnetworks with sparser and linear topologies such as signaling pathways. m module alleviates both problems by using graph entropy based objective function (). In addition, m module incorporates both network topological feature and prior knowledge about the mutational status of genes for the disease under investigation. The second subproblem of network dynamics is how to quantify structural dynamics in the subnetwork. We introduced a novel measure (MCDS) based on the matrix norm of adjacency matrices that represent subnetworks. Unlike degree comparison, which was commonly used in previous studies, MCDS takes into account both the existence and strength of connectivity between genes in a subnetwork. We compared both the quality and the classification accuracy of modules derived using individual networks separately and using m modules. We found that m modules have higher sensitivity and comparable specificity based on known pathway annotations. More importantly, we found that m module based features achieve significantly higher accuracy in predicting cancer stages (Supplementary). This result emphasizes the importance of joint analysis of multiple gene networks to more accurately capture the dynamics of gene pathways. Much of previous studies on connectivity dynamics have been focused on the dynamics of hub genes. m module enables analysis of entire pathway instead of hub genes only. Our result suggests that genes in dynamic modules have unique topological and biochemical properties that may contribute to their function in cancer progression. In particular, we found that genes encoding signaling domains are enriched in dynamic modules but not static modules. This finding is consistent with previous results that signaling domains are more frequently associated with oncogenesis and play critical roles in rewiring signaling networks and driving phenotypic alteration as disease progression () or during cellular stress responses (). We see ample opportunities to improve on the basic concept of m module in future work. First, although this study uses breast cancer as a proof of principle the m module framework is broadly applicable to any cohort of patients for which disease stage specific transcriptome data are available. Second, integrating multiple types of molecular analytes beyond gene expression and somatic mutation (e.g. epi genome miRNA, cn vs might further expand our ability to identify dynamic molecular events that are associated with disease progression. Finally, comparing and contrasting dynamic events involving different molecular types may yield new mechanistic insights into their interactions in the context of disease progression.
