Interrogating protein complexes and pathways in an evolutionary context provides insights into the formation of the basic functional components of the cell. We developed two independent Cytoscape plugins that can be cooperatively used to map evolving protein interaction networks at the module level. The ap cluster plugin implements a recent affinity propagation (AP) algorithm for graph clustering and can be applied to decompose networks into coherent modules. The network evolution plugin provides the capability to visualize selected modules in consecutive evolutionary stages. Availability: The plugins, input data and usage scenarios are freely available from the project web site:

introduction molecular systems are composed of many loosely coupled components that together orchestrate higher cellular functions. The emergence of this inherent modularity is only beginning to be elucidated. For example, up close investigation of selected protein complexes have shown how some of them have been formed through a series of duplication and rewiring events. Such studies have previously focused on complexes of known 3D structure (). More recently systematic analysis based on large scale protein protein interaction (PPI) data have been performed (). For the purpose of analyzing conserved modules in PPI networks it seems natural to employ network alignment techniques (), in particular those which attempt to infer the network snapshots at previous evolutionary stages (). In such scenario, one may first identify complexes and pathways highly conserved in multiple species and then infer duplication, deletion and rewiring events that gave rise to the observed modules. Ideally, the entire process should be automated and interactive, allowing the user to easily identify the conserved * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: Departments of Medicine and Bioengineering, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, USA network regions and seamlessly move between networks of different species to observe the evolutionary changes. For this task we have implemented new software tools and integrated them with the popular Cytoscape platform () via its plugin interface. Our first plugin allows for interactive comparison of networks across evolutionary stages, which is a unique feature not available in other graph visualization tools (). The second plugin implements a recent and already widely used affinity propagation (AP) algorithm (), thus extending the set of existing clustering and module detection methods available within Cytoscape.
