Motivation: Transcripts from ∼95% of human multi exon genes are subject to alternative splicing (AS). The growing interest in AS is propelled by its prominent contribution to transcriptome and proteome complexity and the role of aberrant AS in numerous diseases. Recent technological advances enable thousands of exons to be simultaneously profiled across diverse cell types and cellular conditions, but require accurate identification of condition specific splicing changes. It is necessary to accurately identify such splicing changes to elucidate the underlying regulatory programs or link the splicing changes to specific diseases. Results: We present a probabilistic model tailored for high throughput AS data, where observed isoform levels are explained as combinations of condition specific AS signals. According to our formulation, given an AS dataset our tasks are to detect common signals in the data and identify the exons relevant to each signal. Our model can incorporate prior knowledge about underlying AS signals, measurement quality and gene expression level effects. Using a large scale multi tissue AS dataset, we demonstrate the advantage of our method over standard alternative approaches. In addition, we describe newly found tissue specific AS signals which were verified experimentally, and discuss associated regulatory features. Contact:

introduction the proper function of a living cell depends on constant regulation of its biomolecular content, both spatially and temporally. One important regulated process is splicing, where exonic segments of the transcribed pre mrna are spliced together while intronic segments are removed. In some cases, different exons of the pre mrna may be retained, leading to different transcripts called isoforms, a process known as alternative splicing (AS). There are several known types of AS, with the most common one being cassette AS (), illustrated in. AS plays a critical role in shaping how genetic information is expressed in cells of metazoan species. Moreover, 1550% of human disease mutations affect splice site selection (). Recent high throughput sequencing studies estimate that transcripts from 95% of multi exon human genes undergo AS, with the majority of AS exons displaying differential expression across different tissues (). Such high throughput studies can be probed to identify condition specific 1 splicing changes that subsequently can be linked to genetic disease (). Alternatively, groups of exons identified by these studies as exhibiting concerted changes across functionally related conditions (e.g. muscle tissues) can be used to look for a common regulatory program. For example, several works () correlated splicing changes with potential binding motifs. recently developed a computationally derived regulatory code that includes combinations of motifs and non motif features such as transcript structure characteristics to directly predict splicing changes from genomic sequence. The focus of the work presented here is to facilitate such downstream analysis by accurately identifying biologically informative condition specific splicing changes, or AS signals, underlying high throughput measurements. high throughput AS measurements are typically acquired using microarrays or high throughput sequencing technologies. Accurate quantification of every isoform still poses computational and experimental challenges. Consequently, much of the research involving AS and derived datasets focuses on the simpler task of quantifying splicing changes at the single exon level. Such data can be quantified as the fraction of gene isoforms including an exon, with additional information conveying the overall gene expression level in each condition (). This representation is not only easier to derive, but also corresponds well to the hypotheses accounting for regulated AS. The regulatory mechanisms involved include various structural features and cis elements in the proximity of the alternative exon, with splicing and transcription forming two distinct networks of regulation (). Formally, the measurements from high throughput AS studies can be represented as a matrix whose entries convey the fraction of inclusion and exclusion isoforms for each of the exons and each of the conditions monitored in the study (). Similarly, the overall expression levels of the genes containing each exon can be represented by a corresponding matrix. A widely used approach for identifying common patterns in such data is clustering (). Clustering the columns of the matrix derived from, containing 3700 cassette exons profiled across 27 mouse tissues, easily identifies a cluster of all central nervous system (CNS) tissues, evident on the left side of the cluster gram in. Similarly, clustering rows of the matrix, which represent AS profiles of exons, identifies groups of exons that share a similar AS profile across conditions. While readily available and easy to apply to AS datasets, standard clustering methods such as hierarchical agglomerative clustering and k means clustering, suffer from several drawbacks. First, many splicing changes occur in functionally related conditions, such as CNS or muscle tissues. Standard clustering is not easily modified so as to incorporate such prior knowledge. Second, a splicing change. high throughput AS data representation and analysis: (A) isoforms including and excluding a cassette exon can be quantified using a single number, representing the percent of isoforms that include the exon. A separate number gives the overall gene expression level (not shown here). (B) high throughput AS data as a matrix of percent inclusion values for different exons (rows) under different conditions (columns). (C) The same matrix for a real dataset (), after agglomerative clustering. Inclusion levels are displayed as a heat map with the subset of CNS tissues visible on the left. (D) Four examples of exons exhibiting condition specific splicing changes in CNS, muscle and embryo tissues. Arrows show the position of each exon in the cluster gram. These relative positions do not convey well the tissue groups in which each of these exons exhibit splicing changes. (E) The five underlying AS signals identified by our model and (F) how each of these signals is associated with the four exon examples. in a subset of conditions may involve two types of effects, one being a relative increase of exon inclusion levels and the second being a relative decrease. Common distance measures used for clustering either distinguish between these two effect types or ignore the difference between the two (e.g. correlation and absolute correlation coefficients). In practice, however, it is desirable to be able to distinguish between these two types of effects, but still associate them since they may share common regulatory elements. For instance, splice factors such as Nova, Fox and npt b have been linked to both effects in the same tissues (). Third, another characteristic of AS datasets not easily incorporated into standard clustering methods, is that exons may exhibit a combination of splicing changes in several functionally related tissue groups, such as muscle and CNS (), but occurrence of regulated splicing changes across cellular conditions is expected to generally be sparse. This expected sparsity is related to the experimental setup, where thousands of exons are monitored but most of these do not exhibit condition specific profiles. Fourth, previous work has shown that while some exons exhibit a type of on off splicing profile, others exhibit continuous splicing changes across tissues, and may have different tissue independent baseline inclusion levels. A closer look at the clustering results (), illustrates the problems that arise from the inability to easily incorporate these domain characteristics into standard clustering. Exon 2 of Pank3 and exon 10 of Arfgap1 are an example of two exons positioned on opposite ends of the cluster gram despite both exhibiting a profile containing a splicing change in CNS tissues. Exon 2 of Pank3 and exon 3 of NM_029530.2 are positioned far apart since their baseline levels of inclusion are distinctly different, but both exhibit a similar pattern of increased inclusion in CNS. The Pank3 exon also exhibits increased inclusion in muscle tissues, yet it is positioned adjacent to exon 3 of Fgf1, which exhibits an unrelated splicing profile. Switching to different similarity measures [e.g. from the default L 1 norm used here to Pearson's correlation, or mean squared error (MSE)] or between clustering algorithms, may help address some of these problems, but does not offer an overall solution to the issues raised. Matrix factorization algorithms, such as principal component analysis pc a factor analysis (FA) and singular value decomposition (SVD), offer an alternative approach for analyzing high throughput AS measurements. Following the terminology of SVD previously used for this task (), these algorithms are able to identify a set of C  T underlying eigen exons (termed 'components' in pc a and 'factors' in FA), and assign to each exon in the dataset a matching set of values that represent how much each of these eigen exons contributes to a given exon AS profile. This approach is thus more naturally suited for modeling AS measurements as continuous combination of components, where each component can have either a positive (increased inclusion) or negative (increased exclusion) effect, and with different magnitude. However, these algorithms still lack i326 page i327 i325i333

discussion in this work we presented a model based approach to identifying condition specific AS signals from high throughput data. Unlike other approaches, our generative model is specifically tailored for this task. It incorporates prior knowledge about AS, including known correlation to expression levels, modeling of a tissue independent signal, the expected sparsity of the AS signals and the fact that AS signals may have either a positive or negative effect. The model is also able to incorporate specific knowledge about a given dataset, including information about the quality of the measurements, related gene expression levels and knowledge of specific AS signals in the data. We compared our approach with commonly used alternatives and showed that on real data it was able to produce superior results in terms of the signals identified, their robustness and their assignments to biologically important groups of exons. For the latter, we defined an independent measure of quality, the FII, performed a literature search for tissue specific splicing regulatory cis elements, and showed that the assignment of AS signals by our method correlated significantly better with those elements. Our method was able to detect a novel split of the signal for splicing changes in CNS tissues into two separate subgroups of tissues, and a previously unreported AS signal associated with digestive tissues. The four main tissue specific AS signals identified by our model are supported by a predictive model derived from putative regula o try features, including experimental testing of the model's predictions (). Previous work developing related models include if a and another form of a mixture of factor analyzers (). Both of these models, developed for different applications, differ from ours in the mixture model used and do not include domain specific elements, such as the background model, the gene expression levels and the AS baseline signals. More recent work involving general matrix factorization algorithms include the work by (), which was applied to gene expression data and Robust pc a (), which involves sparse signal assignments and noisy data. In general, the computational alternatives currently available can be broadly divided into two: supervised and unsupervised methods. The first mostly consists of computing statistics such as the mean inclusion level for a predefined group of conditions, while the other includes clustering methods such as hierarchical agglomerative clustering, as well as SVD, pc a and other variants of matrix factorization algorithms. Compared with those, our modeling approach can range between supervised and unsupervised signal identification, depending on the amount of additional information incorporated into the model. We were able to demonstrate the usefulness of this trade-off between search space exploration and prior knowledge exploitation for the identification of AS signals in the data. There are several direct computational extensions to the model presented here. One extension involves defining the number of components in the model as a random variable and marginalizing over it. A recent work by () implemented such a model for factor mixtures using a beta process prior. We note though that in our context we are not simply interested in marginalizing out the component number, since the identity of the AS signals and the exons associated with them are biologically meaningful. Another possible direction for future work is to replace the Gaussian mixture components used in our model with alternative distributions that would fit the data better. This change would be of practical use if the better fit to the data would also lead to more accurate signal assignments to exons. We briefly reviewed some of the regulatory elements we identified as enriched in groups of exons associated with the AS signal reported. Many of these are in excellent agreement with previously published results, including the role and positional bias of cis element known to bind Nova, PTB and Fox. Some identified features, such as the Quaking motif upstream of exons highly included in CNS, offer possible insights to additional regulatory mechanisms. The correlation between signals identified by our model and regulatory elements points to possible extensions and applicative potential of the modeling approach we propose. Our probabilistic framework can naturally be extended to a unified framework where combinations of regulatory features are used to explain identified AS signals and the assignment of these signals to exons is subsequently used to refine the regulatory programs learned. Such a unified approach for modeling regulatory programs has been applied successfully in other domains (). In our recent work (), the model described here was utilized to construct a regulatory code that predicts tissue specific splicing changes directly from genomic sequence. Our framework can be extended to incorporate additional information such as secondary structure elements, nucleosome positions and splice factor binding measurements (), to gain further insights into the underlying regulatory mechanisms associated with each AS signal. Based on the analysis of AS signals we report and the comparison of our method to standard computational alternatives, we believe this work will facilitate the study of future high throughput AS datasets, extending our understanding of the transcriptome complexity.
