Motivation: learning based model quality assessment programs have been quite successful at discriminating between high and low quality protein structures. Here, we show that it is possible to improve this performance significantly by restricting the learning space to a specific context, in this case membrane proteins. Since these are among the most important structures from a pharmaceutical point of view it is particularly interesting to resolve local model quality for regions corresponding, e.g. to binding sites. Results: Our new pro qm method uses a support vector machine with a combination of general and membrane protein specific features. For the transmembrane region, pro qm clearly outperforms all methods developed for generic proteins, and it does so while maintaining performance for extra membrane domains; in this region it is only matched by pro q res. The predictor is shown to accurately predict quality both on the global and local level when applied to GPCR models, and clearly outperforms consensus based scoring. Finally, the combination of pro qm and the Rosetta low resolution energy function achieve a 7-fold enrichment in selection of near native structural models, at very limited computational cost. Availability: pro qm is available as a server at

introduction computational modeling of 3D structure of protein molecules is an important research area that has the potential to dramatically accelerate the determination of protein structures, both in terms of purely predicted structures and as part of an otherwise experimental pipeline. An increase in the number of proteins for which high quality structural data is available would greatly enhance our ability to understand biological function, redesign proteins of interest and develop new drugs, which might even be peptides themselves (). Membrane proteins are particularly interesting for medical applications, but structure prediction of these proteins is still in its infancy compared with globular proteins. Fortunately, many methods (in particular sequence based ones) originally developed for water soluble proteins can be applied directly to membrane * To whom correspondence should be addressed. proteins (). However, methods using knowledge based potentials derived from existing water soluble proteins need to be changed and adapted to account both for the specific membrane environment and composition of membrane proteins (). Many structure prediction methods that approaches today can generate a large number of models either by constructing models from alignments to different templates () or by sampling different regions of the conformational space (). A scoring function or model quality assessment program m qap is then required to discriminate high quality models from imperfect ones. An ideal scoring function would produce perfect correlation between the score and quality, as measured by the distance to the native structure. The various scoring functions in use today can roughly be divided into three classes: physics, knowledge and learning based. For physical scoring functions, the goal is to describe the physics of the interaction between atoms as accurately as possible. These functions are often parameterized on much smaller systems than proteins, and the typical example is a molecular mechanics force field such as o pls (), CHARMM () or Amber (). knowledge based scoring functions in contrast derive probability distributions from features extracted from native structures (Chao). Finally, learning based functions are trained on structural features to distinguish between correct and incorrect models and to predict the actual quality of a given model. The training methods available range from simple optimization of a few parameters to advanced machine learning methods such as neural networks or support vector machines (SVMs;). Most scoring functions have been developed to discriminate between globally incorrect and approximately correct models. In contrast, only a handful of methods focus on the more general problem of predicting the correctness of different parts of a protein structural model (). Moreover, neither the knowledge nor learning based methods have been developed specifically for membrane proteins. In principle, a physics based scoring function could be used directly for membrane proteins, but in that case we would be faced with the much more complex task of accurately representing the lipid bilayer environment around the protein too. In addition, the success of physics based scoring functions as mq aps even for globular proteins has been quite limited, in part due to insufficient sampling. None of the top ranking mq aps in CASP7 or CASP8 were physics
