The modul and plug-in provides Cytoscape users an algorithm for determining extensively overlapping network modules. Moreover, it identifies several hierarchical layers of modules, where meta nodes of the higher hierarchical layer represent modules of the lower layer. The tool assigns module cores, which predict the function of the whole module, and determines key nodes bridging two or multiple modules. The plug-in has a detailed java based graphical interface with various colouring options. The modul and tool can run on Windows, Linux or Mac OS. We demonstrate its use on protein structure and metabolic networks. Availability: The plug-in and its user guide can be downloaded freely from: http://www.linkgroup.hu/modules.php.

introduction nodes of biological networks often belong to multiple network communities. Recently, a number of methods were published to determine tightly or extensively overlapping network modules (). Our modul and framework () introduced community landscapes. The xy plane of a community landscape is a conventional 2D visualization of the network, whereas the z axis represents community centrality. Community centrality of a given edge (or node) was defined as the sum of local influence zones of all network edges (or nodes) including the given edge (or node; Supplementary). Thus community centrality represents an integrated measure of the whole network's influence to one of its edges or nodes. Hills of the community landscape correspond to network modules (Supplementary) yielding extensive overlaps. This concept led to the development of the modul and family of network modularization methods (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as the joint first authors the widely used Cytoscape program () has several very useful clustering plug-ins (). However, these methods do not focus on extensive modular overlaps, and do not build a modular hierarchy, where meta nodes of the higher level represent modules of the lower level. Moreover, existing plug-ins do not provide measures identifying the centre of the module, as well as key nodes bridging two or multiple modules (see Supplementary Table S9, and Supplementary Discussion). Here, we introduce the Cytoscape plug-in of the most widely applicable version of the modul and method family (). We demonstrate its ability to determine biologically relevant, extensively overlapping network modules, hierarchical layers of modules, module cores and key inter modular nodes using protein structure and metabolic networks.
