Motivation: Genetic interactions between genes reflect functional relationships caused by a wide range of molecular mechanisms. large scale genetic interaction assays lead to a wealth of information about the functional relations between genes. However, the vast number of observed interactions, along with experimental noise, makes the interpretation of such assays a major challenge. Results: Here, we introduce a computational approach to organize genetic interactions and show that the bulk of observed interactions can be organized in a hierarchy of modules. Revealing this organization enables insights into the function of cellular machineries and highlights global properties of interaction maps. To gain further insight into the nature of these interactions, we integrated data from genetic screens under a wide range of conditions to reveal that more than a third of observed aggravating (i.e. synthetic sick lethal interactions are unidirectional, where one gene can buffer the effects of perturbing another gene but not vice versa. Furthermore, most modules of genes that have multiple aggravating interactions were found to be involved in such unidirectional interactions. We demonstrate that the identification of external stimuli that mimic the effect of specific gene knockouts provides insights into the role of individual modules in maintaining cellular integrity. Availability: We designed a freely accessible web tool that includes all our findings, and is specifically intended to allow effective browsing of our results

introduction a major goal in biology is to understand how thousands of genes act together to create a functional cellular environment. An emerging powerful strategy for investigating functional relations between genes involves high throughput genetic interaction maps (), which measure the extent by which a mutation in one gene modifies the phenotype of a mutation in another. The interactions in these maps can be divided to alleviating interactions, where the defect of the double mutant is less than expected from page i229 i228i236 interactions between these modules will account for a large portion of the data. We show how the resulting representation facilitates better understanding of the underlying cellular phenomena. In turn, we use these insights to shed light on the function of concrete cellular pathways and also to provide information on the overall organization of the network. We demonstrate how integration of data from genetic screens for reduced fitness under various conditions results in automatic creation of biological insights into the functional role of gene modules.
