Motivation: The three dimensional (3D) conformation of chromosomes and genomes play an important role in cellular processes such as gene regulation, DNA replication and genome methyla-tion. Several methods have been developed to reconstruct 3D structures of individual chromosomes from chromosomal conformation capturing data such as Hi-C data. However, few methods can effectively reconstruct the 3D structures of an entire genome due to the difficulty of handling noisy and inconsistent inter chromosomal contact data. Results: We generalized a 3D chromosome reconstruction method to make it capable of reconstructing 3D models of genomes from both intra and inter chromosomal Hi-C contact data and implemented it as a software tool called MOGEN. We validated MOGEN on synthetic datasets of a polymer worm-like chain model and a yeast genome at first, and then applied it to generate an ensemble of 3D structural models of the genome of human b cells from a Hi-C dataset. These gen-ome models not only were validated by some known structural patterns of the human genome, such as chromosome compartmentalization, chromosome territories, co-localization of small chromosomes in the nucleus center with the exception of chromosome 18, enriched center toward inter chromosomal interactions between elongated or telomere regions of chromosomes, but also demonstrated the intrinsically dynamic orientations between chromosomes. Therefore, MOGEN is a useful tool for converting chromosomal contact data into 3D genome models to provide a better view into the spatial organization of genomes. Availability and implementation: The software of MOGEN is available at: http://calla.rnet.missouri. edu mogen
introduction the three dimensional (3D) structures of chromosomes and genomes play an important role in biological processes such as gene regulation, DNA replication, gene gene interaction, genome methylation, maintenance of genome stability and recurrent chromosomal translocation (). Analyzing 3D structures of chromosomes and genomes is, therefore, an important task in studying functions of genomes. Fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) has been used to study the 3D organization of chromosomes and genomes, however, due to its low throughput and low resolution, it can not be applied to study genomes at a fine or large scale. Recently, chromosome conformation capture 3c based techniques such as Hi-C () and TCC () have emerged as powerful tools for capturing the proximity of chromosomal fragments within the same chromosome intra chromosomal contacts) or between different chromosomes inter chromosomal contacts). These chromosomal contacts can provide new insights into the 3D organization of genomes (). Moreover, they can also be used to infer 3D structures of chromosomes and genomes. Several methods have been proposed to reconstruct 3D structures of chromosomes from chromosomal contacts, which adopt one of the two main strategies (). The first strategy relies on the principles of polymer physics of the chromatin to build models that are consistent with observed chromosomal contacts (). The second strategy converts chromosomal contacts into restraints and then constructs models to satisfy these restraints. Methods utilize the second strategy are called restraint based methods. A common approach used by restraint based methods is to convert chromosomal contacts into spatial distances first and then solves the problem of satisfying these spatial restraints as an optimization problem. Depending how restraints are satisfied, the optimization procedure could yield one single model () or a set of models (). We developed a restraint based method (), in which contacts and non contacts are supposed to satisfy a distance threshold rather than a specific distance value, which is tackled as an optimization problem. Different from most restraint based methods, our method does not require converting contacts into distances. When contacts are highly consistent and can be satisfied altogether, our method produces similar models, but when contacts are largely inconsistent, different models are produced. Although reasonable 3D structures of individual chromosomes can be built by some of these methods, it still difficult to reconstruct 3D structures of large genomes such as the human genome consisting of a number of chromosomes from both intra and inter chromosomal contacts. To the best of our knowledge, currently, no existing methods had built the structural models of the entire human genome consisting of 23 pairs of chromosomes from Hi-C data, which exhibit the known features of the human genome such as chromosome territories and the clustering of small chromosomes in the center with the exception of chromosome 18. The limitation could partially be due to the difficulty of handling noisy and often inconsistent inter chromosomal contacts of low interaction frequency (IF) to assemble individual chromosome structures together while satisfying intra chromosomal contacts with much higher IF. In order to overcome this problem, we generalized our 3D chromosome reconstruction method () to make it capable of reconstructing 3D models of a large genome such as the human genome utilizing both intra and inter chromosomal contact data. We benchmarked the method on two synthetic datasets of the yeast genome () and of a polymer worm-like chain model () and the real Hi-C data of the human genome (), and implemented it as a software tool called MOGEN for users to reconstruct 3D genome structures.
