The chemical structures of biomolecules, whether naturally occurring or synthetic, are composed of functionally important building blocks. Given a set of small molecules for example, those known to bind a particular protein computationally decomposing them into chemically meaningful fragments can help elucidate their functional properties, and may be useful for designing novel compounds with similar properties. Here we introduce mol blocks a suite of programs for breaking down sets of small molecules into fragments according to a predefined set of chemical rules, clustering the resulting fragments, and uncovering statistically enriched fragments. Among other applications , our software should be a great aid in large scale chemical analysis of ligands binding specific targets of interest. Availability and implementation: mol blocks is available as GPL Cþþ source code at

introduction endogenous small molecules are synthesized in the cell in a modular fashion, using building blocks or fragments that are often conserved across organisms (). fragment based drug discovery has also emerged as an important paradigm to navigate the diversity of the chemical landscape and to profile protein drug g ability (). Further, it has been shown that the toxicity of certain drugs can be explained by the presence in their structure of fragments that are shared by toxic compounds (). Although many programs are available to assemble small molecules from fragments (), the reverse problem of breaking down small molecules and analyzing the corresponding fragment sets has been studied less extensively. An implementation of the RECAP algorithm () to fragment small molecules can be found in a commercial program fragment er www chemaxon com and is available in the rd kit library (http://www.rdkit.org), which also implements the BRICS fragmentation algorithm (). However, given a diverse set of small molecules that share a property of interest, there is no automated tool to identify statistically enriched fragments that might explain their activity. Here we introduce the mol blocks suite, which allows users to break down small molecules into chemically meaningful fragments and analyze the resulting fragment distribution (). The software consists of two command line programs: fragment and analyze. The fragment program reads user defined rules to specify the bonds to break or uses default sets of rules [RECAP (), CCQ www chemaxon. com], and BRICS (. Then, the program applies these rules to fragment the molecules, and generates all fragments with a number of heavy atoms above a minimum size defined by the user. The analyze program collects statistics on the frequency with which each fragment occurs, clusters fragments using a user defined similarity threshold based on a fingerprint representation (O') of the fragments and selects a representative fragment for each cluster. This program can also perform enrichment analysis at the level of either fragments or clusters. A typical scenario where fragment and enrichment analyses can be applied is when dealing with a library of small molecules, a subset of which has a specific property of interest. In these cases, mol blocks can be used to fragment the whole library and determine which (if any) fragments are significantly enriched in the set with the property of interest. Fragmentation and enrichment analysis of small molecules may also be useful in analyzing proteins. For example, ligands bound by proteins that share a common property, such as a specific function, can be analyzed in this manner. Such an approach would provide a complement to the functional enrichment analyses that are routinely performed with Gene Ontology terms (). Extensive fragmentation of the entire drug bank () collection of 6460 small molecules with the default rules took 53 s on an iMac with a 2.66 GHz processor. A user's guide with implementation details and more tests is provided with the suite.
