Motivation: Viruses, from the human protein protein interaction network perspective, target hubs, bottlenecks and interconnected nodes enriched in certain biological pathways. However, not much is known about the general characteristic features of the human proteins interacting with viral proteins (referred to as h vips as well as the motifs and domains utilized by human virus protein protein interactions (referred to as hu vir pp is. Results: Our study has revealed that h vips are mostly disordered proteins, whereas viral proteins are mostly ordered proteins. Protein disorder in viral proteins and h vips varies from one subcellular location to another. In any given viral human PPI pair, at least one of the two proteins is structurally disordered suggesting that disorder associated conformational flexibility as one of the characteristic features of virus host interaction. Further analyses reveal that h vips are (i) slowly evolving proteins, (ii) associated with high centrality scores in human ppi network, (iii) involved in multiple pathways, (iv) enriched in eukaryotic linear motifs (ELMs) associated with protein modification, degradation and regulatory processes, (v) associated with high number of splice variants and (vi) expressed abundantly across multiple tissues. These aforementioned findings suggest that conformational flexibility, spatial diversity, abundance and slow evolution are the characteristic features of the human proteins targeted by viral proteins. hu vir pp is are mostly mediated via domain motif interactions dm is where viral proteins employ motifs that mimic host ELMs to bind to domains in human proteins. dm is are shared among viruses belonging to different families indicating a possible convergent evolution of these motifs to help viruses to adopt common strategies to subvert host cellular pathways. Availability and implementation: hu vir PPI data, DDI and DMI data for human virus PPI can be downloaded from

introduction viruses are the obligate intracellular parasites and hence need host cellular machinery for their genome replication and propagation enabled by interactions between viral and several host proteins during various stages of viral infection. Hence, viral host protein protein interactions have been keenly studied by employing both computational () and experimental (Human protein protein interaction hupp i network is robust to random attacks owing to its scale free nature (); however, the network breaks down due to targeted attacks (). Studies have shown that viral proteins interact with hubs, bottlenecks and rich clubs in hupp i network, and they also interact with the human proteins involved in signalling, cell cycle regulation, cell trafficking, transcription and translation (). The fact that viral proteins, although very a few in number, target hubs, bottlenecks and rich clubs indicates that viral subversion of human cellular processes is achieved by targeted attacks (). Our recent study has revealed yet another interesting facet of viral proteins that some of them act as articulation points in the human viral bridged PPI network by bridging unconnected components of hupp i network, thereby mediating certain novel interactions to tune host machinery for their propagation (). In literature, one can find studies reporting properties of host proteins targeted by viral proteins. For example, it has been reported that the human proteins targeted by viruses are associated with diabetes and auto immune diseases (). Viral immune modulators have been shown to target proteins involved in signalling pathways and cellular processes (). It has been found that the targets of HIV-1 are highly conserved across primates (). Structural interaction network studies comprising about 50 viral hupp is () have revealed that the endogenous interfaces hupp i evolve at slower rates compared with rest of the surface, whereas the exogenous interfaces (viral targets) evolve at faster rates (). Later studies based on another dataset comprising 954 interactions reported results () contradicted these results. Among proteins, some are referred to as intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) as these proteins are enriched with disordered regions lacking stable three dimensional structures. IDPs are known to perform many biological functions such as signalling, regulatory processes, DNA binding and transcription (). IDPs usually interact with large number of proteins and hence occupy topologically important positions in protein protein interaction networks (). They are tightly regulated () in the cell and found to harbour short linear motifs slims eukaryotic linear motifs (ELMs)] in their disordered regions that are recognized by modular protein domains such as SH3, PDZ and SH2 (). Many genomes, from prokaryotes to eukaryotes, harbour several genes that code for IDPs () (about 2.0% in archaea, 4.2% in bacteria and 33.0% in eukaryotes). Viral genomes too code for IDPs, and the proportion of amino acids in the disordered regions of these genomes vary from 1% to 70% depending on their hosts or genome types (). Furthermore, some of the viruses harbour sequences that mimic ELMs in the disordered regions (). Some of the IDPs are associated with certain human genetic disorders, cancers, neurodegenerative and autoimmune diseases (). However, role of IDPs in infectious diseases, in particular those caused by viral infections, has not been well studied. In this study, we report a systematic analysis of characteristic features of human proteins interacting with viral proteins h vips as well as on general features of human virus hu vir PPI. We find that significant number of h vips can be classified as IDPs. Furthermore, h vips occupy central positions in PPI network; evolve at relatively slower rates; involve in multiple pathways, harbour a number of potential binding interfaces and linear motifs in their disordered regions. We also find that virus hupp is are mediated by a common set of domain motif interactions dm is
discussion viral replication inside host is marked by various stages of life cycle. During various stages of viral life cycle, viral proteins interact with human proteins localized to distinct cellular locations and distinct functions: extra cellular space or plasma membrane for virus entry and egress, cytoplasm during un packaging or virion assembly, endoplasmic reticulum for protein synthesis and nucleus for viral transcription replication mrna processing. Our study has revealed that hu vir interactions mainly involve disordered proteins (60% hu elm in human protein: ; ELM in viral protein: ; domain in h vip and domain in viral protein: . Domain profile was obtained using interpro scan. ELM profile for protein obtained using ANCHOR. a twenty have experimental evidences () (detailed list in supplementary vir PPI) (and b), which provide inherent conformational flexibility to interacting partners perhaps as a means to compensate structural variations caused by mutations that frequently happen in viral proteins. Protein structural disorder in h vips and viral proteins shows subcellular location specific variation (h and supplementary fig. S1a and b). In most of the hu vir pp is human and viral proteins complement each other in terms of their structural disorder when one is disordered, the other is usually ordered. disorder associated conformational flexibility thus seems to be the common feature of hu vi pp is. Viruses target human proteins that occupy central positions and hence make targeted attacks on hupp i by which they gain control over information flow in hupp i network. h vips are expressed across multiple tissues suggesting that they are housekeeping genes which are required for cellular processes. h vips are associated with splice variation, involved in multiple pathways and localized to multiple subcellular locations thus presenting diversity and variation to interacting viral proteins. Viruses are known to jump across species to cause diseases () as a consequence of their co-evolution with host proteins. Immune system proteins evolve at higher rates when compared with non-immune proteins (). Our study also has revealed that immune h vips evolve at faster rate, whereas non-immune h vips show slowest evolutionary rate. These observations suggest two facets of viral infections: (i) evolutionary arms race between viral and antiviral proteins consistent with () and (ii) viruses' capability to infect different hosts (). Viral pathogen of one host species cause a severe pathological symptoms in an another closely related host species. For example, HIV-1 () and HIV-2 () are thought to have jumped from Chimpanzee and Sooty manga be y respectively. Influenza H1N1 causative of swine flu has jumped from pigs to humans and kf dv ky asano or forest disease virus) that causes the disease in human has jumped from monkey. h vips show higher number of interfaces in disordered regions compared with non h vips and they can form multi interface hubs (). Large number of interfaces in a protein enables it to interact with multiple proteins. h vips are also enriched with ELMs, which function in regulation of activities of proteins in cellular processes such as endocytosis, signalling, transcription, cell cycle regulation and protein degradation pathways. When we resolved hu vir PPI using known DMI and DDI information, we found that viruses mainly utilize ELMs with h vips. In a recent study reported that interspecies pp is between human and viral proteins are mostly characterized by dm is compared with intraspecies interactions They also reported that 30% hu vir pp is can be resolved using DDI and dm is. In our study, with high coverage of almost all known hu vir pp is and higher number of dd is and dm is than previously reported in literature (), we found only 11.6% of the interactions utilize either DDI or DMI. ELMs in viral proteins mimic host motifs. Mimicking SLiMs is evolutionarily favourable for viruses as they undergo mutations rapidly driving convergent evolution (). Mimicked ELMs in viral proteins mostly target kinase functions, cell cycle regulation, protein degradation and cleavage pathways. In bipartite DDI and DMI network, we found that dd is are widespread, and viral domains are involved in multiple interactions with different domains, whereas motifs are involved in single interaction with corresponding lmb d and are utilized by multiple hu vir pp is. It was also found that dd is are mostly virus specific, whereas dm is are used by multiple viruses. KEGG pathways enriched in h vips involved in DMI with viral proteins of different viral families indicate that they are common among families and those of dd is are more specific to families of viruses. This further confirms convergent evolution of linear motifs in viruses belonging to different families as a strategy to target common pathways. KEGG pathways uniquely enriched in DDI and DMI are distinct. In DDI, they are related to immune recognition of viruses, whereas in DMI, they are related to metabolism, cell cycle regulation and immune signalling. It is well established that certain viral proteins modulate pattern recognition receptor (PRR) signalling pathways (), and our results show downstream signalling proteins of PRR pathways form DMI with viral proteins indicating viruses use linear motifs for manipulating these pathways. Proteins containing WW domain, which have role in cell cycle regulation (), are targeted by viruses by mimicking WW domain binding motifs consistent with previous studies (). Non-homologous end joining pathway is enriched in h vips involved in dm is of Retroviridae and Herpesviridae whose activation is required for retroviruses () and inhibition during lytic cycle of herpes viruses (). Interestingly, we found a few pathways involved in regulation of metabolism such as carbohydrate absorption, insulin signalling, ad ipo cytokine signalling, mt or signalling and inositol phosphate metabolism, which are also enriched in h vips targeted via ELMs in viral proteins. Viral modulation of metabolic pathways () is being studied in recent years. mt or signalling pathway is known to be manipulated by pathogens (), our study revealed that AKT, GSK and PIK3K are targeted by many viruses by mimicking p kinase domain binding motifs (and Supplementary). HCV has been shown to stimulate phospho inositol 4 phosphate production via activation of molecular principles of human virus protein protein interactions pi4k3 kinase activation () consistent with our finding inositol phosphate metabolism being targeted by means of dm is. Our previous study on hu vir bridged networks has revealed certain viral proteins acting as articulation points and as a consequence bridge metabolic pathways to the signalling pathways. Aforementioned observations and examples in a nutshell support that host like linear motifs in viral protein sequences are used for modulation of host functions by viruses. Although the known protein disorder in the viral genomes vary broadly in the range from 1 to 70%, majority of them are in the range of 1030% (). Our study has also shown that majority of viral proteins are odp s and MDPs structured (% of disordered residues 30%). Disordered viral proteins () show high degree centrality. Though viral disordered proteins are less in number, we see that they interact with higher number of h vips owing to their disorder and higher number of ELMs. Some viral proteins have shown to contain higher density of ELMs (). Few studies focusing presence of ELMs in disordered proteins of HCV () and across viral genomes () have been reported. There are large numbers of uncharacterized ELMs in disordered regions of viral proteins, which may have functional implications (). In our study, we see viruses utilizing ELMs as a common strategy to manipulate certain pathways. Presence of large numbers of putative ELMs indicate that viruses may use molecular mimicry of ELMs as a strategy to rewire host's regulatory and signalling pathways. Current approaches based on limited structural data are inadequate to uncover all the ELMs involved in hu vir pp is
conclusion our study has shed light on general molecular characteristics of targeted viral attack on host cells. Viruses have evolved in such a way that they employ targeted attack strategy by interacting with important proteins of hupp i network, which are mostly IDPs. In most of the cases, hu vir pp is commonly involve at least one IDP providing conformational flexibility to the protein interaction. Viruses were found to utilize intrinsic disorder in human proteins and of viral proteins differentially in different subcellular locations. Interactions with central proteins enable viruses to take control of host network and redirect it towards synthesis of viral genome and proteins. h vips were found to be enriched with binding interfaces in disordered region and slims elms in them. Viruses mimic host motifs and utilize them for targeted attack on certain host cellular pathways. Presence of motifs which act as molecular switches in regulation of multiple pathways, high connectivity and global expression, involvement in multiple pathways, slow evolutionary rate, protein abundance and high LE in human proteins makes them Achilles' heel for targeted attack by viral proteins. Viruses irrespective of their families mimic linear motifs in their protein sequences as a common strategy to subvert specified functions undergoing convergent evolution. Information control, functional diversity, protein abundance, evolutionary plasticity of viruses to mimic host ELMs and conformational flexibility are the governing principles of hu vir pp is. This knowledge can be further exploited for screening and developing broad spectrum of antiviral therapies.
