Motivation: Enzyme promiscuity, a property with practical applications in biotechnology and synthetic biology, has been related to the evolvability of enzymes. At the molecular level, several structural mechanisms have been linked to enzyme promiscuity in enzyme families. However, it is at present unclear to what extent these observations can be generalized. Here, we introduce for the first time a method for predicting catalytic and substrate promiscuity using a graph based representation known as molecular signature. Results: Our method, which has an accuracy of 85% for the non-redundant KEGG database, is also a powerful analytical tool for characterizing structural determinants of protein promiscuity. Namely, we found that signatures with higher contribution to the prediction of promiscuity are uniformly distributed in the protein structure of promiscuous enzymes. In contrast, those signatures that act as promiscuity determinants are significantly depleted around non promiscuous catalytic sites. In addition, we present the study of the enolase and aminotransferase superfamilies as illustrative examples of characterization of promiscuous enzymes within a superfamily and achievement of enzyme promiscuity by protein reverse engineering. Recognizing the role of enzyme promiscuity in the process of natural evolution of enzymatic function can provide useful hints in the design of directed evolution experiments. We have developed a method with potential applications in the guided discovery and enhancement of latent catalytic capabilities surviving in modern enzymes.

introduction beyond the classical definition of enzyme as specific to the substrate and reaction that catalyzes, enzymes can show the capability of promiscuity, i.e. to catalyze more than one reaction (catalytic promiscuity) or show broad substrate specificity (substrate promiscuity) (). Enzyme promiscuity has drawn considerable attention in recent years due to its evolutionary and practical implications (). In fact, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. enzyme promiscuity has been related to the evolvability of proteins, as a mechanism that can be traced in the divergence of enzyme families and superfamilies (). Namely, the conservation of structural and catalytic features observed in enzyme superfamilies such as tau tom erases (), enolase s () and many others, suggests that enzyme specialization arose via divergent evolution (gene duplication and subsequent mutations) driven by environmental selective pressure from promiscuous precursor enzymes. Inspired on this mechanism of natural evolution, enzyme promiscuity has been sought in the laboratory as a starting place for directed evolution of enzymes capable of new functions (), such as in biocatalysis (), degradation of novel synthetic chemicals () or in other innovative ways in the context of synthetic biology (). These potential applications of enzyme promiscuity in biotechnology have motivated the search of protein engineering methods adding or enhancing latent catalytic activities in existing enzymes, such as site directed mutagenesis and directed evolution (). At the molecular level, several structural mechanisms have been related to enzyme promiscuity. For instance, promiscuous binding has been observed in a large hydrophobic cleft or cavity or in a region with some other unusual structural feature (). Similarly, promiscuity has been linked in some cases to intrinsically disordered regions in the protein (), while in other studies it has been related to conserved regions in the active site (). A promiscuous active site might be able to accommodate different substrates, a feature that has been linked to protein flexibility, in particular to the mobility of active site loops, which appears to play a key role in mediating promiscuity (). Furthermore, experiments have revealed that residues influencing enzyme promiscuity go beyond active residues contacting the substrate (O'). In fact, plasticity () or neutral () residues (residues which are not essential for core catalytic activity) lying along the contour of the active site may hasten divergence, as it has been observed in several / barrel superfamilies such as est are ses and lipases (), enolase s (), ribulose phosphate binding (), as well as in directed evolution of isomerases () or aminotransferases (). Nevertheless, it is at present unclear to what extent these observations can be generalized to other enzyme families, since additional determinants such as posttranslational modifications, the presence of multiple domains, and oligomeric states may be also affecting enzyme promiscuity, such as
