Motivation: well annotated gene sets representing the universe of the biological processes are critical for meaningful and insightful interpretation of large scale genomic data. The Molecular Signatures Database msi gdb is one of the most widely used repositories of such sets. Results: We report the availability of a new version of the database, msi gdb 3.0, with over 6700 gene sets, a complete revision of the collection of canonical pathways and experimental signatures from publications, enhanced annotations and upgrades to the web site. Availability and Implementation: msi gdb is freely available for non-commercial use at http://www.broadinstitute.org/msigdb.

introduction microarrays and other high throughput genomic technologies typically produce long lists of potentially interesting genes, which are not always easily interpreted. Recognizing the importance of coordinately expressed sets of genes, our seminal paper () introduced Gene Set Enrichment Analysis g sea to discover metabolic pathways altered in human type 2 diabetes mellitus. g sea and other analytical enrichment tools summarize genomic data in prioritized lists of higher level biological features. As underscored by a recent survey of 68 enrichment tools, they critically depend on 'backend annotation databases' (). Typically, such databases focus on a particular domain of knowledge or annotation procedure. For example, Gene Ontology (GO) () represents a hierarchy of controlled terms to describe individual gene products, while TRANSFAC () stores information about transcription factor binding sites. A growing number of databases obtain sets from gene expression signatures reported in the literature. These include signature db (), genesi gdb (), c cancer () and L2L and LOLA (). Molecular Signatures Database msi gdb differs from these resources in several distinguishing aspects. (i) msi gdb is explicitly designed to provide gene sets for enrichment analysis methods. As such, it is natively and seamlessly integrated with our g sea software (). (ii) msi gdb covers a substantially more diverse and wider range of gene set sources and types. These include signatures extracted from original research * To whom correspondence should be addressed. publications, and entire collections of sets derived from specialized resources such as GO, KEGG (), TRANSFAC and L2L. (iii) msi gdb gene sets are acquired both through manual curation and by automatic computational means, whereas other databases emphasize only one of these approaches., and sets corresponding to chemical and genetic perturbations from 786 scientific publications shows the growth of the msi gdb collections and database since the initial release (see also online Release Notes). Gene set annotations: each msi gdb gene set is a list of genes with relevant annotations and links to external resources. msi gdb focuses on human gene sets. However, we do include sets from some model organisms and gene set annotations include organism identification. We use HUGO gene symbols and, as of version 3.0, human Entrez Gene IDs serve as universal identifiers. These Entrez IDs are guaranteed to be unique and stable, can easily be mapped into a variety of other identifiers and are natively integrated with the GenBank resources of primary nucleic and protein sequences. We also preserve whatever original identifiers were used in the gene set source. All sets have unique database identifiers and names, and include brief and full descriptions. Other annotations depend on the type of gene set. Annotations linking to external resources are especially important as they allow researchers to place the sets in the context of a specific study and facilitate decisions on follow-up experiments. Gene sets from publications are the most richly annotated. Their annotations include the PubMed ID of the publication, pointers to other gene sets from the same publication, and now also details on the exact table or figure from which the gene set was extracted. For version 3.0, we updated the names of these gene sets to make them more descriptive and standardized and the accompanying brief descriptions to follow a more uniform and consistent format. Other annotation features introduced with version 3.0 include links to source datasets in Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) () and array express (). Canonical pathway sets include links to the pathway at the source web site. File formats: msi gdb gene set files are available for download in plain text and XML formats. The plain text files contain simple listings of gene set membership, while the XML files also include the annotations. To ensure reproducibility of g sea results, older versions of the msi gdb files are always available. Note that users of our g sea software do not need to download the msi gdb files as the tool directly and automatically retrieves the gene sets.
