Motivation: Construction of synthetic metabolic pathways promises sustainable production of diverse chemicals and materials. To design synthetic metabolic pathways of high value, computational methods are needed to expand present knowledge by mining comprehensive chemical and enzymatic information databases. Several computational methods have been already reported for the metabolic pathway design, but until now computation complexity has limited the diversity of chemical and enzymatic data used. Results: We introduce a computational platform, m path to explore synthetic metabolic pathways including putative enzymatic reactions and compounds. m path is an iterative random algorithm, which makes efficient use of chemical and enzymatic databases to find potential synthetic metabolic pathways. m path can readily control the search space and perform well compared with exhaustively enumerating possible pathways. A web based pathway viewer is also developed to check extensive metabolic pathways with evaluation scores on the basis of chemical similarities. We further produce extensive synthetic metabolic pathways for a comprehensive set of alpha amino acids. The scalable nature of m path enables us to calculate potential metabolic pathways for any given chemicals. Availability and implementation: The web tool and viewer are available for free at

introduction recent developments in synthetic biology and metabolic engineering have led to the construction of synthetic metabolic pathways for efficient production of various natural and non natural chemicals. Synthetic metabolic pathways have been mostly constructed by heterologous expression of natural or non natural enzymes, to catalytically convert metabolites into target chemicals and intermediates (). Knowledge bases of enzymatic reactions and metabolic pathways provide troves of information to find key enzymes () and to identify heterologous enzymes from orthologous genes in different organisms. New enzymatic activities can also be engineered by comparing). As databases of enzymatic reactions and compounds have increased in size, computational methods have become necessary to identify the key enzymatic reaction steps for efficient synthetic pathway design (). There are two major computational approaches in designing synthetic metabolic pathways. One is solely dependent on experimentally verified information of enzymes and reactions in current knowledge bases. Synthetic pathways can be designed using a network search from starting to target compounds (). These methods are effective in finding known heterologous enzymatic reactions but ignore any pathway with an unknown reaction step. Another approach is based on chemical structures (). Reaction rules are derived from the chemical structures of substrates and products in known enzymatic reactions and applied to produce possible metabolic pathways including putative compounds and enzymatic reactions. This approach can suggest previously unknown enzymatic reactions in synthetic metabolic pathways. However, the space of possible solutions grows quickly when considering the size of reaction and compound data that is contained in modern databases. Previous methods for synthetic pathway design have been limited to a small number of either reactions or compounds to avoid combinatorial explosion (). These methods may overlook the importance of rare or poorly characterized enzymatic reactions or unknown metabolites. Here, we introduce a computational platform, m path for synthetic pathway design, which makes efficient use of extensive enzymatic reaction and chemical compound databases. We developed an iterative random algorithm to design possible synthetic metabolic pathways. m path could control the search space in finding potential synthetic metabolic pathways to a given chemical. A web based platform was developed to check extensive metabolic pathways by ranking scores based on chemical similarities and suggests enzymes to be engineered. m path further allows us to compute putative synthetic metabolic pathways for a set of given chemicals. We chose 6903 alpha amino acid compounds from the PubChem database to predict possible metabolic pathways and found about 40 000 putative metabolic pathways for 3543 compounds.

discussion we present the m path platform to explore latent synthetic metabolic pathways of putative compounds and reactions to expand the scope of metabolic pathways. To find possible metabolic pathways for any given chemicals, one needs to consider the tradeoff between computational feasibility and the size of chemical and reaction data. Specifically, the successful design of synthetic metabolic pathways based on reaction rules is highly dependent on how chemicals and reactions are represented. In m path the representation of chemicals and reactions in the form of feature vectors enables us to make efficient use of extensive chemical and reaction data. The reaction feature vectors have the ability to cover all enzymatic reactions from KEGG database and differentiate them on the basis of the chemical structures. Even though the abstraction of chemical structures to chemical feature vectors ignores information on chirality, isomer and substructure, these information can be added as additional features. m path uses an iterative random approach and linear programming to avoid the combinatorial explosion in exploring possible metabolic pathways. The random nature of m path gives us a chance to obtain some results even if the number of possible metabolic pathways can not be exhaustively enumerated in computational time. Moreover, using hub reactions as the first step makes it possible to find appropriate start compounds for any target compounds. The evaluation of resulting metabolic pathways is also an issue in the design of synthetic metabolic pathways. Metabolic pathways have been reported to expand the scope in nature by introducing an enzyme with the alteration of substrate specificity bar even and Salah). A compound with similar chemical structure to a substrate in a known enzymatic reaction could be a candidate for new substrate during enzyme evolution. In the same manner, m path designs synthetic pathways including putative reactions with similar reaction chemistry to known enzymatic reactions. The chemical similarities between assigned compounds in m path calculations and substrates or products in known enzymatic reactions can thus be an index for evaluating the applicability of the enzymes and pathways. m path takes advantage of the chemical similarity to calculate average scores for each reaction using chemical fingerprints to differentiate the resulting pathways. The results here show that the chemical similarity score is one evalution index. Additional methods for pathway evaluation have been proposed (), but m path platform is first designed to allow user to check results without excluding all possibilities in the process of making decision. For this purpose, the pathway viewer visualizes all possible metabolic pathways and to output user selected results in the form of either pathway or network data for subsequent analyses such as flux balance analysis (). Due to the increasing size of available data, it is preferable to implement scalable options for dealing with the data size without significant loss of information in the design platform. m path allows various options to control the design space. For example, we can readily extend additional information such as chirality, isomer and substructure in the form of chemical feature vectors by adding the difference in SMILES strings as descriptors in feature vectors (Supplementary). Conversely, we can downsize the chemical features by hierarchical integration of atom and bond types as proposed in previous methods (). The reaction feature vector can also be re-defined in higher resolution integrating auxiliary compounds such as co-factors into chemical feature vector. m path can also be expanded beyond the specific chemical and reaction data used in this study. The set of reaction feature vectors is increased up to 20 000 by using a manually curated BRENDA database in the current version of m path and newer PubChem data can also be updated. The scalability of m path will lead to more extensive and precise design of synthetic metabolic pathways.
