We present metabolite pathway enrichment analysis mpe a for the visualization and biological interpretation of metabolite data at the system level. Our tool follows the concept of gene set enrichment analysis g sea and tests whether metabolites involved in some predefined pathway occur towards the top (or bottom) of a ranked query compound list. In particular, mpe a is designed to handle many to many relationships that may occur between the query compounds and metabolite annotations. For a demonstration, we analysed metabolite profiles of 14 twin pairs with differing body weights. mpe a found significant pathways from data that had no significant individual query compounds, its results were congruent with those discovered from transcript omics data and it detected more pathways than the competing metabolic pathway method did. Availability: The web server and source code of mpe a are available at

introduction metabolite profiling refers to a set of techniques by which a wide range of metabolites can be detected and quantified from biological extracts (). Such experiments are often conducted to discover biomarkers and data resulting from these studies are analyzed using complex multivariate statistical methods (). Recently, tools for analysing metabolite data in the context of predefined biological metabolite sets have, however, been reported (). Instead of discovering specific metabolites that discriminate sample groups, the aim of these methods is to discover predefined metabolic pathways or biological networks that are co-ordinately altered in the experiment. Such changes are often assessed by employing the gene set enrichment analysis g sea procedure () to test whether the elements of some predefined biological group are enriched towards the top or bottom of a ranked list. Here, we describe the metabolite pathway enrichment analysis mpe a for the visualization and functional analysis of metabolite data at the system level. mpe a tests whether metabolites in predefined pathways occur towards the top or bottom of a ranked * To whom correspondence should be addressed. list. It can be applied either to pre annotated compounds or gas chromatography coupled with mass spectrometry (GC-MS) data consisting of mass spectral tags (MSTs). If MSTs are provided, they are characterized using GMD (). This feature was included to facilitate the analysis of data generated by gcms a popular analytical tool for metabolite profiling (). Furthermore, as it is unlikely that all query compounds are unambiguously resolved, mpe a has been developed to handle ambiguously identified compounds. We tested mpe a on a study in which adipose tissue transcriptome and metabo lome were studied in 14 twin pairs discordant for body weight (). mpe a revealed more significantly altered pathways in acquired obesity based on metabolite data than the competing method did and its results corresponded with the pathways that g sea found from transcript omics data.
