sequence structure function information is critical in understanding the mechanism of pm hc and trp mhc binding and recognition. A database for sequence structure function information on pm hc and trp mhc interactions, mhc peptide Interaction database tr version 2 (MPID-T2), is now available augmented with the latest PDB and imgt3d structured b data, advanced features and new parameters for the analysis of pm hc and trp mhc structures. Availability: http://biolinfo.org/mpid-t2.

introduction major histocompatibility complexes (MHC) or human leukocyte antigens (HLAs) in human are important elements of T cell mediated immunity. They are cell surface glycoproteins among which mhc i proteins are ubiquitously expressed by most cells and mhc ii proteins are expressed by antigen presenting cells (APC;). MHC proteins bind immunogenic peptide epitopes (p) derived from antigens and present them as peptide mhc pm hc complexes on the cell surface, for subsequent recognition by t cell receptors (TR), leading to trp mhc complexes, which are responsible for t cell activation and triggering the adaptive immune response cascade (). Understanding the physicochemical basis for the selection of certain specific peptide epitopes by MHC alleles and the consequent recognition of pm hc ligands by TR proteins is critical for the design of T cell based peptide vaccines (). An early collection of pm hc X-ray crystal structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB;) led to the development of mp id (), comprising 86 classical pm hc structures, reporting pm hc interaction parameters. With increasing pm hc and trp mhc structures in the PDB and in the imgt3d structured b () and reports of new interaction parameters (), mpi dt () was developed, with 187 pm hc and 16 trp mhc * To whom correspondence should be addressed. structures along with interaction parameters for the analysis of pm hc structures alone. With recent rise in trp mhc structural data in the PDB and in imgt3d structured b (), and updated interaction parameters (), there is an increasing demand for more effective and efficient computational protocols to predict t cell epitopes. Hence, we have updated mpi dt augmenting it with advanced features and new parameters for the analysis of both pm hc and trp mhc structures, to gain an in depth understanding of the structural determinants underlying trp mhc binding and recognition.

discussion mpidt2 aims to facilitate mining of fundamental relationships and structural descriptors hidden within trp mhc and pm hc interactions for in depth characterization. Inclusion of structural descriptors like BE, m sep TR docking angle and CA have facilitated in understanding the principles underlying trp mhc binding (Khan and Ranganathan, unpublished results). These descriptors can be used as parameters defining pm hc and trp mhc interactions, thereby facilitating rational development of methods to identify strong MHC binding t cell epitopes with greater propensity to activate T cells. This highlights the utility of MPIDT2 in vaccine research. We have now enabled tr specific searches by classifying trp mhc structures based on TR types. Future enhancements will include listing post-translational modifications (PTM) for peptides to help understand the effect of PTM on trp mhc binding and interaction. MPID-T2 will be updated on a quarterly basis.
