We developed new software environment for the metabo lome analysis of large scale multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) assays. It supports the data format of four major mass spectrometer vendors and mzm l common data format. This program provides a process pipeline from the raw format import to high dimensional statistical analyses. The novel aspect is graphical user interface based visualization to perform peak quantification, to interpolate missing values and to normalize peaks interactively based on quality control samples. Together with the software platform, the MRM standard library of 301 metabolites with 775 transitions is also available, which contributes to the reliable peak identification by using retention time and ion abundances. Availability and implementation: mrm probs is available for Windows OS under the creative commons by attribution license at

introduction many metabolomics studies rely on the large scale multiple reaction monitoring (MRM) assay. wide targeted analysis is an example; 41000 MRM transitions precursor product ion pairs) are monitored per single run using high end machines. For MRM assays, we previously reported an objective strategy for metabolite identification from large scale chromatographic data (). This report highlights its recent features, especially new algorithms for peak detection, normalization, and their new graphical user interfaces (GUIs). Peak quantification is the most important and sensitive process during MRM assays. There is no inherent universal algorithm that can perfectly recognize peak edges because they depend on chromatographic conditions; each research group has its own criteria for recognition (). For the accurate detection of peak left and peak right edges, in practice, multiple chromatograms must be checked and compared using a visualization tool. This process is also necessary to avoid misidentification s. For this purpose, we developed an interactive chromatogram viewer that can overlay multiple chromatograms in each window to visualize our peak detection algorithm (). Moreover, it can interpolate missing values (Supplementary Information), and it can adjust signal changes or metabolite dependent drifts using locally weighted least square regression (locally estimated smoothing function, LOESS) and cubic spline with quality control (QC) samples. Together with these features, standard MRM measurements were made available on the PRIMe (Platform for RIKEN Metabolomics) Web site (http://prime.psc.riken.jp) for 301 metabolites (755 transitions); their precursor product ion pairs, retention time and ion abundances are provided. The retention time and ion abundances are particularly useful for the accurate identification of metabolites because these features are comparable across certain instrument types () as long as the experimental conditions are similar. The algorithmic highlights are introduced below.
