Motivation: Feature selection is one of the main challenges in analyzing high throughput genomic data. Minimum redundancy maximum relevance mr mr is a particularly fast feature selection method for finding a set of both relevant and complementary features. Here we describe the mrm re R package, in which the mr mr technique is extended by using an ensemble approach to better explore the feature space and build more robust predictors. To deal with the computational complexity of the ensemble approach, the main functions of the package are implemented and parallelized in C using the openMP Application Programming Interface. Results: Our ensemble mr mr implementations outperform the classical mr mr approach in terms of prediction accuracy. They identify genes more relevant to the biological context and may lead to richer biological interpretations. The parallelized functions included in the package show significant gains in terms of run-time speed when compared with previously released packages.

introduction in genomic data analysis, phenotype associated feature selection is of utmost importance in understanding the biological processes underlying the relevant phenotype and in building accurate predictive models. This is not a trivial task for high throughput genomic data (microarray, next generation sequencing, etc.), as they are high dimensional, noisy and have complex inter correlational structures. Because feature selection is an nondeterministic polynomial time np hard problem, one must resort to the use of heuristics, which find suitable and sub-optimal sets of relevant features in high dimensional datasets. Among these heuristics, the minimum redundancy maximum relevance mr mr feature selection technique is particularly appealing because of the relatively low computational complexity of its algorithm for finding a set of relevant and complementary features (), from which accurate predictive models are developed. The challenge lies in that mr mr like all feature selection algorithms in a low sample to dimensionality ratio setting, produces highly variable results, and small changes in sample data often lead to dramatically different sets of selected features. In the past decade, a new trend has emerged whereby highly accurate 'ensemble' classifiers are produced by combining less accurate ones, on the grounds that model variance is reduced without affecting bias (). However, the computational cost of an ensemble variant of the mr mr method is high, as multiple mr mr feature selections must be done. This was the primary motivator for the development of a new R package, mrm re which implements an ensemble variant of mr mr in which multiple feature sets, rather than a single list of features, is built. Also included in the package is a function for computing a mutual information matrix (MIM) based on the appropriate estimators for each variable type (i.e. continuous, discrete and survival data). Both these package features have been adapted to fully use multicore platforms.

conclusion the R package mrm re provides functions to efficiently perform ensemble mr mr feature selection by taking full advantage of parallel computing. Ensemble mr mr can be beneficial from both a predictive (lower bias and lower variance) and biological (more thorough feature space exploration) point of view, which makes it particularly attractive for high throughput genomic data analysis.
