Motivation: Tandem mass spectrometry provides the means to match mass spectrometry signal observations with the chemical entities that generated them. The technology produces signal spectra that contain information about the chemical dissociation pattern of a peptide that was forced to fragment using methods like collision induced dissoci-ation. The ability to predict these MS 2 signals and to understand this fragmentation process is important for sensitive high throughput proteomics research. Results: We present a new tool called MS 2 PIP for predicting the intensity of the most important fragment ion signal peaks from a peptide sequence. MS 2 PIP pre processes a large dataset with confident peptide to spectrum matches to facilitate data driven model induction using a random forest regression learning algorithm. The intensity predictions of MS 2 PIP were evaluated on several independent evaluation sets and found to correlate significantly better with the observed fragment ion intensities as compared with the current state of the art peptide art tool. Availability: MS 2 PIP code is available for both training and predicting at

introduction mass spectrometry (MS) allows for high throughput protein content measurements in samples by identifying and quantifying proteins in the form of digested peptide sequences. Tandem mass spectrometry (MS 2 ) provides the means to match MS signal observations with the chemical entities that generated them. MS 2 produces signal spectra that contain information about the chemical dissociation pattern of a peptide that was forced to fragment using methods like 'collision induced dissociation' (CID). The signal peaks in an MS 2 spectrum indicate the presence of a peptide fragment ion with a specific mass. The intensity of a signal peak is dependent on a number of factors: the abundance of the peptide in the sample, the efficiency of the cleavage that generated the fragment, the proteo typi city of the fragment ion and other factors related to the peptide and the machine that generated the MS 2 spectrum (). Popular peptide identification tools such as Mascot (), om ssa () and x tandem () assume that MS 2 peaks for the most important fragment ions have a high intensity, and that fragment ions of different types have the same high intensity. Without an accurate model of the relationship between the amino acid composition of the peptide and the peak intensities in the corresponding MS 2 spectrum, these ad hoc approaches fail to match fragment ions for which low intensity peaks are expected to be observed. It has been shown that incorporating knowledge about this relationship between peak intensity and amino acid composition significantly improves peptide identification rates (). Despite the apparent need for accurate MS 2 signal peak intensity predictions from amino acid sequences, only few attempts have been published. A first approach, the mass analyzer tool (), was a deductive physicochemical model of peptide fragmentation. All parameters in the model were optimized on a dataset containing 8900 MS 2 spectra with confident peptide match (PSM). The authors showed that mass analyzer models MS 2 peak intensities more accurately as compared with ad hoc methods. At the same time, an inductive Bayesian decision tree approach was introduced (). This research showed that a decision tree model representation is highly suitable for learning the diverse set of rules that govern peptide fragmentation. Their data driven approach was able to visualize, from 27.000 PSMs, many of the known fragmentation rules and discovered several new ones. However, their approach does not model the peak intensities directly. Rather it models the probability of observing a certain fragment ion intensity. A similar study based on Bayesian neural networks was presented in with a dataset of 13.900 PSMs. Another inductive approach called peptide art () is based on feed-forward neural network representations. It implements an ensemble of neural networks that each models the most important fragment ion peak intensities in one multi output feed-forward neural network. This method models the (normalized) peak intensities directly. The features used as input to the neural network are similar to ones suggested by Elias et al. The authors reported a systematic assessment of the accuracy of the current peptide MS/MS spectrum predictors for the most commonly used collision induced dissociation instruments (). They found that peptide art achieves generally higher accuracy on a wide range of proteomic datasets when trained on a dataset of 41.054 PSMs. We show here that MS 2 signal peak intensity prediction can be significantly improved by exploiting the vast amount of PSM data that have been collected over the recent years. We constructed a dataset of 73.121 merged PSMs and present an *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com inductive leaning approach for peak intensity regression that exploits all of the information contained in this large number of PSMs. Our approach still uses the non-linear decision tree representation for training the peak intensity prediction models. Both training and prediction procedures are implemented in a freely available tool called MS 2 Peak Intensity Prediction, or MS 2 PIP.
