Here we present the msa pad application, a DNA multiple sequence alignment framework that uses PFAM protein domain information to align DNA sequences encoding either single or multiple protein domains. msa pad has two alignment options: gene and genome mode. Availability and Implementation: msa pad is available as a web application (https://recasgate way ba infn it and as two Taverna workflows corresponding to two alignment modes (Gene mode

introduction multiple sequence alignment (MSA) is one of the oldest problems in bioinformatics and represents a key step in sequence analysis applications such as phylogenetic inference and comparative genomics. Algorithms such as translator x () and tran align (EMBOSS;), taking advantage of the higher conservation of proteins than their respective coding sequences, use the protein alignment to guide the reconstruction of accurate MSAs at nucleotide level. However, these methods do not make use of information embedded in protein domains. Moreover, when applied to genomic sequences, such approaches account neither for intron occurrence nor for gene order variations (e.g. mitochondrial genomes; do norio resulting in apparently truncated protein domains or variations in their arrangement along the genome regions under investigation. Here we present a DNA MSA framework msa pad which conceptually translates DNA sequences into amino acids (based on user defined genetic code and reading frame/s), uses information from conserved PFAM domains () to assign the translated sequences to known protein domains, accounts for frame shifts when domain regions are split by introns, performs a domain based protein alignment and then uses protein alignment information to generate the relevant nucleotide multiple alignment. The final MSA can be generated following two different strategies: (i) Gene and (ii) Genome mode. Gene mode alignment respects domain order organization from 5 0 to 3 0 , and resolves the alignment of repetitive domains even when they are repeated in tandem. Genome mode alignment provides a super gene like alignment ignoring domain order constraints.
