Motivation: Multiple sequence alignment is of central importance to bioinformatics and computational biology. Although a large number of algorithms for computing a multiple sequence alignment have been designed, the efficient computation of highly accurate multiple alignments is still a challenge. Results: We present msa probs a new and practical multiple alignment algorithm for protein sequences. The design of msa probs is based on a combination of pair hidden Markov models and partition functions to calculate posterior probabilities. Furthermore, two critical bioinformatics techniques, namely weighted probabilistic consistency transformation and weighted profile–profile alignment, are incorporated to improve alignment accuracy. Assessed using the popular benchmarks: bali base PREFAB, sab mark and ox bench msa probs achieves statistically significant accuracy improvements over the existing top performing aligners, including ClustalW, maff t MUSCLE, prob cons and prob align. Furthermore, msa probs is optimized for multi-core CPUs by employing a multi-threaded design, leading to a competitive execution time compared to other aligners. Availability: The source code of msa probs written in C++, is freely and publicly available from http://msaprobs.sourceforge.net.

introduction multiple sequence alignment is of central importance to bioinformatics and computational biology. The approach for producing an optimal multiple sequence alignment is to simultaneously align multiple sequences using dynamic programming. Unfortunately, this approach is impractical for alignments of more than a few sequences, due to its high computational cost. Therefore, many heuristics have been proposed to compute nearly optimal alignments, such as progressive alignment (), iterative alignment () and alignment based on profile hidden Markov models (). state of the art multiple sequence alignment algorithms tend to share some common techniques to improve alignment accuracy, including combining iterative alignment with progressive alignment, and introducing consistency based schemes. These algorithms are typically assessed on publicly available * To whom correspondence should be addressed. benchmark data sets, including: bali base (), PREFAB (), sab mark (Van) and ox bench (). Currently, the best performing multiple sequence alignment algorithms based on these benchmark tests are t coffee (), maff t (), MUSCLE (), prob cons () and prob align (). ClustalW () is historically one of the most popular multiple sequence alignment programs (with more than 26 000 citations in the ISI Web of Science), complying with the typical progressive alignment pipeline. t coffee introduced a consistency based objective function COFFEE () to progressive alignment by employing a primary library generated from pairwise global and local alignments to form three-way alignments. maff t uses the fast Fourier transform method for rapid identification of homologous regions. It then iteratively refines alignment results after performing an initial progressive alignment. The accuracy of maff t is further improved by introducing a consistency approach incorporating pairwise information into the objective function. MUSCLE works by iteratively refining alignment results with progressive alignment at the core, adopting a log expectation scoring scheme instead of the conventional weighted sum of pairs scoring systems. prob cons employs maximum expected accuracy as an objective function, and introduces a probabilistic consistency approach, based on pair hidden Markov model pair hmm posterior probabilities (), to form three-way alignments. prob align adopts a very similar strategy to prob cons but employs a partition function () to calculate posterior probabilities instead of using a pair hmm. In this article, we present msa probs a new and practical multiple protein sequence alignment algorithm designed by combining a pair hmm and a partition function to calculate posterior probabilities. We further investigate two critical bioinformatics techniques, namely weighted probabilistic consistency transformation and weighted profileprofile alignment, to achieve high alignment accuracy. In addition, msa probs is optimized for modern multicore CPUs by employing a multi-threaded design in order to reduce execution time. Assessed on the four popular benchmarks: bali base PREFAB, sab mark and ox bench msa probs demonstrates significant alignment accuracy improvements over several leading aligners: ClustalW, maff t MUSCLE, prob cons and prob align with competitive execution time. Since t coffee has been proven to be inferior to maff t MUSCLE and prob cons in these papers msa probs we have decided not to include the comparison to it. ClustalW is compared because of its very fast speed (see the 'Results' section).
