The ms datacore api is a free, open source library for developing computational prote-omics tools and pipelines. The Application Programming Interface, written in Java, enables rapid tool creation by providing a robust, pluggable programming interface and common data model. The data model is based on controlled vocabularies ontologies and captures the whole range of data types included in common proteomics experimental workflows, going from spectra to peptide protein identifications to quantitative results. The library contains readers for three of the most used Proteomics Standards Initiative standard file formats: mzm l mz ident ml and mz tab. In addition to mzm l it also supports other common mass spectra data formats: dta, ms2, mgf, pkl, apl text based mz xml and mz data xml based. Also, it can be used to read PRIDE XML, the original format used by the PRIDE database, one of the world leading proteomics resources. Finally, we present a set of algorithms and tools whose implementation illustrates the simplicity of developing applications using the library.

introduction the Proteomics Standards Initiative (PSI) has developed and actively promotes the use of open standard data formats to represent the data produced in mass spectrometry (MS) based proteomics experiments (including technical and biological metadata). Three of the most broadly used formats are: mzm l () to capture the 'primary' data (the spectra and chromatograms), mz ident ml () to report peptide identifications as well as the inferred protein identifications, and the tab delimited mz tab format () that can represent both identification and quantification results. There is increasing interest in new software tools and libraries that can work with these standards. As a result, a set of software libraries in different programming languages has been created (). However, having these independent libraries for different formats can complicate the development of new software. Developers typically have to invest V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
