Ongoing advances in high throughput technologies have facilitated accurate proteomic measurements and provide a wealth of information on genomic and transcript level. In proteo genomics this multi omics data is combined to analyze unannotated organisms and to allow more accurate sample specific predictions. Existing analysis methods still mainly depend on six frame translations or reference protein databases that are extended by transcript omic information or known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). However, six frames introduce an artificial sixfold increase of the target database and SNP integration requires a suitable database summarizing results from previous experiments. We overcome these limitations by introducing ms pro gene a new method for integrative proteo genomic analysis based on customized rnase q driven transcript databases. ms pro gene is independent from existing reference databases or annotated SNPs and avoids large six frame translated databases by constructing sample specific transcripts. In addition, it creates a network combining rnase q and peptide information that is optimized by a maximum flow algorithm. It thereby also allows resolving the ambiguity of shared peptides for protein inference. We applied ms pro gene on three datasets and show that it facilitates a database independent reliable yet accurate prediction on gene and protein level and additionally identifies novel genes. Availability and implementation: ms pro gene is written in Java and Python. It is open source and available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/msprogene/.

introduction high throughput technologies in both genomics and proteomics have driven the development of a variety of methods to analyze the large amounts of data generated. rnase q techniques measure the transcriptome (), while mass spectrometry allows identification and quantification of proteins that were expressed (). The field of proteo genomics combines this multi omics data for more accurate and sample specific analyses (). In recent years, proteo genomic studies have become more and more popular, focusing on deeper understanding of model organisms or exploring currently unannotated genomes (). Despite this popularity, methods that are jointly focusing on genomics, transcript omics and proteomics so far mainly rely on six frame translations () or extensions of existing reference protein databases (). six frame translation has the advantage of being independent from any a priori annotation of the nucleotide sequence. However, it introduces an artificial sixfold increase of the (unknown) target database, which can result in a bias in peptide identification (). In contrast, reference protein databases, for instance extended by known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) from databases such as dbSNP (), are not as prone to this bias as six frame translations. But these approaches depend on existing annotations and thus can not be applied to unannotated organisms without reference proteomes. Further, they might not contain all information necessary to identify mutated or novel genes, and even error tolerant search approaches () may not be sufficient to recover these unannotated genes. Thus, recent studies also rely on transcriptome information to provide better suited databases (
