Motivation: Small RNA sequencing and deg radome sequencing (also known as parallel analysis of RNA ends) have provided rich information on the microRNA (miRNA) and its cleaved mRNA targets on a genome wide scale in plants, but no computational tools have been developed to effectively and conveniently de convolute the mirna target interaction (MTI). Results: A freely available package, m tide was developed by combining modified miRDeep2 and cleaveland 4 with some other useful scripts to explore MTI in a comprehensive way. By searching for targets of a complete miRNAs, we can facilitate large scale identification of miRNA targets, allowing us to discover regulatory interaction networks. Availability and implementation: http://bis.zju.edu.cn/MTide

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) are a kind of small endogenous noncoding RNAs that negatively control gene expression at the post-transcriptional level by degrading target mRNAs in plants (). To make the functions of miRNA totally clear, it is essential to exactly identify the conserved and species specific miRNAs and their target genes. Small RNA sequencing and deg radome sequencing have been widely used in plants to identify miRNAs and target genes on a genome wide scale. Many tools have been developed to handle small RNA sequencing and deg radome data separately, but no specialized tool exists for a one stop survey of this kind of interaction. miRNAs are cleaved from stem loop structured precursors called pre mirnas by dicer like 1 (). Maturation of miRNAs releases RNA fragments derived from different parts of pre mirnas with asymmetric abundance. miRDeep2 (), a new version of mir deep uses the position and frequency of sequenced reads along with the secondary structure of pre mirnas and uses a probabilistic model of miRNA biogenesis in animals to score the possible miRNA sequence. Compared with animals, miRNA precursors are much longer with more variable lengths and more miRNAs belong to paralogous families with multiple members in plants (). Therefore, it can not be applied to the plant systems straightforward (). CleaveLand () was developed specifically to analyze deg radome data. However, because of the algorithms implemented in it, it is impractical to analyze all possible mirna target interactions mt is in a reasonable timescale for miRNAs identified from small RNA sequencing data. Moreover, it only reports targets cleaved between the 10th and 11th nucleotides, but cleavages between 9th and 10th or 11th and 12th nt have also been reported (). Here, we present m tide an integrated tool for exploring MTI in plants. It consists of a modified miRDeep2 with plant specific parameters, a modified cleaveland 4 with more targets reports and some other useful scripts. To control the running timescale in a low level, we add multiple threads support for miRDeep2, cleaveland 4 and other time consuming parts.
