Motivation: The increasing availability of mitochondria targeted and off target sequencing data in whole exo me and whole genome sequencing studies (WXS and WGS) has risen the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure hetero plas my and to easily recognize the most functionally important mitochondrial variants among a huge number of candidates. To this purpose, we developed m toolbox a highly automated pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mito-chondrial DNA from high throughput sequencing data. Results: m toolbox implements an effective computational strategy for mitochondrial genomes assembling and haplogroup assignment also including a prioritization analysis of detected variants. m toolbox provides a Variant Call Format file featuring, for the first time, allele specific hetero plas my and annotation files with prioritized variants. m toolbox was tested on simulated samples and applied on 1000 Genomes WXS datasets. Availability and implementation: m toolbox package is available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/mtoolbox/.

introduction emerging discoveries in human mitochondrial genetics, driven by the advent of next generation sequencing, have revealed that individuals exhibit a complex mixture of mitochondrial genotypes () and carry low level hetero plasmic variants (). On the other hand, the deeper the sequencing coverage, the higher the number of mitochondrial dna mtdna variants and the variety of hetero plasmic ranges found per individual (). In this frame, the deep sequencing of mtDNA raises the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure hetero plas my and to easily recognize the most functionally important variants among a huge number of candidates. To this purpose, we developed m toolbox a highly automated bioinformatics pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mtDNA from high throughput sequencing (HTS) data. The m toolbox workflow includes a computational strategy to assemble mitochondrial genomes from whole exo me sequencing (WXS) and or whole genome sequencing (WGS) data (), which was further updated to detect insertions and deletions ins dels and to assess the hetero plasmic fraction (HF) of each variant allele with the related confidence interval (CI), reported as sample specific meta-information in an enhanced version of the Variant Call Format (VCF) file (version 4.0). The m toolbox pipeline analyzes the reconstructed genomes for haplogroup assignment () and variant prioritization.
