Motivation: next generation sequencing technologies enable the identification of sequence variation in the genome and transcriptome. Differences between the reference genome and transcript libraries complicate the determination of the effect of genomic sequence variants on protein products; similarly, these differences complicate the mapping of sequence variants found in transcripts to their respective genomic position. We have developed MU2A, a publicly available web service for variant annotation that reconciles differences between the genome and transcriptome, enabling the rapid and accurate determination of the effects of genomic variants on protein products, and the mapping of variants detected in transcripts to genomic coordinates. The MU2A web service is available at

introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies enable researchers to identify sequence variants in both germline and disease tissue DNA. In dna seq experiments, genomic DNA is sequenced, and aligned to a reference genome. Variants are detected by identifying the reads with alternative bases compared with the reference. In rnase q which is primarily intended to identify differential gene expression, cDNA is sequenced and aligned to a reference transcript library. Common downstream processing steps for dna seq experiments include the mapping of the variants to their transcript positions to determine effects on protein function. Common downstream processing steps for rnase q experiments include the mapping of transcript variants to genomic coordinates to determine conservation of the corresponding regions. For both steps, it is imperative to consider conflicts between the reference genome and transcript libraries. The consensus sequence for the reference genome is determined from the DNA of only a few individuals, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. while the RefSeq transcript library represents a consensus across a vast number of mRNA sequences deposited in GenBank. The most obvious difference can be found at known single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) positions, where the reference genome may show the minor allele, and the transcript library the major allele (and vice versa). Other differences include insertions or deletions (indels), or rare single base variants. We have developed MU2A, a variant assessment tool that accepts either genomic or transcript positions and reconciles the discordance between the reference genome and transcriptome when predicting the effects of sequence variants. MU2A rapidly and accurately determines the effects of genomic variants on transcripts and proteins; determines the genomic context of variants detected in transcripts; flags variants with genome transcript misalignments; annotates variants that correspond to known SNPs or known cancer mutations; annotates variants with information on genomic conservation, gene function and determines effect on domain integrity.
