Motivation: With the expansion of whole genome studies, there is rapid evolution of genotyping platforms. This leads to practical issues such as upgrading of genotyping equipment which often results in research groups having data from different platforms for the same samples. While having more data can potentially yield more accurate copy number estimates, combining such data is not straightforward as different platforms show different degrees of attenuation of the true copy number or different noise characteristics and marker panels. Currently, there is still a relative lack of procedures for combining information from different platforms. Results: We develop a method, called MPSS, based on a correlated random effect model for the unobserved patterns and extend the robust smooth segmentation approach to the multiple platform scenario. We also propose an objective criterion for discrete segmentation required for downstream analyses. For each identified segment, the software reports a p value to indicate the likelihood of the segment being a true CNV. From the analyses of real and simulated data, we show that MPSS has better operating characteristics when compared to single platform methods, and have substantially higher sensitivity compared to an existing multiplatform method. Availability: The methods are implemented in an R package MPSS, and the source is available from http://www.meb.ki.se/ yud paw
introduction copy number variants cn vs are defined as duplications or deletions in the number of copies of a DNA segment (larger than 1 kb in length) when compared to a reference genome. Currently, common technologies used to detect cn vs include high density * To whom correspondence should be addressed. single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays and comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) arrays. In recent years, whole genome studies using commercial genotyping arrays to detect cn vs have been rapidly expanding. With decreasing cost of commercially available platforms and the fast evolution of these platforms, it is not unusual for research groups to have data from multiple platforms for each sample. For example, The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network, a joint effort of the National Cancer Institute (NCI) and the National Human Genome Research Institute (NHGRI) to explore genomic changes involved in human cancers, used Agilent 244K, Affymetrix SNP 6.0 and Illumina 550K platforms to measure copy number alterations in its pilot study. Our own collaborators, and perhaps many other researchers, collected genotype data using both Illumina human hap300 and human hap240s arrays for each sample in order to get higher genome coverage. Marker density is an important factor for comprehensive and accurate detection of cn vs and their breakpoints, and different platforms have different probe coverage and density; see for a summary of probe coverage of the different platforms in the different chromosomes. Combining data from different platforms can potentially yield more precise and accurate detection of cn vs and its breakpoints. However, combining such data is not straightforward because it is known that estimates from different platforms show different degrees of attenuation of the true copy number changes () as well as different noise characteristics. Furthermore, different platforms have different marker panels and molecular assay methods (). Currently, there is still a relative lack of formal procedures for combining information from different platforms for copy number calling. Most studies with multiple platforms interrogating the same samples process the data from the different platforms independently, then combine the segments in an ad hoc manner. This approach does not fully utilize information from the different platforms, and when the segmented results from the different platforms differ, it is difficult for researchers to come to a consensus in a statistically rigorous manner. One published method, multiple platform circular binary segmentation m pcbs (), is able to jointly use information from different platforms for CNV calling. The m pcbs method extends the circular binary segmentation (CBS) algorithm () by detecting coupled changes in multiple sequences. Briefly, it uses a weighted sum of t statistics
discussion we have described a new method for identifying cn vs by using data from multiple platforms simultaneously. This method allows researchers to come to a formal consensus result when data from different platforms but for the same individuals are available. The model assumes a random effects parameter that is common to all platforms, meaning that each platform is assumed to have the same underlying copy number pattern. We also develop an objective method to segment the estimated random effects parameter (which describes the underlying copy number pattern) into discrete segments. In addition, we provide a method for calculating a p value associated with a segment of interest. The p value would indicate how likely that the segment is a deletion duplication and is useful for filtering out likely false positives background correction is needed to make the data from the different platforms comparable; we use a robust smoother that assumes the majority of each chromosome has normal copy number. While this assumption is likely to be true for germ-line samples, it may not hold for cancer tumor samples. recently developed a normalization method to bring data from different platforms to the same scale. The method uses a technique based on principal curves to estimate the normalization functions. This method was tested on data from The Cancer Genome Atlas Research Network and seems to work well on tumor samples where there is sufficient deletions and duplications in the genome, but we found that it did not work well with the germ-line samples we use. When we performed s normalization on our samples, the correlation in the copy number estimates between the platforms increased only very slightly after normalization (see supplementary and. This could be due to insufficient cn vs in the data for the principal curves to be identified. We illustrate the performance of MPSS using real and simulated data sets. In the comparisons using real datasets, we show that MPSS cn vs has greater amount of overlap with the reference as compared to the other methods. In the comparisons using simulated datasets, we show that the proposed method can achieve high sensitivity and specificity at reasonable noise levels. In general, for all methods, the proportion of overlapping bases with the highly comprehensive CNV map published by is low. However, we believe it is due to the limitation of the SNP arrays rather than the inadequacy of the algorithms. This was also noted by where the authors investigated and found that in the regions where the reference cn vs lie, both Affymetrix and Illumina platforms do not have a shift in the intensities and hence the algorithm would not pick out the region as a CNV. Moreover, we do not know if the reference list we have used can be considered the gold standard, since it is not likely to have 100% sensitivity and specificity. Even sequencing methods only show between 72.2% and 96.5% specificity (). The arrival of higher density arrays, for example, the Illumina human omni25 and human omni5 arrays will likely improve the sensitivity of CNV identification. Another kind of multiplatform problem arises when there is some stratification of cohorts by chips; for example, if the cases and controls were typed on different chips. Differential sensitivity or false positive rates between the platforms will lead to confounding bias in the case control comparisons. The method presented here assumes that the data from the different platforms are available for each individual, hence the algorithm could not address this problem. This is an important and valid concern and warrants further investigations.
