Motivation: Population heterogeneity through ad mixing of different founder populations can produce spurious associations in genome wide association studies that are linked to the population structure rather than the phenotype. Since samples from the same population generally co evolve different populations may or may not share the same genetic underpinnings for the seemingly common phenotype. Our goal is to develop a unified framework for detecting causal genetic markers through a joint association analysis of multiple populations. Results: Based on a multi-task regression principle, we present a multi population group lasso algorithm using L 1 /L 2 regularized regression for joint association analysis of multiple populations that are stratified either via population survey or computational estimation. Our algorithm combines information from genetic markers across populations, to identify causal markers. It also implicitly accounts for correlations between the genetic markers, thus enabling better control over false positive rates. Joint analysis across populations enables the detection of weak associations common to all populations with greater power than in a separate analysis of each population. At the same time, the regression based framework allows causal alleles that are unique to a subset of the populations to be correctly identified. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our method on hapmap simulated and lactase persistence datasets, where we significantly outperform state of the art methods, with greater power for detecting weak associations and reduced spurious associations. Availability: Software will be available at

introduction association mapping has recently become a popular approach to discover the genetic causes of many complex diseases such as cancer, asthma and diabetes. A typical genome wide association (GWA) study involves examining genotype data, often single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), collected over millions of genetic markers in search for an association with the given phenotype such as disease outcome or disease related quantitative traits, where a very small fraction of the markers are linked to the phenotype. Thus, the main challenge is to maximize the power for identifying causal alleles while suppressing false positives. We consider the problem of taking advantage of the population structure in the samples to increase the power of an association analysis. It has been observed that population heterogeneity arising from ad mixing of ancestor populations almost always exists at different levels in any genotype data, and is often correlated with * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the geographical distribution of the individuals. For example, it has been shown that such heterogeneity is present in the HapMap data () across European, Asian and African populations; and heterogeneity at a finer scale within European ancestry has been found in many genomic regions in the UK samples of Wellcome trust case control consortium wtc cc dataset (Wellcome Trust). Although the standard assumption in existing approaches for association mapping is that the effects of causal mutations are likely to be common across multiple populations, the individuals in the same population or geographical region tend to co evolve and are likely to possess a population specific causal allele for the same phenotype. For example reported that the lactase persistence phenotype is caused by different mutations in Africans and Europeans. In addition, the same genetic variation has been observed to be correlated with gene expression levels with different association strengths across different HapMap populations. Our goal is to be able to leverage information across multiple populations, to find causal markers in a multi population association study.
