Motivation: Multifunctional proteins perform several functions. They are expected to interact specifically with distinct sets of partners, simultaneously or not, depending on the function performed. Current graph clustering methods usually allow a protein to belong to only one cluster, therefore impeding a realistic assignment of multifunctional proteins to clusters. Results: Here, we present Overlapping Cluster Generator (OCG), a novel clustering method which decomposes a network into overlapping clusters and which is, therefore, capable of correct assignment of multifunctional proteins. The principle of OCG is to cover the graph with initial overlapping classes that are iteratively fused into a hierarchy according to an extension of Newmans modularity function. By applying OCG to a human protein protein interaction network, we show that multifunctional proteins are revealed at the intersection of clusters and demonstrate that the method outperforms other existing methods on simulated graphs and PPI networks. Availability: This software can be downloaded from

introduction protein protein interaction (PPI) networks highlight the modularity of cellular processes and allow deciphering protein functions at the cellular level. Since PPI networks can be represented as simple graphs where a vertex corresponds to a protein and an edge to a direct physical interaction, graph partitioning methods have been proposed to highlight groups of densely connected vertices (; or a it to kallio and sch wik owski 2006 for a review). Identified clusters are usually designated as 'functional modules', i.e. groups of proteins involved in the same pathway or the same cellular process. Although successful in predicting the function of uncharacterized proteins (), these methods lead to 'strict' partitions, in which each vertex (protein) belongs to exactly one cluster (functional module). Clearly, the logic of strict partitions does not always represent the biological reality. For instance, some proteins perform different cellular functions and consequently contribute to pleiotropic phenotypes when mutated (). Such multifunctional proteins are expected to specifically interact with distinct sets of partners, either simultaneously or not, depending on the function performed. 'Strict' partitions, however, do not allow a protein to belong to several clusters. Another limitation is encountered with protein complexes whose composition and function may vary according to the context and conditions (). Addressing some biological questions, therefore, requires methods leading to 'overlapping' clusters, that allow vertices to be multi clustered. Overlapping clustering first appeared three decades ago with theoretical studies on distance analyses (or, for an extensive review,). These methods have not been intensively developed and consequently, have not been as successful as hierarchical and partitioning methods. With respect to biological networks, although the overlapping nature of biological communities has been recognized (), only few methods leading to overlapping clusters have been proposed (). None of these methods, however, has been extensively used to answer biological questions: c finder contributed to the identification of protein complexes from AP/MS data () and Link Communities helped predict a set of prostate cancer genes (). In this work, we present OCG (Overlapping Cluster Generator), a novel method to cover a PPI network with relevant overlapping clusters. By applying our method to the human PPI network, we show that multifunctional proteins are revealed at the intersection of clusters. Finally, we show that our method outperforms other existing methods () both on simulated graphs and on PPI networks.

discussion graph partitioning can lead to ambiguous results where a node is assigned to one particular cluster but could, just as well, have been assigned to another. This situation is often due to the structure of the graph under study and is particularly encountered during analyses of PPI networks. Indeed, although the modularity of these networks allowed identifying clusters of proteins acting together in particular biological processes using appropriate graph partitioning, the uniqueness of node classification impedes revealing the involvement of some proteins in multiple processes. The reality of PPI networks, therefore, is more accurately described by allowing modules (clusters) to overlap. To deal with this dual nature of PPI graphs (both modular and overlapping), we have developed the OCG algorithm described herein, a method to cover graphs with overlapping clusters based on the optimization of the modularity. We propose covering the graph with centred cliques that we iteratively fuse. This initial class system outperforms the recently developed Link Communities algorithm () (), which aims at capturing the overlapping structure of the graph by grouping similar edges into a hierarchy. OCG, therefore, appears better at grasping the overlapping nature of graphs with low density of edges, such as PPI networks. Currently available PPI networks represent only a subset of all pp is in a given cell. Therefore, the topological structure of the entire interactome is still unknown and under debate. A direct consequence of this uncertainty is the lack of 'real' partitions against which we could test the efficacy of our methods. Therefore, simulations have been performed using several models of random graphs (). In this context, we chose to:(i) design a graph with overlapping communities to be recovered, (ii) build simulated graphs corresponding to this system, according to three different models and (iii) apply the methods mentioned here on each of the simulated graphs. This approach allowed us to test the performance of each method on a difficult problem in which each cluster to be found shares nodes with two other clusters. Since the simulated graphs with overlapping communities might not faithfully reflect the biological reality (i.e. proteins may be involved in more than two processes), we verified that multi clustered nodes in simulated and biological graphs have similar characteristics. Indeed, multi clustered nodes have higher average degree and betweenness than mono clustered in both types of graphs (data not shown). When OCG is used to cluster a PPI network, multifunctional proteins are identified at the intersections of the overlapping clusters. Interestingly, the top 10 most multi clustered proteins are important transcriptional regulators and signaling proteins which are integral parts of most cellular processes. This emphasizes the fact that functional modules can be interconnected through the regulators they share. It, therefore, appears that OCG could represent a valuable tool to investigate cross-talk between processes.
