As new methods for multivariate analysis of genome wide association studies become available, it is important to be able to combine results from different cohorts in a meta analysis. The R package multi meta provides an implementation of the inverse variance based method for meta analysis generalized to an n dimensional setting. Availability and implementation: The R package multi meta can be downloaded from CRAN.

introduction genome wide association studies g was have been a powerful tool for genetic discovery for almost a decade. Results have shed light on many different biological processes from lipid metabolism to blood composition as well as social and behavioral patterns (, www genome gov gwa studies. A key to the success of g was was the ability to combine several studies in a meta study which allowed sufficiently large sample sizes for powered association studies even for variants of small phenotypic effect. Although typically g was test one phenotype at a time, many biological features are better described by a combination of several variables. Thus, addressing multiple phenotypes can give great increase in power, by taking into account the underlying correlations between variables. Multivariate regression is a straightforward generalization of standard g was where a linear multivariate mixed model can be fit and allows controlling for population stratification and relatedness (). In particular, a new set of algorithms included in the GEMMA software () allows for a fast multivariate fitting and testing up to 10 phenotypes in large sample sizes. As for the univariate g was it might be desirable in some settings to be able to combine multivariate results from different studies to further increase statistical power in genotype phenotype associations. Here, we describe a novel statistically efficient method to perform meta analysis in a multivariate setting. It is an inverse variance based method that allows different weights for each cohort to take into account the accuracy of each effect estimate. The inverse variance method has been successfully used for single trait association testing () and is suitable for n dimensional generalization. Finally, it is implemented as part of the R package multi meta to benefit from flexible environment and open access, as well as extra plotting functions for results visualization.
