s moldy n is a software package for stochastic modelling of spatial biochemical networks and intracellular systems. It was originally developed with an accurate off lattice particle based model at its core. This has recently been enhanced with the addition of a computationally efficient on lattice model, which can be run stand-alone or coupled together for multiscale simulations using both models in regions where they are most required, increasing the applicability of s moldy n to larger molecule numbers and spatial domains. Simulations can switch between models with only small additions to their configuration file, enabling users with existing s moldy n configuration files to run the new on lattice model with any reaction, species or surface descriptions they might already have. Availability and Implementation: Source code and binaries freely available for download at www s moldy nor g implemented in C/Cþþ and supported on Linux, Mac OSX and MS Windows. Contact: martin robinson math sox ac uk Supplementary Information: Supplementary data are available at Bioinformatics online and include additional details on model specification and modelling of surfaces, as well as the s moldy n configuration file used to generate Figure 1.

introduction in recent years, computational simulations for modelling spatial biochemical networks and intracellular systems have grown in popularity. The rapid increase in computation power and software complexity have increased the range of applicability of these tools to larger and more complex biological systems, while including important stochastic, geometrical (boundary) and multiscale temporal and spatial effects. Computational simulations have been successfully used to understand cellular systems such as cell division in Escherichia coli (), spatio-temporal correlations in the mitogen activated Protein Kinase (MAPK) pathway () and act in dynamics in filopodia (). s moldy n www s moldy nor g is a spatial stochastic simulator that uses an accurate off lattice method to simulate user defined reaction diffusion networks on arbitrary domains and surfaces. It uses a readable, plain text configuration file to specify molecular species, reactions, simulation surfaces or compartments and has a run-time command feature that allows users to specify either observations (e.g. concentration profiles, total molecule numbers) or manipulations of the system (e.g. moving surfaces, changing reaction or diffusion rates). This article presents a major update of the s moldy n package, which incorporates a new on lattice model and its coupling with the existing off lattice model. A significant new feature is the ability to setup multiscale simulations that can use the accurate off lattice models in specific regions of interest, coupled with a coarse but computationally efficient on lattice model for the rest of the domain (). Multiscale simulations of this nature are useful for modelling unbounded or large domains where a large portion of the domain is
