Motivation: Single nucleotide variant (SNV) detection procedures are being utilized as never before to analyze the recent abundance of high throughput DNA sequencing data, both on single and multiple sample datasets. Building on previously published work with the single sample SNV caller genotype model selection (GeMS), a multiple sample version of GeMS multi gems is introduced. Unlike other popular multiple sample SNV callers, the multi gems statistical model accounts for en-zymatic substitution sequencing errors. It also addresses the multiple testing problem endemic to multiple sample SNV calling and utilizes high performance computing (HPC) techniques. Results: A simulation study demonstrates that multi gems ranks highest in precision among a selection of popular multiple sample SNV callers, while showing exceptional recall in calling common sn vs. Further, both simulation studies and real data analyses indicate that multi gems is robust to low quality data. We also demonstrate that accounting for enzymatic substitution sequencing errors not only improves SNV call precision at low mapping quality regions, but also improves recall at reference allele dominated sites with high mapping quality. Availability and implementation: The multi gems package can be downloaded from https://github. com cui lab multi gems
introduction in recent years, a precipitous fall in the costs of DNA sequencing has led to a similarly precipitous rise in the amount of available DNA sequencing data. Using such data, projects such as the 1000 Genomes) and the International HapMap Project () have done much to catalog human genetic variation. Such projects have put an emphasis on sequencing multiple samples, as it has been demonstrated that given a fixed sequencing budget, the total number of population variants identified can often be increased by decreasing the coverage and increasing the number of samples sequenced (). This is, in fact, a motivation for the 1000 Genomes Project low coverage pilot project (1000 Genomes). As single nucleotide variants sn vs are the most common type of sequence variation, many data analysis tools have been created to detect sn vs from DNA sequencing data. However, the prevalent single sample SNV detection procedure has proved insufficient with the availability of data from multiple samples. There are generally two possibilities for SNV detection using single sample SNV callers on multiple sample data. First, it is possible to pool the multiple sample data, and run single sample SNV callers on all the data as if it were one sample. This can, however, reduce the number of legitimate SNV calls, as rare sn vs are often dismissed as errors. Also, pooled data genotype calls may not be indicative of the true sample genotypes. For example, if half of the samples are homozygous reference and the other half are homozygous variant, then the pooled genotype call will likely be heterozygous, even when none of the samples are such. Second, single sample SNV callers can be run on all the samples independently and the output SNV call lists can be combined. This procedure may be useful if the analysis objective is to find variants unique to individual samples. However, for the most part, this procedure will greatly inflate the false positive rate. A common solution to these issues is the development of multiple sample SNV callers. These procedures utilize data from multiple samples to identify both common and rare sn vs as well as sn vs which may have limited support across multiple samples. The amount of sn vs called would generally be between that of the two possibilities mentioned above. That is, the goal of multiple sample SNV callers is to have a good balance of precision and recall with respect to all the samples analyzed. There are, however, concerns with currently available multiple sample SNV callers. A primary concern is how to utilize all important and available information to accurately call sn vs from multiple samples. Other concerns include the resulting multiple testing problem that arises, computational performance and robustness to low quality sequencing and alignment data. All of these concerns are addressed with the multiple sample genotype model selection multi gems SNV caller, which will here be introduced. multi gems builds on the previously published single sample SNV caller GeMS (), and estimates sample genotypes and genotype probabilities for possible SNV sites. Unlike other popular multiple sample SNV callers, the multi gems statistical model accounts for enzymatic substitution sequencing errors. Also, in consideration of the multiple testing problem associated with SNV calling, sn vs are called using a local false discovery rate lf dr estimator. Further, multi gems utilizes high performance computing (HPC) techniques for computational efficiency and is robust to low quality sequencing and alignment data.

discussion since each genomic site is considered independently in the multi gems likelihood, analysis of each site can be parallelized for simultaneous computation. Therefore, we have utilized parallel computing based on the multi-core CPU framework (OpenMP technology, GNU C/C ) for increased procedure performance. The multi gems software package currently supports the input of the sam tools pile up alignment format (http://samtools.source for genet pile up shtml and will soon support samba m alignment files (). For more information on filtering samba m files before converting to sam tools pile up files, please see the PDF document entitled 'Filtering Alignment Files' (https://github.com/ cui lab multi gems. The multi gems algorithm can be expanded to call other types of variants, such as insertions and deletions, by extending the usage of the N variable in the existing framework. This area of investigation would need to consider the impact of utilizing the base call quality scores when calling indels or other variant types, as compared to sn vs. For users currently desiring an in del calling analysis, procedures such as free bayes g atk sam tools vars can or din del () are available and can be added to an analysis pipeline. Likewise, procedures are available for the detection of other types of variation, such as copy number variation the f score and SNV count (in parentheses) are provided for each SNV caller and mapping quality quarter. The results are sorted in descending order of the 'Quarter 1' f score values the results are sorted in descending order of f score
