Motivation: Bead arrays are becoming a popular platform for high throughput expression arrays. However, the number of the beads targeting a transcript and the variation of their intensities differ from sample to sample in these arrays. This property results in different accuracy of expression intensities of a transcript across arrays. Results: We provide evidence, with publicly available spike in data, that the false discovery rate of differential expression is reduced by modeling bead level variability with a multi-level mixed effects model. We compare the performance of our proposed model to existing analysis methods for bead arrays: the unweighted t test and other weighted methods. Additionally, we provide theoretical insights into when the multi-level mixed effects model outperforms other methods. Finally, we provide a software program for differential expression analysis using the multi-level mixed effects model that analyzes tens of thousands of genes efficiently. Availability: The software program is freely available on web at

introduction bead arrays are becoming a popular platform to generate high throughput expression data (). One of the advantages of the technology is that all beads targeting a transcript have exactly the same sequence and length (): this property rids the concerns for averaging intensities from probes with different affinities and a common target transcript. However, in bead arrays, the number of beads targeting a transcript differs from sample to sample, usually between 5 and 80 beads. Moreover, variation of the bead level intensities targeting a common transcript differs across samples. Given these differences in the number of beads and the variation of their intensities, the average expression intensity for a given transcript will have varying precision across samples. Although measures of precision are typically generated along with the computed average gene expression intensities, it is commonplace to simply compare the intensity levels across experimental groups using Analysis of Variance (ANOVA; more than two groups) or t test (two groups), ignoring the bead level variability. This approach is problematic. For example, the standard error of the average is inversely proportional to square root of the number of beads, and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. intensities for a transcript averaged over 5 beads will be four times more variable than that over 80 beads. Recently, there are increasing efforts to incorporate bead level technical variability as weights in linear methods (). For example used variance of bead level intensities as the inverse weight in comparing two sample groups., proposed a test statistic based on unweighted average of bead level intensities but used bead level variability to compute standard errors. Any reasonable use of bead variability will likely improve the accuracy of differential expression analysis. However, to our knowledge, formal consideration of under which model the weighting scheme is optimal, or comparisons between different weighting schemes, have not been reported. Noticeably, in all these weighting methods, weights are completely determined by bead level technical variation and are independent of the magnitude of array level biological variation. Our work adds to the body of research by modeling bead level variation by a multi-level mixed effects model (MLM). Under this model, the weights for the bead averages are determined by the relative magnitudes of both bead level technical variation and array level biological variation. In addition, using publicly available spike in data, we compare the false discovery rate (FDR), sensitivity, specificity, empirical Type I error and empirical power of our proposed model to six other methods.
