Motivation: There are now many predictors capable of identifying the likely phenotypic effects of single nucleotide variants sn vs or short in frame Insertions or Deletions (INDELs) on the increasing amount of genome sequence data. Most of these predictors focus on sn vs and use a combination of features related to sequence conservation, biophysical, and or structural properties to link the observed variant to either neutral or disease phenotype. Despite notable successes, the mapping between genetic variants and their phenotypic effects is riddled with levels of complexity that are not yet fully understood and that are often not taken into account in the predictions, despite their promise of significantly improving the prediction of deleterious mutants. Results: We present de ogen a novel variant effect predictor that can handle both missense sn vs and in frame INDELs. By integrating information from different biological scales and mimicking the complex mixture of effects that lead from the variant to the phenotype, we obtain significant improvements in the variant effect prediction results. Next to the typical variant oriented features based on the evolutionary conservation of the mutated positions, we added a collection of protein oriented features that are based on functional aspects of the gene affected. We cross validated de ogen on 36 825 polymorphisms, 20 821 deleterious sn vs and 1038 INDELs from SwissProt. The multilevel contextualization of each (variant, protein) pair in de ogen provides a 10% improvement of MCC with respect to current state of the art tools. Availability and implementation: The software and the data presented here is publicly available at

introduction the human exo me covers $1% of the entire genome and contains roughly 180 000 protein coding exons (). There are currently 40 million human variants identified by genome sequencing over multiple individuals from different genetic backgrounds (), with every individual carrying around four million variants in their whole genome. Whole exo me sequencing (WES) identifies approximately 20 000 of these per individual () in a cost effective manner (), and has led to the successful identification of many new disease gene associations in the last years (). The huge amount of WES data that became available over the last decade has allowed researchers to explore the genetic basis of human disease, and tools were developed that aid in the identification of disease causing genetic variants. For example, variant prioritization tools () process exo me sequencing data and rank the observed variants, so that the ones most likely to be causative for a specific disease are ranked highest. The major benefit of this ranking is that it focuses subsequent in vitro validation experiments to the subset of genetic candidates that are more likely to be related to the disease under investigation (). The state of the art variant prioritization methods integrate heterogeneous sources of genetic and biological information (), where one of the most critical features are the scores of pathogenicity for single nucleotide variants sn vs as predicted by tools such as PolyPhen2 (), Sift (), mutation taster (), Mutation Assessor (), phylo p (), g erp  (), and CADD (). These tools use machine learning (ML) approaches to address the variant effect prediction problem from many different angles related to the known proxies for pathogenicity, such as the evolutionary conservation of the mutated position (), the stability change upon mutation (), possible structural alterations (), the change in physico/chemical characteristics due to the mutation () and functional annotations using GO terms (). The phenotypic al interpretation of protein level alterations on the level of individuals is the ultimate goal of this field (), but this causal relationship is still far from being completely understood and it is confounded by many aspects related to the intrinsic complexity of cell life (). A crucial restriction of variant effect prediction is that an alteration of the protein's molecular phenotype, even if it is a sine qua non condition for the disease phenotype in the carrier individual, may not constitute in itself a sufficient cause for the disease: this also depends on the particular role that the affected protein plays in the well-being of the organism (). Even the most commonly used features, which relate evolutionary constraints with likely functional damage, offer only a partial correlation with the pathogenicity of the variant (). Consequently, additional information that bridges the variant phenotype gap is crucial to improve variant effect predictions. Here, we present de ogen a novel method for variant effect prediction that integrates heterogeneous sources of information in order to analyze each (protein, variant) pair by combining different levels of contextualisation of the protein function with a Random Forest (RF) () predictor. After a cross validation with very strict settings, de ogen performs 10% better than the most recently developed variant effect predictors that target missense sn vs. Additionally, we show that our approach is general enough to provide an improvement in the prediction of the phenotypic effects of short in frame genetic variants (INDELs), where, after retraining the RF using almost the same features as for sn vs de ogen performs 17% better than variant effect predictors without multilevel contextualization. These improvements show that adding levels of contextualization to variant effect prediction helps to approach the complexity of cell life, an effect observed for both sn vs and INDELs. The increased contextualization will also, in time, allow a better understanding of why particular variants might have a particular deleterious effect.

conclusion the novel variant effect predictor we present here integrates heterogeneous sources of biological information in order to improve the contextualization of both the variant and the affected protein. We do this by merging relevant aspects to the molecular phenotype, the gene and the biological pathways involved. We also show that this approach is general enough to be applicable to both sn vs and INDELs, even if in the latter case the average impact at the molecular levels is much more disruptive. This functional contextualization of the protein enables de ogen to outperform nine state of the art predictors, indicating that careful integration of data from relevant sources is an excellent approach to improve not only predictions, but also our understanding of the mechanisms underlying the genotype to phenotype relationship. Future developments will dig deeper into the interpretation of the single predictions, aiming at understanding how a particular variant influences cell machinery and its functioning in dvar. i pathway log odds scores learned considering only in dvar
