Motivation: Epistasis, the presence of gene gene interactions, has been hypothesized to be at the root of many common human diseases, but current genome wide association studies largely ignore its role. Multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) is a powerful model free method for detecting epistatic relationships between genes, but computational costs have made its application to genome wide data difficult. Graphics processing units (GPUs), the hardware responsible for rendering computer games, are powerful parallel processors. Using GPUs to run MDR on a genome wide dataset allows for statistically rigorous testing of epistasis. Results: The implementation of MDR for GPUs mdr gpu includes core features of the widely used Java software package, MDR. This GPU implementation allows for large scale analysis of epistasis at a dramatically lower cost than the standard cpu based implementations. As a proof of concept we applied this software to a genome wide study of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS). We discovered a statistically significant two snp classifier and subsequently replicated the significance of these two SNPs in an independent study of ALS. mdr gpu makes the large scale analysis of epistasis tractable and opens the door to statistically rigorous testing of interactions in genome wide datasets. Availability: mdr gpu is open source and available free of charge from http://www.sourceforge.net/projects/mdr.

introduction genome wide association studies hold promise for the discovery of the genetic factors that underlie common human diseases (). Unfortunately this promise has largely not been realized (). It is thought that this failure could be due to epistasis, the role of gene gene interactions, which has commonly been ignored in these studies. Powerful and model free methods such as multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) have been developed (), but an exhaustive examination of even pair-wise interactions in a 550 000 SNP dataset would require the analysis of 1.510 11 combinations. While an analysis of this scale is approachable with modern cluster computing, an analysis that includes permutation testing to assess the statistical significance of results remains infeasible with cpu based approaches. Rendering photo-realistic video games in real time is also computationally difficult. For video game graphics, specific hardware (the graphics processing unit or GPU) has been developed. The GPU is a massively parallel computing platform that can be adapted to some scientific tasks. We have previously shown that MDR is one of these tasks (). Here we provide software which makes practical the analysis of epistasis in genome wide data through the use of GPUs and demonstrate its application to a genome wide analysis of epistasis of sporadic amyotrophic lateral sclerosis als page 695 694695

discussion while SNP rs4363506 has been reported as associated with disease in, it did not have a statistically significant effect in when considered alone ( 2 , P = 0.18) and would have failed to replicate without considering pairwise effects. SNP rs6014848 has not previously been described as associated with sporadic ALS, although it shows main effects (uncorrected  2 , P  0.05) in both datasets have shown that SNPs can fail to replicate a significant association when the joint effect of those SNPs is ignored. This is particularly likely when the populations from which patients are ascertained differs collected individuals from the USA, while collected individuals from Ireland. By considering the joint effect of SNPs, mdr gpu discovers a novel association which replicates in an independent dataset. GPUs provide a platform for epistasis analysis in genome wide data where computational requirements far exceed what CPUs can cost effectively provide. mdr gpu is a software package for this emerging computing platform that enables human geneticists to tackle analyses previously found to be intractable.
