Motivation: An important aspect of infectious disease research involves understanding the differences and commonalities in the infection mechanisms underlying various diseases. Systems biology based approaches study infectious diseases by analyzing the interactions between the host species and the pathogen organisms. This work aims to combine the knowledge from experimental studies of host– pathogen interactions in several diseases to build stronger predictive models. Our approach is based on a formalism from machine learning called multitask learning, which considers the problem of building models across tasks that are related to each other. A task in our scenario is the set of host pathogen protein interactions involved in one disease. To integrate interactions from several tasks (i.e. diseases), our method exploits the similarity in the infection process across the diseases. In particular, we use the biological hypothesis that similar pathogens target the same critical biological processes in the host, in defining a common structure across the tasks. Results: Our current work on host pathogen protein interaction prediction focuses on human as the host, and four bacterial species as pathogens. The multitask learning technique we develop uses a task based regularization approach. We find that the resulting optimization problem is a difference of convex (DC) functions. To optimize, we implement a convex concave procedure based algorithm. We compare our integrative approach to baseline methods that build models on a single host pathogen protein interaction dataset. Our results show that our approach outperforms the baselines on the training data. We further analyze the protein interaction predictions generated by the models, and find some interesting insights.

introduction infectious diseases are a major health concern worldwide, causing millions of illnesses and deaths each year. Newly emerging viral diseases, such as swine H1N1 influenza, severe acute respiratory syndrome (SARS) and bacterial infections, such as the recurrent Salmonella and Escherichia coli outbreaks not only lead to wide-spread loss of life and health, but also result in heavy economic losses. To better navigate this landscape of infectious diseases, it is important to not only understand the mechanisms of individual diseases, but also the commonalities between them. Combining knowledge from related diseases will give us deeper insights into infection and host immune response, will enhance our ability to comprehend new diseases and lead to efficient development of therapeutics. Key to the infection process are host pathogen interactions at the molecular level, where pathogen proteins physically bind with human proteins. Via these protein interactions, the pathogen manipulates important biological processes in the host cell, evades host immune response and multiplies within the host. Interactions between host and pathogen proteins can be studied using small scale biochemical, biophysical and genetic experiments or large scale high throughput screening methods like yeast two hybrid (Y2H) assays. Databases like phi base (), PIG (), hp idb (), ph is to () aggregate host pathogen protein interactions from several small scale and high throughput experiments via manual literature curation. These databases are valuable sources of information for developing models of the modus operandi of pathogens. However, interaction datasets from these databases are not only small but are available for only a few well studied pathogens. For example, the phi base () database covers 64 diseases but has only 1335 interactions, PIG () covers only 12 pathogens. Computationally, this calls for techniques that combine datasets and build joint models across several pathogens, which can then be used to analyze the commonalities in the pathogens and also to predict plausible interactions that are biased by this joint understanding. In our work, we study host pathogen protein protein interaction (PPI) where the host is fixed and the pathogens are various bacterial species (). The host species we consider is human and the bacterial species are Yersinia pestis, Francisella tularensis, Salmonella and Bacillus anthracis, which cause the diseases bubonic plague, acute pneumonia, typhoid and anthrax, respectively. Some recent work on infectious diseases has alluded to the hypothesis that different pathogens target essentially the same critical biological processes in the human body. The analysis by suggests that HIV infection shares common molecular mechanisms with certain signaling pathways and cancers study bacterial and viral interactions with human genes and find infection mechanisms common to multiple pathogens. Experiments by show how various bacterial cyclo moduli ns target the host cell cycle. The study by on plant pathogens, in particular, Arabidopsis concludes that pathogens from different kingdoms deploy independently evolved virulence proteins that interact with a limited set of highly connected cellular hubs to facilitate their diverse life cycle strategies illustrates an example depicting the commonality in various bacterial species, where *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com they are targeting the same biological pathways in their human host. This biological hypothesis, which we henceforth call the commonality hypothesis, is exploited here to jointly learn PPI models for multiple bacterial species. We translate the hypothesis into a prior that will bias the learned models. We use a multitask learning based approach, where each 'task' represents the interaction of one bacterial species with human. The prior is represented in the form of a regularize r that penalizes models to the degree that the above hypothesis is violated.

conclusion we presented a method that uses biological knowledge in jointly learning multiple PPI prediction tasks. Using a task regularization based multitask learning technique, we were able to encode a biological hypothesis into the optimization framework effectively, thus enabling the commonality hypothesis to be tested. Our results indicate that the tasks benefit from this joint learning and we see an improvement of 4 F points over the baseline methods. While our current results were presented on four bacterial species, we plan to extend our analysis to several other pathogens. Another direction to explore is the case where the pathogen is fixed and the hosts are different. Our current approach integrates multiple tasks in a pairwise manner, which is inefficient because it does not scale well while integrating several PPI datasets. The most straightforward way of extending Equation (3) to learning m tasks simultaneously involves loss terms for each of the tasks and Om 2  pairwise regularization terms, which unfortunately makes the optimization problem more complex and inefficient. A more promising and efficient direction would be to consider model selection at the task level where only the most relevant and useful tasks are used for multitask learning.
