Motivation: With rapidly expanding protein structure databases, efficiently retrieving structures similar to a given protein is an important problem. It involves two major issues: (i) effective protein structure representation that captures inherent relationship between fragments and facilitates efficient comparison between the structures and (ii) effective framework to address different retrieval requirements. Recently, researchers proposed vector space model of proteins using bag of fragments representation frag bag which corresponds to the basic information retrieval model. Results: In this article, we propose an improved representation of protein structures using latent dirichlet allocation topic model. Another important requirement is to retrieve proteins, whether they are either close or remote homologs. In order to meet diverse objectives, we propose multi viewpoint based framework that combines multiple representations and retrieval techniques. We compare the proposed representation and retrieval framework on the benchmark dataset developed by Kolodny and co-workers. The results indicate that the proposed techniques outperform state of the art methods.

introduction following huge efforts from the structural genomics research community, protein structure databases are ever expanding. Whenever a new protein structure is determined, an important step is to identify its structural neighbors, which can provide important clues about its function and evolutionary linkages. Since the protein structure is relatively more robust than sequence during evolution, structure comparison methods can discover remote homologous proteins for a given protein. They also play a key role in understanding the diversity of structure space by analyzing the existing structure databases. In order to derive interesting scientific insights from the vast structure databases available now, highly efficient methods for comparing protein structures are required. The success of structure comparison methods can be measured based on their effectiveness in detecting closely and remotely homologous proteins (). The closely homologous proteins have similar structures with relatively lesser number of insertions and deletions. On the other hand, remote homologs * To whom the correspondence should be addressed.  The work was done when the author was an intern at Department of CSE, i it Madras. possess significantly different structures. The similarity in these cases can be inferred based on the similarity of structural fragments. Fragment level protein structure comparison works well in practice as demonstrated by several methods bud owski. The first fragment based comparison method was proposed by Remington and Mathews, which performs rigid body superposition of fixed length backbone fragments from individual proteins (). The rigid body superposition was later used by Zuker and Somorjai to define the distance between backbone fragments while comparing them using dynamic programming (). The fragment based structure comparison was also used in identification and ranking of local features (). For further details, the readers are referred to an excellent review paper by. Recently, researchers proposed an interesting vector space representation of protein structures using fragments as the bases (). The method, frag bag appears to perform the task of retrieving similar structures efficiently and is the state of the art method in fragment based structure comparison. frag bag represents each structure as a bag of fragments, which is the most basic model of retrieval proposed in text literature. The success of frag bag opens up many interesting avenues, where advanced language modeling techniques proposed in Information Retrieval ir statistical Natural Language Processing (NLP) can be adopted for representing protein structures. Such approaches are expected to achieve better performance in terms of efficiency and accuracy of identifying structural homologs. The article focuses on two important problems in this context: (i) effective protein structure representation that captures inherent relationship between fragments and facilitates efficient comparison between the structures and (ii) effective framework to address different retrieval requirements. We propose a new representation for protein structures based on latent dirichlet allocation (LDA) (). LDA models a collection of discrete objects as a mixture of latent topics, and has been shown to work remarkably well in text and image retrieval domain. The success of LDA in text domain is attributed to effective capturing of relationship between words. Drawing a parallel, here we demonstrate that LDA indeed models relationships between fragments in protein structures effectively and achieves a competitive performance with state of the art structural methods at a fraction of the computation costs. Another important contribution of this work is that we propose multi viewpoint homology detection framework to effectively find close, as well as, remote homologous proteins for a query protein structure. This is the first attempt to adopt advanced models from IR and statistical NLP for addressing protein structure comparison problem.

conclusion we proposed a novel framework for representation and comparison of protein structures. We demonstrated that our method outperforms most of the existing filter and match methods. Our results are very competitive even with the state of the art structure comparison methods operating at the level of complete 3D representation. Moreover, our method is much faster than these methods. kolodny the proposed approaches are shown in bold. Multiview model I is a combination of TF and LDA, multiview model II is a combination of tf idf and LDA and multiview model III is a combination of Boolean vector and LDA. The speed is given as average CPU minutes per query. If the processing time (after preprocessing of protein structure) for a query is 0.1 s, then it is mentioned as fast.
