Motivation: Normal development of multicellular organisms is regulated by a highly complex process in which a set of precursor cells proliferate, differentiate and move, forming over time a functioning tissue. To handle their complexity, developmental systems can be studied over distinct scales. The dynamics of each scale is determined by the collective activity of entities at the scale below it. Results: I describe a multi-scale computational approach for modeling developmental systems and detail the methodology through a synthetic example of a developmental system that retains key features of real developmental systems. I discuss the simulation of the system as it emerges from cross scale and intra scale interactions and describe how an in silico study can be carried out by modifying these interactions in a way that mimics in vivo experiments. I highlight biological features of the results through a comparison with findings in Caenorhabditis elegans germline development and finally discuss about the applications of the approach in real developmental systems and propose future extensions. Availability and implementation: The source code of the model of the synthetic developmental system can be found in www wisdom. weizmann acil yaki multiscale model. Contact:

introduction many developmental systems in multicellular organisms are regulated by a small set of precursor cells that proliferate, differentiate and move to form a functioning tissue (). Developmental systems embody a highly dynamic and complex process, which advances in numerous individual cells simultaneously. Molecular interactions over a complex regulatory network drive the development by orchestrating cell extrinsic cues and cell intrinsic regulation (). However, due to hurdles in in vivo experimentations, data in developmental biology are largely static, and the granularity of knowledge about timing and function of cellular mechanisms remains coarse (). Analysis and study of developmental systems can be done over distinct scales: organism, tissue, cell, molecule, gene, etc. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). These scales are not merely a matter of zooming in and out. Rather, scales introduce the concept of emergent behavior: the behavior at a specific scale that is not explicitly expressed in any of the elements at the lower scale and results from their collective activity (). The activity of a tissue, for example, emerges from the collective activity of the individual cells that comprise it. Similarly, cell activity emerges from the collective molecular interactions over the regulatory network. Three hierarchical scales, molecular, cellular and tissue, are important in the analysis of developmental systems (). At the molecular scale, an intracellular regulatory network controls molecular mechanisms such as gene expression, receptor activity and protein degradation. Above the molecular scale is the cellular scale where each individual cell decides on its next developmental step, i.e. proliferation, fate determination and motility. Further above is the tissue level where the cell population acts in concert to develop its anatomy and function. Activity at each scale drives behaviors at the above and below scales. For instance, interactions in the regulatory network at the molecular scale determine, at the cellular scale, individual cell decision making. These, in turn, collectively stimulate anatomical formation at the tissue scale. Conversely, the position of a cell in the tissue determines which cell extrinsic cues it detects and the decisions it makes. A change in elements at one scale may significantly affect the activity at other scales, resulting in an altered development. Multi-scale modeling is gaining increased focus in computational biology (). It served to study various biological systems, including the electrical activity of the heart (), the function of the lungs () and the multi physical phenomena that govern cortical bone behavior (). However, most of these studies focus on function and physiology of the adult tissue and often do not handle dynamic aspects of the development. The approach presented here tackles dynamics and emergence in the process of development. The approach models developmental systems by structuring known biological information in designated elements in each scale: (i) molecular mechanisms implicated in the regulatory network are formalized at the molecular scale, (ii) proliferation, fate determination and motility are defined as decision making at the cellular scale and (iii) anatomic constraints and cell extrinsic cues are defined at the tissue scale in a grid that overlays the structure. cross scale interactions are modeled as events that emanate from element in one scale and are translated to events at the other scales. The collective intra and cross scale events

DISCUSSION
