We present muta scope a sequencing analysis pipeline specifically developed for the identification of somatic variants present at low allelic fraction from high throughput sequencing of amplicons from matched tumor normal specimen. Using datasets reproducing tumor genetic heterogeneity, we demonstrate that muta scope has a higher sensitivity and generates fewer false positive calls than tools designed for shotgun sequencing or diploid genomes. Availability: Freely available on the web at

introduction the accurate detection of somatic mutations in tumors is critical for precise diagnostic and selection of targeted therapies (), but the low allelic fraction frequently encountered in heterogeneous or poor cellularity clinical specimens renders this task challenging. In current clinical assays, amplicons covering the exons of 10100 cancer genes are amplified via polymerase chain reaction based or analogous approaches and sequenced at high depth to identify mutations present in 55% of a DNA sample (). Despite high coverage depth, the error rate resulting from systematic sequencing bias (), can hinder the detection of mutations. Although experimental () or analytical () methods, or comparison with the normal DNA () can mitigate this effect, most analysis strategies were developed for sequencing of random shotgun DNA fragments, and thus do not take into account systematic errors specific to amplicon sequencing. In amplicon sequencing, loci are covered by reads with identical genomic starting positions, and because the error rate increases along the length of the read (), a variable consensus error rate exists over the target (). Analytical strategies specifically designed for amplicon sequencing have the potential to enhance the mutation detection accuracy of current clinical assays, especially at low allelic fraction here we present muta scope a software dedicated to the detection of mutations at low allelic fraction from amplicon sequencing of matched tumor normal samples pairs. muta scope determines the amplicon of origin for each read and measures the specific experimental error rate from sequencing the normal DNA. The mutations in the tumor are then identified by comparison with the error rate using a binomial statistics and classified as germ line or somatic by comparison with the normal DNA. A set of filters adapted to amplicon sequencing then eliminates false positive calls. We used two experimental datasets, a mixture of 8 normal DNA (MIX) and a set of 80 tumor normal spiked in (TNS) pairs derived from 38 different normal germ line DNA samples to measure the performance of the approach in comparison with other mutation callers.
