my bionet is a web based application for biological network analysis, which provides user friendly web interfaces to visualize, edit and merge biological networks. In addition, my bionet integrated KEGG metabolic network data from 1366 organisms and allows users to search and navigate interesting networks. Availability and Implementation: All KEGG metabolic network data are organized and stored in the MySQL database. my bionet is implemented in flex actionscript and PHP languages and deployed on an Apache web server. my bionet is accessible through all the flash embedded browsers at

introduction owning to the emergence and rapid proliferation of new high throughput sequencing technologies, more and more biological data are produced and are used to infer underlying networks by means of various methods in systems biology. Network visualization can map different sorts of biological information onto the graph, giving researchers new biological insight. In this respect, network visualization is becoming increasingly important for analyzing large amounts of data. Developed network visualizations can be roughly classified as either web based or stand-alone (). Traditional web based visualization tools, e.g. VisANT (), are mostly implemented as Java applets, whereas a few web based visualization tools have been developed using the Flash platform that is browser independent and more flexible for users to design their custom templates. Cytoscape Web () is a web based visualization tool based on the Cytoscape algorithm, using the Flash platform as a client component to visualize network data on websites. Another visualization tool, STRING (), utilizes the Flash platform to visualize protein protein interactions data on a web server. Both * To whom correspondence should be addressed. these applications do not allow users to edit and update a network. y works developed a commercial web application y files Flex, which integrates complicated graph visualization and editing functionality with an internet application relying on Flash player (http://www.yworks.com/en/products_yfilesflex_about.html). However, this is a canonical network tool, not particularly tailored for analyzing biological networks, and in addition it is commercial software. In this article, we have developed a Web application, my bionet on a Flash platform. my bionet is designed to be a lightweight, easy to use, web based tool for analyzing biological networks. It has important features for biological network operations, including visualization, editing and merging networks. KEGG () metabolic networks are integrated into my bionet allowing users to search and navigate the KEGG data conveniently.
