Motivation: With 48 million new cases in 2010, particularly documented in developing countries, tuberculosis (TB) is still a highly present pandemic and often terminal. This is also due to the emergence of antibiotic resistant strains md rtb and xdr tb of the primary causative TB agent Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB). Efforts to develop new effective drugs against MTB are restrained by the unique and largely impermeable composition of the mycobacterial cell wall. Results: Based on a database of anti mycobacterial substances (CDD TB), 3815 compounds were classified as active and thus permeable. A data mining approach was conducted to gather the physico-chemical similarities of these substances and delimit them from a generic data-set of drug like molecules. On the basis of the differences in these datasets, a regression model was generated and implemented into the online tool myc perm check to predict the permeability probability of small organic compounds. Discussion: Given the current lack of precise molecular criteria determining mycobacterial permeability, myc perm check represents an unprecedented prediction tool intended to support anti mycobacterial drug discovery. It follows a novel knowledge driven approach to estimate the permeability probability of small organic compounds. As such, myc perm check can be used intuitively as an additional selection criterion for potential new inhibitors against MTB. Based on the validation results, its performance is expected to be of high practical value for virtual screening purposes. Availability: The online tool is freely accessible under the URL http:// www myc perm check
introduction despite its ancient origin and the successes of antibacterial chemotherapeutic s introduced 450 years ago, tuberculosis (TB) is still one of the most widespread and abundant infectious diseases. In 2010, 8.8 million new cases were documented, particularly in developing countries (). Since the discovery of Mycobacterium tuberculosis (MTB) as the primary causative agent of TB, a complex first line treatment was developed based on the prodrug isoniazid. However, because of the emergence of multi and extensively drug resistant strains md rtb and xdr tb the design of novel potent inhibitors is an ongoing challenge (). An important natural defense mechanism of MTB is its thick and waxy cell wall providing a first powerful barrier against antibiotic drugs. It consists of a peptidoglycan arabi nogal act an my colic acid core as well as the out most layer, the so called capsule (). It has been shown that not only hydrophilic agents, but also lipophilic agents may have severe problems passing the permeability barrier of the cell wall, owing to the unusually low fluidity of the lipid bilayer (). Without the ability to penetrate this cell wall, even most potent inhibitors of validated mycobacterial drug targets like in ha () will not have any efficacy. Unfortunately, data about mycobacterial permeability properties of chemical compounds are hardly available, hampering the development of knowledge based methods for permeability estimation. However, as in most of the cases a compound must permeate the mycobacterial cell wall to show anti mycobacterial activity, it is reasonable to infer an ability to pass this barrier for compounds active against mycobacteria. In 2010, Ekins and colleagues developed a collaborative database (CDD TB) of 4200 000 compounds, which had been tested for antibiotic activity against MTB (). Over 3800 structures showed growth inhibition of !90% at a concentration of 10 M. Obviously, these compounds have sufficient permeability to be active against MTB and may, thus, be used as a knowledge base for analyzing permeability determining features. Accordingly, an extensive data mining approach based on the physico-chemical properties of this dataset was performed with the subsequent development of a regression model. With this knowledge based classification system, the permeability of potential new compounds against MTB can be estimated with high accuracy and quantified comfortably.
