We present my toe a tool for analyzing mitochondrial morphology and dynamics from fluorescence microscope images. The tool provides automated quantitative analysis of mitochondrial motion by optical flow estimation and of morphology by segmentation of individual branches of the network like structure of the organelles. my toe quantifies several features of individual branches, such as length, tortuosity and speed, and of the macroscopic structure, such as mitochondrial area and degree of clustering. We validate the methods and apply them to the analysis of sequences of images of U2OS human cells with fluorescently labeled mitochondria. Availability: Source code, Windows software and Manual available at

introduction mitochondria play a key role in several cellular processes, from energy production to apoptosis and ageing. Malfunctioning in mitochondrial processes has been associated to several diseases (). Due to mitochondrial fusion and fission, the organelles form a highly dynamic structure that can change from fragmented to filamentous (). A better understanding of the dynamics of this structure and its relationship with complex cellular processes may provide much insight on mitochondrial functioning and their role on the well-being of cells. Recent works addressed the problem of segmenting mitochondria from fluorescence microscope images. () presented a segmentation method along with descriptors for mitochondrial properties. Another method uses 3D imaging (). Mitochondrial motility has been assessed by the degree of colocalization between successive images and from the differences of subsequent image pairs (). These methods detect motion but do not yield data on directionality. Other methods to study motility include optical flow (OF) estimation () and distance transform (). Tracking methods for motility analysis exist, but rely heavily on human interaction (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed we present an easy to use software, my toe for automated study of mitochondrial structural dynamics from temporal confocal images. It has a simple graphical user interface and requires only a few parameters from the user. my toe includes a novel segmentation method which identifies individual branches of the organelles' structure by thresholding and by morphological image processing. In contrast to previous methods, this allows quantifying properties of both single branches and the macroscopic structure formed by the mitochondria. OF is used for motion analysis. The output can be examined in my toe with branch level data being visualized by color coding individual branches based on the data, and motion vectors being visualized as quiver plots. The results are saved as MATLAB mat files and comma separated values. We first describe the methods in my toe and results of the validation procedure. Finally, we use my toe to analyze time-lapse sequences of U2OS human osteosarcoma cells hoechst 33342 and WGA647 fluorescent dyes, respectively. The images were acquired with a Nikon Eclipse Ti with 100 Apo, a wallac perkin Elmer ultra view spinning disk confocal system, and or emc cd camera and an autofocus system. Each cell was imaged every 3 s for 10 min in 2D. An example image is shown in. in and 1c, we show a region of the same image, and the structure segmented from that region, respectively. The quality of microscope imaging is degraded by noise and saturation, thus we added noise and increasingly saturated the images (Supplementary Material). We applied my toe and observed how the features changed with increasing levels of degradation. Visual inspection showed that the methods are robust to levels of degradation much higher than in real images. In Supplementary Material we present the results of the analysis of structure and motion and of the features in for a set of images. As an example shows time series of mean branch speeds of mitochondria of four cells, revealing that they differ widely, likely due to differing cell cycle stage.

discussion my toe provides an easy means to study mitochondrial structure and kinetics by automated image analysis of temporal images of fluorescently labeled mitochondria. The structure analysis was found robust to noise and insensitive to saturation. Thus, the method can be used to obtain reliable measurements from saturated images, provided that the mitochondrial branches are separable. So far, we tested my toe on one cell type. Its efficiency may depend on the shapes of cell type and mitochondria. Here we showed that it is accurate enough to, for example, distinguish the kinetics of the mitochondria structure from one cell to another. In the future, this framework can be extended by including additional descriptors and adding other shape analysis techniques that can be chosen as a function of the cell type. Additionally, we aim to further develop my toe so as to automatically detect abnormalities in the mitochondria structure, due to chemicals (such as in drug screening) or disease.
