Motivation: Stable isotope labelling experiments have recently gained increasing popularity in metabolomics studies, providing unique insights into the dynamics of metabolic fluxes, beyond the steady state information gathered by routine mass spectrometry. However, most liquid chromatography mass spectrometry data analysis software lacks features that enable automated annotation and relative quantification of labelled metabolite peaks. Here, we describe mz match iso a new extension to the metabolomics analysis pipeline mz match r. Results: Targeted and untargeted isotope profiling using mz match ISO provides a convenient visual summary of the quality and quantity of labelling for every metabolite through four types of diagnostic plots that show (i) the chromatograms of the isotope peaks of each compound in each sample group; (ii) the ratio of mono isotopic and labelled peaks indicating the fraction of labelling; (iii) the average peak area of mono isotopic and labelled peaks in each sample group; and (iv) the trend in the relative amount of labelling in a predetermined iso to pomer. To aid further statistical analyses, the values used for generating these plots are also provided as a tab delimited file. We demonstrate the power and versatility of mz match iso by analysing a 13 c labelled metabo lome dataset from trypanosoma l parasites. Availability: mz match r and mz match iso are available free of charge from http://mzmatch.sourceforge.net and can be used on Linux and Windows platforms running the latest version of R. Contact: rainer breitling manchester ac uk
introduction isotope labelled LCMS data to generate plots and tables that describe the labelling pattern in detail. The ability to generate a comprehensive graphical visualization of the output along with the extensible and scriptable nature of the software itself makes mz match iso a unique data analysis tool for isotope labelling studies. mz match iso is an extension to mz match an open source Java toolbox for MS data processing and visualization (). Features of mz match enabled by the R package mz match r including the new peak ml data exchange format and the data analysis pipeline were described by. mz match has been applied to many metabolomics data analyses () and is the underlying platform for software such as ide om (). Currently, only LCMS data analysis is supported by mz match iso however, it is possible to process gas chromatography mass spectrometry data analyses using mz match r and mz match iso with some additional scripting.
