Motivation: The nano string n counter Platform is a new and promising technology for measuring nucleic acid abundances. It has several advantages over pcr based techniques, including avoidance of amplification, direct sequence interrogation and digital detection for absolute quantification. These features minimize aspects of experimental error and hold promise for dealing with challenging experimental conditions such as archival formalin fixed paraffin embedded samples. However, systematic inter sample technical artifacts caused by variability in sample preservation, bio-molecular extraction and platform fluctuations must be removed to ensure robust data. Results: To facilitate this process and to address these issues for nano string datasets, we have written a pre-processing package called nano string norm in the R statistical language. Key features include an extensible environment for method comparison and new algorithm development, integrated gene and sample diagnostics, and facilitated downstream statistical analysis. The package is open source is available through the CRAN package repository, includes unit tests to ensure numerical accuracy, and provides visual and numeric diagnostics. Availability: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/NanoStringNorm

introduction the nano string n counter Platform is an emerging medium throughput technology for measuring mRNA and miRNA abundances and for assessing copy number variants (). nano string technology has several potential benefits relative to microarray and pcr based technologies. First, its parallelized nature and small number of manual manipulations generate data faster than many pcr based methods. Second, the hybridization method used directly interrogates target sequences, avoiding the need for bias prone amplification steps, even for low abundance * To whom correspondence should be addressed. transcripts. Third, measurement is achieved using digital detection of uniquely bar-coded probes, providing absolute quantification. This combination of advantages is thought to provide favorable conditions for testing formalin fixed paraffin embedded ff pe samples. ff pe preparation is a standard protocol for the long term storage of human clinical specimens. Despite some positive reports (), the degradation of RNA in ff pe samples challenges existing mRNA quantitation assays. The ability to reliably process ff pe samples would greatly facilitate retrospective studies. Accordingly there has been a dramatic increase in the uptake of nano string technology in our research facility. In some cases, it is used as a validation procedure; in others as a discovery tool using candidate genes. A common rationale is the desire to exploit large, clinically well annotated ff pe collections. Since nano string is a new technology, many details of its analysis remain unexplored: optimal methods of data pre-processing are unknown, although this is well known to impact biological conclusions (). nano string currently recommends pre-processing using Microsoft Excel spreadsheet functions. This has significant limitations. First, manual analysis is both hard to reproduce and prone to errors (): gene and sample name auto formatting are well known issues (). Second, macros and worksheets can not easily be adapted to changing experimental designs or pre-processing methods: spreadsheet software lacks the sophisticated statistical tools common in bioinformatics (e.g. survival or mixed models). Third, it is highly desirable to integrate workflows in a single environment, and downstream analyses are typically performed in statistical environments. Fourth, the quality of data pre-processing requires careful assessment with data visualizations that are difficult to automate using spreadsheets. For these reasons we have developed an open source R package, called nano string norm to implement a reference set of preprocessing techniques. We chose the R statistical environment to allow integration with BioConductor libraries (), and to exploit its data visualization () and statistical tools. nano string norm outlines a pipeline of pre-processing steps with multiple options at each stage and provides a framework for method development and comparison. By standardizing code and automating error capture, nano string norm will enable more reproducible and robust analysis of nano string datasets.
