Motivation: Datasets from high throughput sequencing technologies have yielded a vast amount of data about organisms in environmental samples. Yet, it is still a challenge to assess the exact organism content in these samples because the task of taxonomic classification is too computationally complex to annotate all reads in a dataset. An easy to use web server is needed to process these reads. While many methods exist, only a few are publicly available on web servers and out of those, most do not annotate all reads. Results: We introduce a web server that implements the naïve Bayes classifier (NBC) to classify all meta genomic reads to their best taxonomic match. Results indicate that NBC can assign next generation sequencing reads to their taxonomic classification and can find significant populations of genera that other classifiers may miss. Availability: Publicly available at: http://nbc.ece.

introduction after acquiring a sample and using next generation technology to perform shotgun sequencing, the next step in meta genomic analysis it to assess the taxonomic content of the sample. This methodology, also known as phylogenetic analysis, gives a simple look at 'Who is in this sample?' The first tool ever used (which is still widely used) for taxonomic assessment is Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST;). In recent years, several specialized web servers have been made available to the public to ease the process of taxonomically classifying reads, namely phylo pythia (), CAMERA (), web carma (), mgr ast () and Galaxy (). Unlike BLAST, phylo pythia and web carma return more specific taxonomic information and assign reads to higher level taxonomic levels using a consensus of BLAST top hit taxonomies [aka 'last common ancestor' algorithms (. In this article, we focus our comparison to remote stand-alone web servers and not to methods that only have locally installable software. Ultimately, all the meta genomic analysis web servers aim to ease analysis of complex environmental samples for users that do not have resources to maintain their own databases and systems. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. phylo pythia was the first taxonomic classification web server to be implemented. phylo pythia is based on a support vector machine (SVM) classification method and produces very good accuracy for long (1 Kbp) reads (). web carma is a homology based approach that matches environmental gene tags to protein families and reports good results for long and ultrashort 35-bp reads using (i) BLASTX to find candidate environmental gene tags eg ts and (ii) using Pfam (protein family) hidden Markov models (HMMs) to match the eg ts against protein families during an EGT candidate selection process. mgr ast meta genome Rapid Annotation using Subsystem Technology) (), CAMERA (Community Cyberinfrastructure for Advanced Microbial Ecology Research and Analysis) () and the Galaxy Project () are high throughput meta genomic pipelines that aim to be an all in one one stop analysis for meta genomic samples. For taxonomic classification of shotgun sequencing, mgr ast offers a homology based approach, SEED (). CAMERA and Galaxy provide high throughput implementations and custom databases for BLASTN. BLASTN yields best hit sequence matches and is known to have reasonable accuracy (). Previously, Rosen et al. have explored a machine learning method, nave Bayes classifier (NBC), as a possible way to classify fragments that can annotate more sequences than BLAST (). We now implement the algorithm on a web server for public use and benchmark it against other web sites.

discussion in we show the percentage of reads (out of the whole dataset) that ranked in the top eight genera for each algorithm. We see that all methods are in unanimous agreement for Clostridium and Bacillus, while most methods (except Galaxy) agree for prominence of me than ocul le us. CAMERA supports nbc s findings of Pseudomonas and Burkholderia, known to be found in sewage treatment plants (). [The biogas reactor contained 2% chicken manure so it can have the traits of sludge waste (. In, Pseudomonas and so rangi um have been found in sludge wastes. strep to spo rangi um and Streptomyces are commonly found in vegetable gardens (), which is quite reasonable since this is an agricultural bioreactor. Therefore, NBC potentially has found significant populations of genera that other classifiers have missed. thermo sinus is not in nbc s completed microbial training database and therefore, it did not find any matches. NBC took 21 h to run and classified all 100% of the reads compared with 12 h/23% for web carma 5 h/99% for CAMERA, 23 h/140% for Galaxy 1 , and a few weeks 2 /56.2% for mgr ast. NBC runs on a 4-core Intel machine and speed would linearly increase with distributed computing in the future.

conclusion the nave Bayes classification tool is implemented on a web site for public use. We demonstrate that the tool can handle a complete pyrosequencing dataset, and it gives the full taxonomy for each read, so that users can easily analyze the taxonomic composition of their datasets. NBC classifies every read unlike other tools and is easy to the Biogas reactor community. CAMERA and NBC tend to agree for over 70% of the genera shown while mgr ast agrees with CAMERA and NBC near 50%. web carma bins fewer s reads, and Galaxy has high variability. For the first 5602 reads (1.5 Mb web site limit), phylo pythia only classifies eight reads to the phylum level and is not included in the graph due to its inability to make assignments at the genus level. use, runs an entire dataset in a reasonable amount of time and yields competitive results.
