Non-linear calibration is a widely used method for quantifying biomarkers wherein concentration response curves estimated using samples of known concentrations are used to predict the bio-marker concentrations in the samples of interest. The R package nCal fills an important gap in the open source, stand-alone software for performing non-linear calibration. For curve fitting, nCal provides a new implementation of a robust, Bayesian hierarchical five parameter logistic model. nCal supports a simple graphical user interface that can be used by laboratory scientists, and contains functionality for importing data from the multiplex bead array assay instrumentation. Availability: The R package nCal is available from http://cran.r-pro ject org web packages ncal under GPL-2 or later. Contact: y fong fhcrc org Supplementary information: Supplementary information is available in the form of an R package vignette at the above repository and an FAQ at http://research.fhcrc.org/youyifong/en/resources/ncal.html.

introduction nonlinear calibration is a widely used method for quantifying biomarkers in biomedical studies. There are two stages in nonlinear calibration. In the first stage, a concentration response curve is estimated for each assay run using observed outcome for standard samples with known concentrations. An assay run refers to a batch of samples run closely in time and space, e.g. all samples run on a single microplate. In the second stage, point estimates and confidence bounds are estimated for the biomarker concentrations in the samples of interest. Many laboratories use commercial software for performing non-linear calibration. These include general purpose programs like GraphPad Prism and stat lia as well as assay specific programs like master plex and Bio-Plex Manager for the multiplex bead array assay, which is becoming a common assay for quantifying protein concentrations. Besides being expensive and hard to automate, these programs provide relatively simple single curve fitting methods. Furthermore, they often lack proper precision estimates for the estimated concentrations. The R package nCal provides two sets of curve fitting methods. The first, implemented through another R package drc (), is an estimating equation based method that is equivalent to those available from most existing non-linear calibration software. The second, implemented within nCal, is a robust Bayesian random effects model based approach (). It allows borrowing of information across multiple assay runs for the same biomarker, incorporates prior information regarding the curve to curve variability and provides flexible models for the experimental noise. After obtaining a curve fit via either approach, nCal estimates the biomarker concentrations in the samples of interest and computes variance estimates for the estimated concentrations. nCal does not have as extensive a graphical user interface as its commercial counterparts do, but it does contain a simple graphical user interface based on the R package g widgets that allows non r users to perform non-linear calibration. nCal also provides a function that imports data from the Excel files of Luminex  results that have been output by a Bio-Plex instrument's software.
