Motivation: The identification of functional modules from protein protein interaction (PPI) networks is an important step toward understanding the biological features of PPI networks. The detection of functional modules in PPI networks is often performed by identifying internally densely connected subnetworks, and often produces modules with  core  and  peripheral  proteins. The core proteins are the ones having dense connections to each other in a module. The difference between core and peripheral proteins is important to understand the functional roles of proteins in modules, but there are few methods to explicitly elucidate the internal structure of functional modules at gene level. Results: We propose nc mine which is a novel network clustering method and visualization tool for the core peripheral structure of functional modules. It extracts near complete subgraphs from networks based on a node weighting scheme using degree centrality, and reports subgroups as functional modules. We implemented this method as a plugin of Cytoscape, which is widely used to visualize and analyze biological networks. The plugin allows users to extract functional modules from PPI networks and interactively filter modules of interest. We applied the method to human PPI networks, and found several examples with the core peripheral structure of modules that may be related to cancer development. Availability and Implementation: The Cytoscape plugin and tutorial are available at Cytoscape app store. (http://apps.cytoscape.org/apps/ncmine).

introduction biological relationships among genes or proteins, such as gene coexpression and protein protein interactions (PPI), are modeled as interaction networks or graphs, where a node corresponds to a gene or a protein and an edge represents an interaction between the connected node pair. Interaction networks sometimes contain several densely connected subnetworks, which are recognized as functional modules (). Especially, Hartwell et al. emphasized the importance of understanding of interactions between modules when phenomenological analysis is performed. Proteins in the same subnetwork are considered to perform a specific biological task and tend to have related functions. Therefore, the detection of functional modules within a large interaction network is one of the fundamental steps to understand the biological functions of genes and proteins. The task to find functional modules in interaction networks is called the network clustering problem and many algorithms have been proposed for this purpose. For example, Newman (2006) proposed a measure of modularity called 'Q' to quantify how well a network is divided into a number of subnetworks globally, and suggested a method to map the network clustering problem to the problem of maximizing Q. They tried to identify community structures from various social and biological networks. In the biological fields developed the m code method to find protein complexes in PPI networks. The method first defines a score for each node, which reflects the connectivity of the node, and searches for groups of nodes with higher scores. With a different approach developed c finder which uses the clique percolation method (CPM) (). This method searches for k cliques (complete graphs with k nodes) and then combines the k cliques. It can detect more dense subnetworks compared with other methods, like m code proposed NeMo, which employs a hierarchy based clustering strategy and uses a log odds score reflecting the degree of sharing neighboring nodes.) and) used machine learning techniques to detect protein complexes or functional modules by a combination of topological of networks given as input data and features of known protein complexes. Graph clustering problem is one of the most hot topics in the field of computer science, and several algorithms are being developed recently (). All of these methods have distinct characteristics and could produce interesting biological modules, but they are unable to handle an important feature of biological networks, that is, overlap among modules. Careful investigations of biological networks have suggested that some functional modules in an interaction network share the same nodes (). In other words, some functional modules have overlapping regions. In the field of graph theory, this problem is called the soft clustering problem. The importance of the soft clustering problem in biological networks may be rephrased as the core peripheral structure' of functional modules (). When two tightly related protein groups share many proteins, which is typical in a signal network cascade, the two groups will be identified as a single functional module using the current hard clustering methods. From the viewpoint of a biological network, the core proteins play an important role in the module and peripheral proteins (with fewer edges) interact with a subset of core proteins and may be involved in a specific function, such as the regulation of the network. Previously proposed methods can not effectively elucidate the relationships between clusters that share proteins and produce many independent clusters when overlaps are permitted. There exists few graph clustering methods that also enables visualization of relationships between clusters. To overcome these limitations of previous methods, we developed a method called nc mine which focuses on the identification of modules in biological networks and the extraction of biologically meaningful clusters. nc mine detects functional modules from biological interaction networks by constructing 'local near cliques using a node weighting scheme based on degree centrality, and by iteratively merging local near cliques according to cluster overlap. The combination of the local cluster construction phase and the merge phase enables the detection of overlapping proteins between modules and reveals relationships among modules at the same time. The near clique is a graph structure lacking a few edges compared with the complete graph. Clique or complete graphs are mathematically well studied and easy to enumerate, but near clique searches are quite difficult to implement. Several previous studies have used clique detection algorithms to find functional modules (), but the clique is a stringent requirement for biological phenomena because some elements of functional modules may interact with only the part of the module (i.e. a subset of its members) and because experimental nose will hide some existing edges in the modules. Wu et al. first tried to find core peripheral structure for biological networks (). Wu et al. first searched for clusters and extended them to find peripheral nodes, while our methods first searched for clusters, merged the found clusters and identified core part of the overlapping clusters as described later.
