high throughput technologies can identify genes whose expression profiles correlate with specific phenotypes; however, placing these genes into a biological context remains challenging. To help address this issue, we developed nested Expression Analysis Systematic Explorer (nEASE). nEASE complements traditional gene ontology enrichment approaches by determining statistically enriched gene ontology subterms within a list of genes based on co annotation. Here, we overview an open source software version of the nEASE algorithm. nEASE can be used either stand-alone or as part of a pathway discovery pipeline. Availability: nEASE is implemented within the Multiple Experiment Viewer software package available at http://www.tm4.org/mev.

introduction numerous studies indicate that high throughput measurement of gene transcription provides the means to examine how organisms respond on a genome wide scale to experimental perturbations or to the development of pathological conditions. Analysis of the data produced by these technologies typically results in lists of genes whose expression patterns correlate with the phenotypes under study. However, placing these lists into a useful biological context remains a significant challenge. A common approach to this problem is to perform statistical assessment of categorical assignments of functional attributes () associated with genes identified in a particular analysis. Current functional enrichment algorithms can be classified into three main classes: singular enrichment * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First authors analysis (SEA); gene set enrichment analysis g sea and modular enrichment analysis me a (). Traditional SEA approaches, such as EASE () and on to express (), use a predefined list of differentially expressed genes to linearly assess the enrichment of individual gene ontology (GO) terms () in a term by term fashion with statistical methods that include chi-square, Fisher's exact test and Binomial probability. The g sea class, on the other hand, takes a no cut off approach that utilizes expression data and associated experimental values from all genes in a microarray experiment to derive enrichment scores for annotation terms. In the original g sea method, gene members of each functional category are rank ordered based on expression values to determine a maximum term enrichment score; p values are then assigned to each term by a kolmogorov smirnov like statistic (). The more recent me a class of algorithms use varied statistical methods combined with network discovery approaches that improve enrichment sensitivity and specificity by evaluating the relationships among categorical assignments (i.e. parents, children, siblings) ().
