In the past years, there has been a growing interest in methods that incorporate network information into classification algorithms for bio-marker signature discovery in personalized medicine. The general hope is that this way the typical low reproducibility of signatures, together with the difficulty to link them to biological knowledge, can be addressed. Complementary to these efforts, there is an increasing interest in integrating different data entities (e.g. gene and miRNA expressions) into comprehensive models. To our knowledge, r package net class is the first software that addresses both, network and data integration. Besides several published approaches for network integration , it specifically contains our recently published st svm method, which allows for additional integration of gene and miRNA expression data into one predictive classifier. Availability: net class is available on http://sourceforge.net/p/ net class r and CRAN (http://cran.r

introduction one of the major goals of personalized medicine is to identify molecular biomarkers that reliably predict a patient's response to therapy to avoid ineffective treatment and to reduce drug side effects and associated costs. For that purpose, prognostic and diagnostic biomarker signatures have been derived from omics data in numerous publications for various disease entities. To construct biomarker signatures typically machine learning algorithms are used, such as SVMs () and random forests (). The challenge is the extreme high dimensionality of omics data coupled with a relatively small sample size, which imposes a major need for careful feature selection. However, during the past years it has become more and more clear that classical feature selection methods, such as t test based filtering, frequently lead to signatures that are neither reproducible on a different dataset () nor biologically interpretable (). Hence, there has been a growing interest to incorporate prior information on protein protein interactions, pathways or Gene Ontology annotation into feature selection algorithms (see Cun and frohlich frohlich 2012a for an extensive review). It has been shown that such approaches can at least increase the feature selection stability and facilitate the biological interpretation of signatures (Cun and frohlich frohlich 2012b). In this article, we present our r package net class which implements five network based gene selection methods. Although there is a rich literature on general data integration, net class is, to our knowledge, the first software that allows for integrating miRNA and mRNA expression data together with protein protein interactions and mirna target gene information () into one predictive model. net class thus complements the functionality of our earlier software package path class (). It is worth emphasizing that net class focuses on classification algorithms only. A software package that is more tailored to Cox regression is cox boost (). (). The basic idea behind st svm is to smooth a feature wise marginal statistic (like the commonly used t statistic over the structure of a joint protein protein and mirna target gene interaction graph. For this purpose, a random walk kernel is used (). A permutation test is used to select features in a highly consistent manner, and then these features are used for subsequent SVM training. In our article, we demonstrated the utility of this approach on four datasets from different tumor entities and specifically showed that integration of miRNA and mRNA expression could enhance the prediction power for prostate cancer prognosis ().

conclusion net class is an r package that allows for network and data integration for biomarker signature discovery. It includes several published approaches for incorporating network information into gene selection. Moreover, net class contains our recently published st svm algorithm, which allows for additional integration of miRNA and mRNA expression data. All implemented methods can perform repeated cross validation to estimate the prediction performance. Moreover, integration of i graph facilitates the follow-up analysis of selected features via graph algorithms and plotting functions. In summary, we believe that net class provides a useful tool for biomarker signature discovery in personalized medicine.. Workflow of st svm Marginal statistics for features in each omics dataset are computed and smoothed over the structure of a joined mirna ppi network. After re ranking a permutation test selects the most relevant features and trains an SVM model. The obtained signature can be visualized as a network
