The systematic and unbiased charting of protein protein interaction (PPI) networks relevant to health or diseases has become an important and burgeoning challenge in systems biology. Further, current reports have supported that good correlation exists between the topological properties and biological function of protein nodes in networks. Coronary artery disease (CAD, also called coronary heart disease) is the most common type of heart disease worldwide. Traditional approaches of studying individual gene or protein have shown their weakness in such complex disease. Here, we provide net cad a web based tool for systematic investigation of cad specific proteins in human PPI network. The features of net cad includes the following: proposing a novel method combining biological principles and graph theory, quantified topological analysis tools, build in PPI information database consolidated from major public databases, creating cad associated subnetwork and visualizing network graph with good visual effects. net cad may provide important biological information for uncovering the molecular mechanisms and potential targets for therapies of CAD, which could not be found merely through molecular biology methods.

introduction protein protein interaction (PPI) is an important layer of connectivity between cell processes. The disturbance of pp is may result in the disturbance of the cell process to which they contribute, compromising the cell viability or even leading to cell death. With the development of high throughput screens, such as yeast two hybrid assays, affinity puri e cation coupled to mass spectrometry and synthetic lethal and syn expression great volume of PPI data has been yielded, forming complex PPI networks p pins of varied species. These large networks provide a global view of cellular function and biological processes, which might bring biological and computational researchers new opportunities and challenges. Recently, many studies indicated that the topology of p pins is intimately related to biological functions and has potential applications, such as predicting disease causing genes (), annotating genes and proteins (Jiang et al.,
