net rave is a small suite of R functions for generating dependency networks using sparse regression methods. Such networks provide an alternative to interpreting top n lists of genes arising out of an analysis of microarray data, and they provide a means of organizing and visualizing the resulting information in a manner that may suggest relationships between genes.

introduction the advent of microarray technology has spawned a plethora of statistical and machine learning methods to analyze the resulting expression data. Their ultimate aim is to guide the researcher to some understanding of how the observed patterns of gene expression are related to the phenotype being studied and to suggest hypotheses that merit further exploration. In this note, we outline net rave a two step approach to analyzing microarray data that combines a fast, sparse variable selection method, known as gene rave (), with dependency networks, an alternative to Bayesian networks developed by. net rave is a descriptive tool, whose use is facilitated by a small suite of R (R Development Core) functions that interface with the existing libraries to visualize the resulting networks. Its output is a local dependency network that encapsulates the results of the data analysis in a form that is easy to visualize and provides users with additional information about local relationships between gene transcripts. These local relationships can then be used to generate hypotheses that can lead to further experimentation.

discussion there are a few options for generating and visualizing dependency networks that are discussed in the documentation accompanying net rave and in the Supplementary Material. In our experience in analyzing this and other datasets, we have found many of the genes in a local network are also found in top n lists of differentially expressed genes obtained by, for example, modified t tests. Here, 12 of the 32 genes in appear in the to p97 list of. For example, they found that ALDH3A1 (depth 0) and CYP1B1 (depth 0) were highly up-regulated in smokers. However, the network imposes an additional structure on those lists that provides the researcher with a means of organizing and visualizing that information. The dependency network in shows other genes that were not comparatively highly up or down-regulated, yet that are related to the effects of cigarette smoking. For example, AKR1B10 is a potential diagnostic marker of non small cell lung carcinoma (), and together with other aldo keto reductase genes (AKR1C1, AKR1C2 and AKR1C3) participates in the metabolism of xenobiotics; the up-regulation of PIR, which appears at depth 1, represents one mechanism by which cigarette smoke induces apoptosis in the airway epithelium (); and many other such examples. In molecular toxicology research, it is well documented that the transcription factor aryl hydrocarbon receptor a hr also called the dioxin receptor) enhances gene transcription upon activation by polycyclic hydrocarbons such as those found in cigarette smoke (reviewed in). It is tempting to speculate that some gene linkages within the network in are due to coordinated gene expression in response to activation of a hr by cigarette smoke toxins, but the truth is inevitably more complex. Consider the effect of smoking on epithelial inflamation. Linkages between some genes such as
