The discovery of functionally related groups in a set of significantly abundant proteins from a mass spectrometry experiment is an important step in a proteomics analysis pipeline. Here we describe netweaver s (Network Weighted Averages) for analyzing groups of regulated proteins in a network context, e.g. as defined by clusters of protein protein interactions. netweaver s is an R package that provides a novel method for analyzing proteomics data integrated with biological networks. The method includes an algorithm for finding dense clusters of proteins and a permutation algorithm to calculate cluster p values. Optional steps include summarizing quantified pep-tide values to single protein values and testing for differential expression , such that the data input can simply be a list of identified and quantified peaks.

introduction the statistical analysis of protein protein interaction networks p pins in conjunction with mass spectrometry (MS) data is an effective way to find functional groups of identified proteins in large networks. Several methods for network analysis are already implemented in R, but none are specific to label free or labeled MS experiments. The package ppi stats provides tools for the analysis of p pins specifically for bait prey technologies (). de graph performs gene network differential ex statistical significance for each protein. The resulting p values for individual proteins can be used in the network analysis step, which scores highly connected subgraphs, i.e. dense clusters, with these p values. Because the need to specify many parameters can greatly impact the results, we chose a highly data driven cluster finding algorithm that requires only one parameter. Our protein and cluster scoring each require only one additional parameter.

description netweaver s provides a method for the integrated statistical analysis of MS data and biological networks. The input for netweaver s is a set of peaks from an MS experiment that has been identified, quantified and normalized. The data can be input as an r bioconductor expression set or a matrix to be converted into an expression set using custom summarizer. If the data are at the peptide level, then summarization to the protein level is required for use in netweaver s e set summarizer. This can be done before or after testing for DE (DEtest). The summarization step consists of aggregating all peptide quantities for a given protein using the mean or median so that each protein only has one value per sample. The test for DE is implemented using the linear modeling framework of the limma package (). The output of the test includes p values that may be used in the main algorithm of netweaver s run netweaver s which maps the proteins to a user specified network in node node format and performs the network analysis. The function find dense clusters uses the walk trap algorithm for finding highly connected subgraphs as implemented in the R package i graph csard i as a part of the network analysis algorithm. The clusters are scored using a weighted mean or median of log transformed p values score clusters. The weights are a function of the number of proteins with which a given protein interacts. A permutation test perm test may be carried out to determine the statistical significance of the clusters. See Supplementary File 1 for more details on the cluster scoring and the permutation test, as well as supplementary for a schematic overview of the netweaver s procedure.

application we applied the R package to MS data from a phosphorylation study of human embryonic stem cells (, see Supplementary File S1 for the experimental design). The R package vignette provided as Supplementary File S2 presents the code for summarizing the data, performing hypothesis testing and running the network analysis using the Reactome human pp in version 43 (). netweaver s identified clusters of proteins with roles in processes known to be involved in stem cell differentiation. See Supplementary File 1 for these results, results from netweaver s applied to a null dataset and an example using data that were summarized and tested in another R package.
