Motivation: Recent studies on human disease have revealed that aberrant interaction between proteins probably underlies a substantial number of human genetic diseases. This suggests a need to investigate disease inheritance mode using interaction, and based on which to refresh our conceptual understanding of a series of properties regarding inheritance mode of human disease. Results: We observed a strong correlation between the number of protein interactions and the likelihood of a gene causing any dominant diseases or multiple dominant diseases, whereas no correlation was observed between protein interaction and the likelihood of a gene causing recessive diseases. We found that dominant diseases are more likely to be associated with disruption of important interactions. These suggest inheritance mode should be understood using protein interaction. We therefore reviewed the previous studies and refined an interaction model of inheritance mode, and then confirmed that this model is largely reasonable using new evidences. With these findings, we found that the inheritance mode of human genetic diseases can be predicted using protein interaction. By integrating the systems biology perspectives with the classical disease genetics paradigm, our study provides some new insights into genotype phenotype correlations.

introduction decades of research into human genetic diseases, revolutionized by the application of innovative technologies including next generation sequencing and genome wide association study, has led to the accumulation of an impressive amount of disease gene associations (). On the other hand, the rapid development of proteomic technologies provides an extensive protein interaction map that improves our understanding of the complex genotype to phenotype relationships among human diseases and their associated genes (). This provides an opportunity to reevaluate the traditional models about human genetic diseases. An important molecular mechanism that underlies genotype to phenotype relationship is the inheritance modes, including either dominant mode that a single mutated allele of relevant gene is enough to affect or recessive mode that both mutated alleles are necessary. Although the rapid accumulation of disease gene associations and protein interaction data promise to improve our understanding of the disease inheritance mode and how it inter relates to the human diseases at a systems level, the incorporation of inheritance mode has been rarely seen in recent large scale studies. Protein network based study has been proven to be a valuable strategy for understanding the molecular mechanism underlying human diseases (). Recently, the network perturbation model has been proposed as an alternative molecular mechanism of human diseases (), arguing that the inheritance mode should also be recognized at the network level. In this model, failures in the connectivity of protein interaction network (PIN) that alter the network topology underlie human diseases. It was observed initially in Caenorhabditis elegans that mutations of gene RbAp48 can cause the loss of a subset of interactions while leaving the gene partially functional (). Subsequently, a number of studies have provided strong evidence that mutations causing specific loss of interaction, not necessarily complete loss of gene product, frequently occur in diseases (Schuster). Many disorders, such as Charcot Marie Tooth disease, Creutzfeldt Jacob disease and Alzheimer syndrome, were found to be protein interaction related diseases (). Researchers also suggested that aberrant protein interactions involving gene Htt may contribute to the pathology of Huntington (). A recent study demonstrated that in frame Mendelian disease mutations are highly enriched on protein interaction interfaces, suggesting that protein interaction plays a role in the pathogenesis of a substantial number of genetic diseases (). So far, the classical model of genotype to phenotype relationship is gene centric assuming that a mutation causes complete loss of a gene product (). However, the network perturbation model suggests that, in principle, the understanding of Mendelian inheritance should take into account of the interaction between two genes. To our knowledge, two recent studies analyzed the connection between inheritance modes of human genetic diseases and protein interactions schuster bock ler and *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals permission soup com. schuster bock ler and Bateman collected 119 known protein interaction altering mutations from scientific literatures and observed a significant enrichment of autosomal dominant (AD) mutations versus autosomal recessive (AR) mutations. Zhong et al. found that AD disorders are more frequently associated with in frame mutations than AR disorders, a mutation type that frequently leads to defective protein interaction rather than complete gene loss. Given the previous findings about the correlation between interaction and inheritance mode, it is highly probable that protein network properties can differentiate between different inheritance modes. Here, by taking advantage of comprehensive protein interaction data and a large number of Mendelian diseases with known inheritance mode, we conducted a systematic study to show the correlation between protein network and inheritance modes, and refined a likely interaction based model to explain the correlation.

discussion unlike non pathological variations and out frame disease mutations, it has been found recently that in frame disease mutations are significantly enriched on interactions interfaces (). The in frame mutations were suggested more likely to alter protein interaction and were found to be able to distinguish between AD and AR disorders (). These suggest protein network can provide novel insights into genotype phenotype correlations between different inheritance modes. We therefore analyzed a series of network properties between AD and AR inheritances and found (i) network connectivity strongly correlated with the likelihood of a gene causing AD diseases (disease risk) and the ability of a gene causing multiple AD diseases ple io tropy (ii) AD diseases are more likely to be associated with the bottleneck genes, whereas no significant schematic illustration of AD/AR genes with multiple interactions. Protein interaction can be used as a molecular basis to understand the correlation between network connectivity and AD disease, and the ple io tropy of AD disease genes, whereas it is not appropriate for explaining the ple io tropy for AR disease genes. (B) Schematic diagram of the differences between AD and AR disease genes. AD disease genes are shown as orange nodes, located in functional center of PIN as hubs, core members and bottlenecks of modules, whereas AR disease genes are shown as green nodes, segregated at the periphery of PIN, resulting in large network distances from other AR disease genes associated with different diseases network based analysis of genotype phenotype correlations correlation was found for AR diseases. To explain the results, we refined a model based on previous studies and supported with more evidence. It was argued that network based study may improve our conceptual understanding of the term ple io tropy on account of diverse disorders that result from losing different interactions of the same gene (). However, our study suggests that the ple io tropy of AR disease genes should be treated differently from AD disease genes. In addition to gene ple io tropy the clinical features may show striking variation among patients for the same dominant disorder, and in some cases, show no abnormal clinical features (). We expect that, with further systematic investigations of the relationship between human AD disorders and gene networks, this variable expressivity and reduced penetrance of dominant diseases, together with the ple io tropy would be better understood. ple io tropy is also one of the reasons that multiple diseases co occur in the same patient. Many comorbid disease pairs have been shown to share the same pleiotropic gene (). Therefore, our study may also suggest different comorbid tendencies between AD disease pairs and AR disease pairs. Because topological central genes are more essential than other genes, our results may suggest that mutations on AD genes are more likely to cause severe impairment of cell function than mutations on AR genes. In our study, the proportion of AD genes having mouse lethal orthologs are significantly higher than that of AR genes ( 2 test, P50.01). The connection with important interaction may be one of the reasons why non-lethal dominant mutations are sometimes found to cause embryonic lethality when homozygous. The results would be more consistent with the model by analyzing only loss of function mutations. For this purpose, we compiled 302 genes known to cause disease through haplo insufficiency (HI) from previous studies (). Similar results were reproduced by analyzing HI genes (Supplementary). Significantly different network properties were found between HI genes and AR genes, whereas no significantly different properties were found between HI genes and other AD genes. A recent study has also investigated the relationship between dominant and recessive mutations in interfaces with the same or different disorders (). Different with this study, we only analyzed mutation pairs in the same gene because of the small number of interactions being mapped by mutations on the corresponding interfaces of interacting proteins. The study presented some different results and suggested that AD mutation pairs on corresponding interaction interfaces of interacting proteins are not likely to cause the same disease. We suggest that, it is possibly due to the fact that tissue specific expression imposes spatial restriction on these interactions. gain of function mutations and dominant negative mutations are also important mechanisms of dominant diseases, for which the data are not currently available at a large scale. It is possible that some mutations on AD genes are associated with the gain of new interactions or that some dominant mutations give rise to altered gene product blocking the interaction of wild type gene product. Revised model taking into account of multiple mutation types would be necessary in the future study. In addition, Disease progression is also associated with mutations causing the change of other molecular interaction types such as in transcriptional networks or metabolic networks. Integration of different types of molecular interactions should further improve our understanding of the inheritance modes of genetic diseases. We believe that, as more large scale data of diverse molecular interactions and more specific disease mutations are detected, our knowledge of the genotype phenotype relationship will be highly expanded, to which we hope our study made a contribution.
