Motivation: In the developing nervous system, the expression of proneural genes, i.e. Hes1, Neurogenin-2 (Ngn2) and delta like 1 (Dll1), oscillates in neural progenitors with a period of 2–3 h, but is persistent in post-mitotic neurons. Unlike the synchronization of segmentation clocks, oscillations in neural progenitors are asynchronous between cells. It is known that Notch signaling, in which Notch in a cell can be activated by Dll1 in neighboring cells (trans-activation) and can also be inhibited by Dll1 within the same cell cis inhibition is important for neural fate decisions. There have been extensive studies of trans-activation, but the operating mechanisms and potential implications of cis inhibition are less clear and need to be further investigated. Results: In this article, we present a computational model for neural fate decisions based on intertwined dynamics with trans-activation and cis inhibition involving the Hes1, Notch and Dll1 proteins. In agreement with experimental observations, the model predicts that both trans-activation and cis inhibition play critical roles in regulating the choice between remaining as a progenitor and embarking on neural differentiation. In particular, trans-activation is essential for generation of oscillations in neural progenitors, and cis inhibition is important for the asynchrony between adjacent cells, indicating that the asynchronous oscillations in neural progenitors depend on cooperation between trans-activation and cis inhibition. In contrast, cis inhibition plays more critical roles in embarking on neural differentiation by inactivating intercellular Notch signaling. The model presented here might be a good candidate for providing the first qualitative mechanism of neural fate decisions mediated by both trans-activation and cis inhibition
introduction in the developing mammalian nervous system, it has been shown that the expression of proneural genes, i.e. Hes1, Ngn2 and Dll1, oscillates in neural progenitors. However, in immature post-mitotic * To whom correspondence should be addressed. neurons, Hes1 is downregulated, but Ngn2 and Dll1 are upregulated in a sustained manner, suggesting that oscillatory versus sustained expression of proneural genes is critical for neural fate decisions (). Additionally, Notch signaling via intercellular communication also plays important roles in neural fate decisions, i.e. activation of Notch signaling prevents cells from differentiating and plays a crucial role in maintaining neural progenitor populations during development (). Intercellular communication via Notch signaling is involved in a wide variety of processes and generally controls binary fate decisions between neighboring cells (). ligand receptor trans interactions i.e. interactions between neighboring cells, results in trans-activation and release of the Notch intracellular domain. ligand receptor interactions also take place within the same cell, i.e. cis interaction which induces the inactivation of Notch by a process called cis inhibition. Both trans-activation and cis inhibition have emerged as key regulatory mechanisms in both vertebrates and invertebrates (del). Trans-activation has been extensively investigated both experimentally and theoretically, especially in the control of vertebrate neurogenesis () and somite formation (). In contrast, the operating mechanisms and potential implications of cis inhibition are less clear and need to be further investigated. Analyzing cell fate decisions based on both transactivation and cis inhibition may have a broad impact on our system level understanding of Notch signaling and will be an important topic for future exploration (). Both oscillation and synchronization of clock genes induced by intercellular Notch signaling are necessary for normal segmentation (). However, oscillations in neural progenitors are asynchronous between neighboring cells. Progenitor cells tend to asynchronously differentiate into diverse cell types so that they can respond differently to the same environmental condition and thereby contribute to generation of diversity in the developing brain (). Both experiments and computational models have shown that intercellular Notch signaling can successfully lead to synchronized segmentation clocks (). However, synchronization can not be realized, despite the existence of intercellular Notch signaling, in neural progenitors (). It has been speculated that

discussion in contrast to the results of the substantial studies on trans-activation between Dll1 and Notch, the operating mechanisms and potential implications of cis inhibition are less clear. In this article, we present a computational model for neural fate decisions based on intertwined dynamics with trans-activation and cis inhibition involving the Hes1, Notch and Dll1 proteins. The model predicts that both trans-activation and cis inhibition play critical roles in neural fate decisions and therefore provides a good framework for the theoretical analysis of the mechanisms underlying neural fate decisions mediated by both trans-activation and cis inhibition
