Protein structure refinement is a necessary step for the study of protein function. In particular , some nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) structures are of lower quality than X-ray crystallographic structures. Here, we present nm re a web based server for NMR structure refinement. The previously developed knowledge based energy function STAP (Statistical Torsion Angle Potential) was used for nm re refinement. With STAP, nm re provides two refinement protocols using two types of distance restraints. If a user provides NOE (Nuclear Overhauser Effect) data, the refinement is performed with the NOE distance restraints as a conventional NMR structure refinement. Additionally, nm re generates noe like distance restraints based on the inter hydrogen distances derived from the input structure. The efficiency of nm re refinement was validated on 20 NMR structures. Most of the quality assessment scores of the refined NMR structures were better than those of the original structures. The refinement results are provided as a three dimensional structure view, a secondary structure scheme, and numerical and graphical structure validation scores. Availability and implementation: nm re is available at http://psb.kobic.re.kr/nmre/

introduction the determination of three dimensional (3D) protein structures is an important challenge in structural biology because structure is closely related to function. NMR (Nuclear Magnetic Resonance) spectroscopy is one method of protein structure determination, and it also provides information about the dynamics of proteins. However, protein structures determined by NMR spectroscopy are of lower quality than X-ray structures. Thus, refinement is a necessary step in NMR structure study. Three NMR structure refinement databases have been constructed: DRESS (a Database of REfined Solution NMR Structures;), re coord (REcalculated COORdinates Database;) and STAP (Statistical Torsion Angle Potential;). NMR structure refinement using the NOE (Nuclear Overhauser Effect) distance data obtained by NMR is performed in many refinement studies (). However, NOE distance data exist in various formats, such as cyan a CNS and XPLOR. Therefore, NOE data manipulation is difficult for general researchers. Another problem in improving NMR structures is the ambiguity and sparseness of NOE data (). The nm re web server provides simple and fast NMR structure refinement with noe like distance data using the
