The popularity of using NMR spectroscopy in metabolomics and natural products has driven the development of an array of NMR spectral analysis tools and databases. Particularly, web applications are well used recently because they are platform independent and easy to extend through reusable web components. Currently available web applications provide the analysis of NMR spectra. However, they still lack the necessary processing and interactive visualization func-tionalities. To overcome these limitations, we present nmr pro a web component that can be easily incorporated into current web applications, enabling easy to use online interactive processing and visualization. nmr pro integrates server side processing with client side interactive visualiza-tion through three parts: a python package to efficiently process large NMR datasets on the server side a Django App managing server client interaction, and spec draw js for client side interactive visualization. Availability and implementation: Demo and installation instructions are available at http://mamitsu kala borg tools nmr pro
introduction nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy is indispensible for structure identification of chemical compounds, becoming a crucial part of metabolomics and natural products studies. Web applications are attractive environments for analysis and storage of NMR spectra because (i) web is a platform independent highly interactive environment and (ii) existing web applications can be easily extended through integrating 'web components', such as JavaScript libraries and web services, to provide additional functionalities. Online processing and interactive visualization of spectra are necessary functionalities for all NMR web applications (). However, web applications for NMR analysis such as metabo analyst (), metabo hunter () and COLMAR () require NMR spectra to be processed offline beforehand. Also, interactive investigation of NMR spectra in databases such as hm db () requires raw spectra to be downloaded and visualized offline. Although processing and interactive visualization of NMR spectra are needed for web applications, web components providing these functionalities are still lacking. In fact, previously used Java applet components, such as j spec view () and Nemo, suffer from security concerns and require installation of additional software. Also, although the recently developed js nmr () and speck tackle () offer javascript based visualization, they have very limited processing functionalities. The development of web components for processing NMR spectra is hampered by three challenges caused by the large size of NMR spectra: (i) processing of large datasets is computationally intensive, requiring server side integration. (ii) A compressed spectral format, required for efficient transfer across the Web, is lacking we present nmr pro an open source easy to integrate web component for processing and visualization of NMR data, which is highly extensible to include new functionalities according to the needs of each application. nmr pro consists of three integrated parts, (i) Python package with extensible functionality plugins for server side spectral processing, (ii) Django App for spectral compression and managing communication between server and client sides and (iii) spec draw js a JavaScript library for visualization of 1D and 2D NMR datasets. Advantages over existing tools are summarized in the supplement (Tables S1 and S2).

conclusion we present nmr pro an extensible web component that can be easily integrated in current web applications and databases, providing NMR processing and visualization functionalities. Future work is to extend nmr pro by implementing new plugins to add further functionalities such as covariance NMR and multivariate analysis for wider application in metabolomics and natural products.
