Motivation: Association tests based on next generation sequencing data are often under-powered due to the presence of rare variants and large amount of neutral or protective variants. A successful strategy is to aggregate genetic information within meaningful single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) sets, e.g. genes or pathways, and test association on SNP sets. Many existing methods for group-wise tests require specific assumptions about the direction of individual SNP effects and or perform poorly in the presence of interactions. Results: We propose a joint association test strategy based on two key components: a nonlinear supervised dimension reduction approach for effective SNP information aggregation and a novel kernel specially designed for qualitative genotype data. The new test demonstrates superior performance in identifying causal genes over existing methods across a large variety of disease models simulated from sequence data of real genes. In general, the proposed method provides an association test strategy that can (i) detect both rare and common causal variants, (ii) deal with both additive and interaction effect, (iii) handle both quantitative traits and disease dichotomies and (iv) incorporate non genetic covariates. In addition, the new kernel can potentially boost the power of the entire family of kernel based methods for genetic data analysis. Availability: The method is implemented in MATLAB. Source code is available upon request.

introduction genome wide association studies gw ass based on single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chips have enjoyed varying degrees of success in identifying genes associated with complex diseases or traits (). It has now been widely accepted that standard g was explains at most a small fraction of the population variation of most complex traits (). Recently, deep resequencing is emerging as a new and potent means for mapping complex trait genes. Resequencing delivers orders of magnitude more variants than SNP chips and include both common variants with minor allele frequency (MAF) 10%, as well as rare variants with MAF 1%. Availability of rare variant information presents unique opportunities to evaluate the 'common disease rare variants' hypothesis. This hypothesis states that a complex disease can be attributed to multiple rare variants with relatively high risks, and it has attracted much attention in recent studies. Attesting to this hypothesis, a number of deleterious or protective rare variants have been identified for low * To whom correspondence should be addressed. plasma levels of high density lipoprotein cholesterol (), hypertension () and type i diabetes (). Identifying disease associated rare variants, however, is challenging, because a particular rare disease predisposing allele may be present in only a handful of patients. Henceforth, traditional single marker tests that capture only marginal effects are doomed to have low power. A useful strategy to address this challenge is to effectively merge information in SNP variants by some meaningful SNP sets, for instance, genes or pathways, and then to identify disease associated genes or pathways rather than disease variants. Following this idea, several aggregation based association test approaches have been developed proposed a group-wise test exploiting both multivariate and collapsing strategies that possess higher power than a simple multivariate test or simple collapsing. Madsen and extended the method by incorporating weights that depend on MAF into the group-wise statistics and approximating p values by permutations within each group. Both methods consider rare variants with MAF falling below a pre-specified threshold and exclude common variants from analysis. This separate treatment seems counterproductive because in reality both common and rare variants can be informative. The pooling strategy of circumvents the issue of arbitrarily chosen frequency threshold by calculating a group-wise statistic under a variety of thresholds. However, this strategy also has several limitations. First, environmental predictors are excluded from analysis even though they may contribute significantly to a disease. Second, interactions among SNPs can not be effectively detected. Third, the solution is sensitive to the classification of variants: if all types of variants, deleterious, protective or neutral, coexist, then various signals can cancel one another during the pooling and thus can potentially compromise statistical power proposed a SNP set genotype based statistic for rare variants and declared that the common variants and environment factors can be modeled together with the rare variant statistic in a logistic regression (LR) model. However, interactions between rare and common variants still can not be explicitly modeled in this way, and the method handles only dichotomous traits. The field of statistical dimension reduction (DR) offers a useful and appealing means for genotype aggregation. It is based on the belief that high dimensional data can be effectively summarized in a low dimensional space, and the subsequent modeling can concentrate on the reduced space. The most commonly used dimension reduction approach is principal components analysis pc a applied pc a to combine SNP information within pathways, generated the so called eigen snps and used eigen snps in subsequent association mapping. However, pc a has at least two limitations. First, pc a aggregates SNPs regardless of the phenotypic trait information. Since mapping traits to associated genes is of ultimate interest, it is intuitively desirable to aggregate SNPs under the guidance of trait information such as disease status or quantitative traits. In statistical terms, pc a is an 'unsupervised' DR solution, whereas a 'supervised' DR solution is preferred. Second, the eigen snps or principle components, are 'linear' combinations of the SNPs. As a consequence, such summary measures may fail to capture complex interacting effects among the individual SNPs, and in turn reduce the power of subsequent association mapping. In this article, we develop a powerful association mapping approach based on next generation sequencing data. Two key ingredients of the proposed method are a statistical DR that achieves supervised and nonlinear reduction, and a new kernel that is based on Markov chain theory and particularly suitable for qualitative SNP data. Our contributions are mainly 2-folds. First, the proposed association mapping approach simultaneously takes into account (i) both rare and common variants, (ii) both additive and interaction effect, (iii) quantitative traits as well as disease dichotomies and (iv) non genetic covariates. Second, the commonly used kernels, such as Gaussian, polynomial and spline, work successfully with continuous attributes, but may perform poorly for discrete genetic data. The proposed new kernel is specially designed for discrete attributes and can effectively capture the similarity between individual genotypes. Moreover, the new kernel is novell y derived from powerful Markov chain theory and can benefit many kernel based learning methods in general. We compare our proposal with some state of the art aggregation and mapping solutions and find that our method clearly achieves superior power in a variety of different genetic model scenarios. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes our proposed association mapping, including kernel based nonlinear DR and construction of new kernels. Section 3 presents numerical studies comparing various aggregation and association mapping solutions. Section 4 concludes the article with a discussion and suggests potential future extensions.

discussion ideally an association test should be able to handle: (i) high dimensionality of genomic dataset, which typically far exceeds the sample size; (ii) both rare and common variants; (iii) additive, recessive and dominant models of gene action; (iv) both quantitative traits and disease dichotomies and (v) non genetic covariates. Most of existing solutions could not deliver across the board judged by all those criteria. To bridge the gap, we have proposed a strategy based on nonlinear supervised DR and a new kernel to effectively aggregate genotype information. Such an aggregation increases the likelihood of detecting multiple causal variants, whereas nonlinear reduction permits complex interactive relationship among genetic variants. Moreover, the GLM framework based on the aggregated features can naturally handle both quantitative and categorical traits, and incorporate non genetic predictors and or environmental variables. Finally, the proposed WF kernel based on Markov chain theory for genotype data has been proven useful compared with some existing kernels and can potentially benefit a wide range of kernel methods, such as kernel pc a support vector machines and nonparametric and semiparametric regressions.
