Non-covalent residue residue contacts drive the folding of proteins and stabilize them. They may be local ie. involve residues that are close in sequence, or non-local. It has been suggested that, in most proteins, local contacts drive protein folding by providing crucial constraints of the conformational space, thus allowing proteins to fold. We compared residues that are involved in local contacts to residues that are involved in non-local contacts and found that, in most proteins, residues in non-local contacts are significantly more conserved evo-lutionarily than residues in local contacts. Moreover, non-local contacts are more structurally conserved: a contact between positions that are distant in sequence is more likely to exist in many structural homologues compared with a contact between positions that are close in sequence. These results provide new insights into the mechanisms of protein folding and may allow for better prediction of critical intra chain contacts.

introduction the importance of local versus non-local contacts is debated: The folding of a peptide chain into a biologically active 3D structure is driven primarily by the non-covalent interactions between atoms from different amino acids (). Not all the non-covalent interactions in a protein are equally consequential for folding and stabilization of the structure. Identifying the interactions that drive folding and distinguishing them from non-critical interactions is a key to understanding protein folding. A common distinction that is often mentioned in this context is between local interactions, namely those that occur between residues that are adjacent in sequence, and non-local ones. The relative importance of local versus non-local interactions for protein folding and stability is bitterly debated for 435 years. Experimental and theoretical analyses of their respective importance give conflicting results (). An earlier study that was based on computer simulation of models of proteins on a two dimensional lattice concluded that non-local interactions are critical for folding (). Around the same time, however, other studies relied on theoretical and experimental results to propose that folding is determined primarily by local interactions (). This view was later supported by several studies that suggested that local interactions dominate folding (). Other studies used statistical mechanical models to suggest that the importance of non-covalent interactions is defined more by their physical nature (e.g. hydrophobic versus electrostatic) than by the sequence separation of the participating residues (). Notwithstanding, numerous studies have continued to argue that the sequence separation is a relevant feature for distinguishing between more and less important interactions. With the growth of protein structure databases and the advent of computational methods, more sophisticated analyses were applied to larger datasets. One computational analysis determined that the contribution of local interactions to the stability of the native state is small (), while another study concluded that fold ability of a sequence is determined primarily by local interactions (). In several large scale analyses, the notion of interaction was replaced by that of a contact, namely analysing all pairs of residues that are close enough in space to allow for an interaction between them. plax co Simons and Baker () linked the distribution of local and non-local contacts to folding rate. They used the relative contact order (CO), which is the average sequence distance between all pairs of contacting residues in a chain. Higher CO indicates more non-local contacts, while lower CO indicates that more of the contacts are local. They analysed the CO of few dozen single domain proteins and concluded that proteins with lower CO fold more rapidly than ones with higher CO (). A common interpretation of these results is that the ratio of local to non-local contacts in a protein determines the kinetics of folding. A recent analysis suggested that local and non-local contacts have significantly different effect on the folding rate (). Most of the above studies are based on an attempt to directly assess the contributions of different interactions to folding based on various energetic models, and in some cases on incidental experimental analysis of a small set of proteins. The different results may be ascribed, at least to some extent, to the difference in the models and techniques used in the assessment. Here, we propose to use the wealth of sequence and structure data to tackle this question in a different way. Rather than attempting *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y These authors contributed equally to this work.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com to explicitly assess the energetic contribution of each type of intermolecular interaction to the folding and stability of the chain, we propose to indirectly assess their importance through their evolutionary and structural conservation. We assume that positions that form contacts that are more critical for folding and stability of the proteins are likely to be more conserved. This approach enables large scale analysis of all known structures and does not require theoretical models and approximations that may or may not faithfully represent the physical reality of protein folding. We checked whether there are significant differences in evolutionary conservation between local and non-local contacts in the native structure of proteins. We found that in the vast majority of proteins with known 3D structure, non-local contacts are more conserved than local ones. Furthermore, the average conservation of residues that are involved in non-local interactions is significantly higher than that of proteins involved in local interactions. Analysis of the structural similarity between homologous structures allowed us to assess the structure conservation of individual residues. This was done by checking how often the position of the residue is structurally aligned in structural homologues. Using a proper background, we were able to show that residues that are involved in non-local contacts are more likely to be structurally conserved compared with residues that are involved in local contacts. Furthermore, the non-local contacts themselves are more conserved than their local counterparts. These differences indicate that residues that are involved in non-local contacts are less tolerant to substitutions and structural changes than residues that are involved in local contacts. Together, they offer a new perspective in the discussion about the importance of local and non-local contacts to protein folding and stability.

discussion conceivably the higher conservation of non-local contacts compared with local ones may simply be the result of other, already known, characteristics of protein structure. For example, it is well established that buried residues tend to be more conserved than exposed ones (; franz osa and Xia, 2009;). Possibly, non-local contacts may involve more buried residues, while local contacts may occur more frequently between residues that are accessible to solvent. If true, this may be reflected in the average conservation of each of these groups of contacts. However, when we calculated the correlation between the accessible surface area of the residues involved in contacts and their entropy, we found a rather weak correlation coefficient of 0.34. In a more direct analysis, we created equal accessibility sets (see Section 2) such that the local and non-local interactions set have the same distributions of solvent access i bilities. In this comparison, the difference remained highly significant, though smaller in magnitude (P-values51.7  10 5 for entropy, see Supplementary). Using relative accessibility gave similar results (Supplementary). Another possible source for the difference may be the number of spatial neighbours of each residue. Residues involved in non-local contacts may be involved, on average, in more contacts than other residues, and such 'hubs' may also be more conserved than other residues. To control for this possible effect, we created an Equal accessibility equal neighbours set (see Section 2). Again, non-local contacts were significantly more conserved even when we controlled for number of spatial neighbours (see Supplementary). We also checked whether the differences we observed between local and non-local contacts may stem from using multi-domain proteins, from using the DALI structural alignment algorithm or from bias toward a specific structural class of proteins. Although in some cases smaller number of alignments reduced the statistical significance, the trend of greater structural conservation of non-local contacts remained clear in all cases (see Supplementary Tables S1S3). As an illustration we bring the example of non fluorescent flavoprotein (PDB 1nfp highlights in red residues that participate in contacts that are highly structurally conserved (i.e. high f contacts ) in this protein. The average f contacts of all local contact (i.e. between residues that are 512 positions apart) was 0.11, which is less than a half of the average for non-local contacts (between residues that were 420 positions apart), which was 0.25. As can be clearly seen in, most of the highly conserved contacts are between residues that are distant in sequence (in this case 420 residues apart), while only a few may be considered local (512 residues apart). It seems that the non-local contacts stabilize interactions between helices and within sheets. In both categories, some of the residues are buried and others are exposed. Thus, using a non-redundant version of all proteins with known 3D structure, we showed that non-local contacts are, on average more conserved both evolutionarily and structurally. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first time that such differences have been observed and statistically assessed. The difference between these two classes of contacts can stem from a variety of structural or evolutionary factors. One possible explanation may be that the contribution of non-local contacts to the folding or to the stabilization of the native structure is greater than that of local contacts. This claim is consistent with the predictions made based on polymer statistics that a longer polymer chain is less likely to have contacts between its ends than shorter chains (). Therefore, in order to ensure the existence of a non-local contact, there might be a higher need to conserve the residues providing such a contact. This hypothesis is supported by several recent experimental observations that found that non-local native interactions are being formed in very early stages of the folding process (). They are also consistent with the conjecture that formation of such interactions in the early stages of folding reduce the configurational entropy of the chain and consequently accelerates folding. If true, these results may be useful in devising structure prediction tools and in protein engineering.
