Motivation: Nucleosomes are the basic elements of chromatin structure. They control the packaging of DNA and play a critical role in gene regulation by allowing physical access to transcription factors. The advent of second generation sequencing has enabled landmark genome wide studies of nucleosome positions for several model organisms. Current methods to determine nucleosome positioning first compute an occupancy coverage profile by mapping nucleosome enriched sequenced reads to a reference genome; then, nucleosomes are placed according to the peaks of the coverage profile. These methods are quite accurate on placing isolated nucleosomes, but they do not properly handle more complex configurations. Also, they can only provide the positions of nucleosomes and their occupancy level, whereas it is very beneficial to supply molecular biologists additional information about nucleosomes like the probability of placement, the size of DNA fragments enriched for nucleosomes and or whether nucleosomes are well positioned or fuzzy in the sequenced cell sample. Results: We address these issues by providing a novel method based on a parametric probabilistic model. An expectation maximization algorithm is used to infer the parameters of the mixture of distributions. We compare the performance of our method on two real datasets against Template Filtering, which is considered the current state of the art. On synthetic data, we show that our method can resolve more accurately complex configurations of nucleosomes, and it is more robust to user defined parameters. On real data, we show that our method detects a significantly higher number of nucleosomes. Availability: Visit

introduction the study of the processes governing gene regulation is a central problem in molecular biology. One of the key factors influencing gene expression is the complex interaction between chromatin structure and transcription factors. The fundamental unit of chromatin is the nucleosome, composed of 146  1 bp of DNA wrapped 1.65 turns around a protein complex of eight histones. To elucidate the role of the interactions between chromatin and transcription factors, it is crucial to determine the location of the nucleosomes along the genome. In general, the more condensed the chromatin, the harder it is for transcription factors and other DNA binding proteins to access DNA and carry out their tasks. * To whom correspondence should be addressed the more accessible is the DNA, the more likely surrounding genes are actively transcribed. The presence (or the absence) of nucleosomes directly or indirectly affects a variety of other cellular and metabolic processes like recombination, replication, centromere formation and DNA repair. A handful of experimental techniques have been developed for genome wide mapping of nucleosomes. For instance, one can enrich for genomic regions that are either bound to histones (typically via chromatin immuno-precipitation or ChIP) or for genomic regions that are free of nucleosomes (linkers). For instance, MAINEs m nase assisted Isolation Nucleosomal Elements) () isolates the portions of the DNA that are attached to nucleosomes, because m nase preferentially digests linker regions. Then, microarrays chip chip or sequencing chips eqm nase seq are applied to the enriched DNA. In this article, we concentrate on the analysis of sequencing data, given the prevalence of m nase chips eq experiments in the recent literature. The computational analysis of the sequencing data usually consists of two main steps: (i) a nucleosome occupancy coverage is computed from the process of mapping nucleosome enriched sequenced reads to a reference genome, followed by some normalization steps and (ii) nucleosomes are placed according to the peaks of the coverage profile. Approaches based on peak calling are computationally fast and quite accurate in resolving isolated (stable or arrayed ) nucleosomes; however; they are not entirely reliable when more complex nucleosome configurations are present. Observe that while it is physically impossible for two nucleosomes to be 'overlapping' on the same location on a DNA strand, it is quite common that the population of cells from which the enriched DNA was obtained had nucleosomes slightly off sync at a given genomic coordinate (transient interaction). As a consequence, the resulting coverage profile will exhibit a 'blurring' of the peaks. Molecular biologists distinguish the case of 'overlapping' nucleosome from 'fuzzy' nucleosomes or 'fuzzy' regions (see). For overlapping nucleosomes, the overlap is relatively small; in the 'fuzzy' case, several nucleosomes are mutually overlapping for a significant fraction of their size (see Zhang and Pugh 2011 for a review). By introducing a threshold parameter on the allowed overlap, one can define precisely the line between 'fuzzy' and 'overlapping'. Another shortcoming of peak calling approaches is that they can only report nucleosome positions and or occupancy level. Molecular biologists, however, need additional information about nucleosomes. For instance, they are interested in the level of 'fuzziness' in certain genomic locations with respect to coding regions (i.e. well positioned for all the cells in the sample, or blurred or how strong is the binding between nucleosomes and DNA. To address these shortcomings, we propose a method that determines the accurate position of the nucleosomes independently from the amount of overlaps in the nucleosomes. This method can also extract other important statistics about nucleosomes, e.g. the probability that a nucleosome is actually present, a measure of nucleosome 'fuzziness', and the size of DNA fragments enriched for nucleosomes. Here, we propose a parametric probabilistic model for nucleosome positioning, which we called NOrMAL, for NucleOsome Mapping ALgorithm. NOrMAL uses Expectation Maximization (EM) to infer its parameters. To demonstrate the performance of our method, we report experimental results on maine seq data for Plasmodium falciparum () and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (). We compare the performance of our method against the Template Filtering (TF) algorithm (), which is considered the current state of the art in terms of accuracy and ability to estimate sizes of the DNA fragments bound to nucleosomes. We also discuss a fundamental limitation of greedy peak calling approaches in the case of overlapping nucleosomes and how our method addresses this issue.

conclusion we described a parametric probabilistic model for nucleosomes positioning framed in the context on a modified Gaussian mixture model. Our method directly addresses the challenges imposed by overlapping and fuzzy nucleosomes, their detection and the inference of their characteristics. We demonstrated with a synthetic example that the current state of the art method does not properly handle complex overlapping configurations. We have also shown that NOrMAL is significantly more robust to user defined parameters. On real data, our method detects a higher number of nucleosomes. Although our method is currently slower than TF, the processing time is still modest compared to other steps in the sequencing pipeline and we believe the efficiency of NOrMAL can be improved.
