Motivation: Chimeric RNA transcripts are generated by different mechanisms including pre mrna trans splicing chromosomal translocations and or gene fusions. It was shown recently that at least some of chimeric transcripts can be translated into functional chimeric proteins. Results: To gain a better understanding of the design principles underlying chimeric proteins, we have analyzed 7,424 chimeric RNAs from humans. We focused on the specific domains present in these proteins, comparing their permutations with those of known human proteins. Our method uses genomic alignments of the chimeras, identification of the gene gene junction sites and prediction of the protein domains. We found that chimeras contain complete protein domains significantly more often than in random data sets. Specifically, we show that eight different types of domains are over-represented among all chimeras as well as in those chimeras confirmed by rnase q experiments. Moreover, we discovered that some chimeras potentially encode proteins with novel and unique domain combinations. Given the observed prevalence of entire protein domains in chimeras, we predict that certain putative chimeras that lack activation domains may actively compete with their parental proteins, thereby exerting dominant negative effects. More generally, the production of chimeric transcripts enables a combinatorial increase in the number of protein products available, which may disturb the function of parental genes and influence their protein protein interaction network.

introduction the splicing of mRNAs is an essential aspect of eukaryotic gene expression. This process can occur in cis, within a single pre mrna or in trans, between two different pre mrnas in the latter case, chimeric transcripts are generated (). Chimeric transcripts can also be produced by other mechanisms, including gene fusion (), recombination and other mechanisms (). The defining property of a chimeric RNA transcript is a fusion of transcripts from at least two discrete genes. The pioneering observations evidencing the joining of sequences from separate genes were made in trypanosomes (), though similar events have been shown to occur * To whom correspondence should be addressed in nematodes () and higher eukaryotes (). More recently, chimeric transcripts were demonstrated also in flies (). In the case of the fly mod gene (mdg4), the independently transcribed pre mrnas are formed a chimeric transcript with exons from the sense and antisense strands of the mod genomic region. Other genes in fruit fly incorporate both sense and antisense exons, such as lola genes (). In the mosquito, chimeric transcripts were found to involve internal exons from genes at different chromosomal loci (). In mammals, chimeric transcripts are frequently associated with cancer (). Indeed, abnormal MYC mRNA transcripts, a ubiquitous feature of tumor cells, typically involve one or more exons from another gene spliced to exon 2 of MYC (). Additionally, fusion genes that arise from chromosomal rearrangements have been found in an expressed sequence tag (EST) library () and in a more recent study, chimeric proteins were identified in different human cell lines (). The interesting empirical evidence of human chimeras made up of two genes () was supported in a subsequent study of the human cholesterol acyltransferase 1 (ACAT-1) hybrid mRNA (), in which mapped the 5 Untranslated Region (5 UTR) of this gene was mapped to Chromosome 7 and the remaining sequence to Chromosome 1 (). paired end RNA sequencing of human cancer cell lines led to the discovery of tissue specific converging, diverging and overlapping mRNA chimeras (). Finally, high throughput sequencing of fruit fly mRNAs identified chimeric transcripts with complex genomic architecture (). Although, a large variety of chimeras have been described at the RNA level, there are still only a few examples in humans, where it has been shown empirically by mass spectrometry experiments that the chimeric RNAs produce corresponding chimeric proteins (). Some examples of chimeric proteins found in tumors, are those that result from recurrent chromosomal translocations, which can be found in different patients with the same tumor type (). Although several studies have addressed the potential influence of local sequence features on such recurrence (), the design principles of chimeric proteins still remain unclear, for examples the preferential incorporation of a full protein domain from the parental protein. To better understand the design principles underlying chimeric proteins, here, we present an analysis of a data set of 7,424 human chimeric transcripts (). Recently, the expression of 175 chimeras in this data set was confirmed by high throughput RNA sequencing (). We focused on protein domains present in the chimeric transcripts and compared their permutations to those contained in protein coding transcripts generally found in humans. We found that chimeras contain complete protein domains significantly more often than would be expected if gene or exon splicing were assumed to be a random process. Specifically, we show that at hook gtp eft u MHC, SH2, SH3, tyr kc EF-h domains and WD40 repeats are over-represented among chimeras. Moreover, we discovered that some chimeras potentially encode proteins with novel and unique combinations of domains. Given the observed prevalence of entire protein domains in chimeras, we predict that certain putative chimeras with missing activation domains may actively compete with their parental proteins, thereby exerting dominant negative effects. Interestingly, fusion proteins produced by chromosomal translocations in cancers also incorporate the tyrosine kinase tyr kc Runt, at hook (DNA binding), n up repeats (nuclear signals) and coiled coil domains. Therefore, we propose that production of chimeric transcripts may produce active competition with original proteins and produce dominant negative phenotypes in cancer. Finally, it must be noted that chimeras can drive diversification of a given transcriptome offering the opportunity to acquire novel functional proteins.

discussion here we show that chimeras are particularly enriched in eight types of protein domains. In conjunction with our earlier study, our data raise the possibility that chimeras result not only in altered cellular localizations due to a sizable enrichment in transmembrane domains frenkel morgenstern et al., submitted for publication), but also in the acquisition of a number of other new functions. Using the ELM resource, the position and length of each domain within a given protein was assigned and annotated. Thus, the domain composition and domain order relative to the protein sequence was readily available for each protein, allowing us to identify unique and novel domain combinations in chimeras. Of note, as many chimeras have been evidenced by multiple ESTs (and Supplementary Material), we propose that some chimeras may be produced by regulated trans splicing and have functional advantages. Elucidating the possible trans splicing mechanisms, in humans, remains as a promising field of research. In this study, we focused on chimeras in frame and chimeras confirmed by RNA sequencing experiments (). For all chimeras confirmed by rnase q and in frame we predicted the protein domains they contained and compared the permutations of domain pairs to those found in all proteins or in random data sets. Using this approach, we identified novel domain pairs that are unique to chimeras, which incorporate transcription factors as parental genes. Given the fact that even low expression of mutated transcription factors can interfere with the function of the wild type transcription factor, we propose that many chimeras exert dominant negative phenotypes. Taking into consideration the protein domains identified in the fusion proteins, we propose that dominant negative effects of fusion proteins may be frequent in cancer. Moreover, chimeras may influence the protein protein interactions of parental genes in the protein interaction network. Thus, chimeras with domains from the highly connected proteins will produce more consequences than chimeras from less connected proteins. Taking in consideration, the recent findings on the highly expressed genes incorporated in the human chimeras (), and the fact that highly expressed genes tend to have more protein protein interaction partners (), we propose that chimeras can influence the protein protein interaction network of the parental genes. Having validated the existence of chimeric proteins in eukaryotes, we stress the need to take chimeric proteins into consideration when carrying out experimental studies of protein cellular localization. Moreover, the potential dominant negative effect of chimeras should be taken into account when protein protein interactions are studied. Finally, we suggest that future studies investigate if chimeric RNAs represent useful biomarkers for the early diagnosis of different different cancers.
