Motivation: Numerous annotations are available that functionally characterize genes and proteins with regard to molecular process, cellular localization, tissue expression, protein domain composition, protein interaction, disease association and other properties. Searching this steadily growing amount of information can lead to the discovery of new biological relationships between genes and proteins. To facilitate the searches, methods are required that measure the annotation similarity of genes and proteins. However, most current similarity methods are focused only on annotations from the Gene Ontology (GO) and do not take other annotation sources into account. Results: We introduce the new method bios im that incorporates multiple sources of annotations to quantify the functional similarity of genes and proteins. We compared the performance of our method with four other well known methods adapted to use multiple annotation sources. We evaluated the methods by searching for known functional relationships using annotations based only on GO or on our large data warehouse bio my n. This warehouse integrates many diverse annotation sources of human genes and proteins. We observed that the search performance improved substantially for almost all methods when multiple annotation sources were included. In particular, our method outperformed the other methods in terms of recall and average precision.

introduction similarity search plays an important role in biological, pharmaceutical and medical investigations. For instance, the introduction of the BLAST algorithm by to search for similar sequences has been considered a milestone in genomics (). Other similarity search methods to mine databases of 3D molecule conformations have been important for drug discovery (). In addition, the growing availability of annotations that characterize genes and proteins () opens the new possibility to find biological relationships by similarity searches based on function, domain composition, disease association, tissue expression, etc. For example, the identification of similarly annotated genes and proteins can reveal new gene disease associations (To whom correspondence should be addressed.
