Motivation: More and more evidences have indicated that long noncoding RNAs ln crnas play critical roles in many important biological processes. Therefore, mutations and dysregulation s of these ln crnas would contribute to the development of various complex diseases. Developing powerful computational models for potential disease related ln crnas identification would benefit biomarker identification and drug discovery for human disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention. Results: In this article, we proposed the assumption that similar diseases tend to be associated with functionally similar ln crnas. Then, we further developed the method of Laplacian Regularized Least Squares for l ncrna disease Association lrl sld a in the semi supervised learning framework. Although known disease– l ncrna associations in the database are rare, lrl sld a still obtained an AUC of 0.7760 in the leave one out cross validation, significantly improving the performance of previous methods. We also illustrated the performance of lrl sld a is not sensitive (even robust) to the parameters selection and it can obtain a reliable performance in all the test classes. Plenty of potential disease l ncrna associations were publicly released and some of them have been confirmed by recent results in biological experiments. It is anticipated that lrl sld a could be an effective and important biological tool for biomedical research. Availability: The code of lrl sld a is freely available at http://asdcd. amss accn software details 2
introduction it is well known that genetic information is stored in protein coding genes, which are referred to as the central dogma of molecular biology (). Therefore, RNA is only considered to be an intermediary between a DNA sequence and its encoded protein during a considerable long period (). Recent studies have shown that protein coding genes account for only a small fraction of the human genome ($1.5%). In other words, 498% of the human genome does not encode protein sequences (). Especially, it has been observed that the proportion of non protein coding sequence increases with the complexity of organisms (). These facts challenge forementioned traditional view of RNA. Furthermore, accumulating evidences have shown that non-coding RNAs nc rnas normally play a critical role in various biological processes. Specially, long noncoding RNAs ln crnas are a class of important nc rnas with the length 4200 nt (;). In the past few years, increasing number of ln crnas have been discovered in eukaryotic organisms ranging from nematodes to humans with the rapid development of both experimental technology and computational methods (). It has also been shown that the expression levels of ln crnas appear to be lower than protein coding genes (), and some ln crnas have high tissue specificity (). Accumulating evidences have indicated that plenty of ln crnas play critical roles in many important biological processes, including transcription, translation, splicing, differentiation, epigenetic regulation, immune responses, cell cycle control and so on (). Therefore, mutations and dysregulation s of ln crnas are associated with a broad range of human diseases (), such as cancers (), cardiovascular diseases () and neurodegeneration diseases (). For example, l ncrna hot air PCA3 and UCA1 have been treated as potential biomarker of hepatocellular carcinoma recurrence (), prostate cancer aggressiveness (van) and bladder cancer diagnosis, respectively (). Therefore, identifying potential human disease related ln crnas can facilitate not only the understanding of molecular mechanisms of human disease at l ncrna level, but also biomarker identification for human disease diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention (). So far, plenty of studies have generated a large amount of l ncrna related biological data about sequence, expression, function and so on. These datasets *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com have been stored in some publicly available databases, such as n red (), l ncrna db (), non code (). However, only relatively few l ncrna disease associations have been reported. Developing powerful computational models based on these datasets to predict potential disease l ncrna associations on a large scale has been treated as one of the most important topics of ln crnas and diseases. Computational model can provide most promising l ncrna disease associations for further experimental validation, hence decrease the time and cost of biological experiments. In the previous work, we have manually collected experimentally reported disease l ncrna associations and constructed the first l ncrna disease association database, l ncrna disease (http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/lncrnadisease) (). This database has included 4480 l ncrna disease associations, $208 ln crnas and 166 diseases and laid the solid data fundament for l ncrna related predictive research. Furthermore, we obtained an important conclusion that ln crnas tend to be related to the same disease as their genomic neighbor genes and developed a simple l ncrna disease association prediction method based on the genomic context of a given l ncrna (). The conclusion obtained in this study laid the solid theoretical fundament for disease l ncrna association prediction research. Based on this conclusion, various disease related l ncrna prediction methods can be developed. In this article, we logically extended the basic assumption in the previous disease microrna (miRNA) association prediction research () and proposed the following assumption for disease related l ncrna prediction: similar diseases tend to be associated with functionally similar ln crnas. Based on this assumption and the fact that selecting ln crnas that are not related to the given disease is currently difficult or even impossible, we developed a computational model of Laplacian Regularized Least Squares for l ncrna disease Association lrl sld a in the semi supervised learning framework. This method prioritizes the entire lnc rnao me for disease of interest by integrating known phenom el ncrna ome network obtained from the database of l ncrna disease disease similarity network and l ncrna similarity network. lrl sld a is a global approach that can rank candidate disease l ncrna pairs for all the diseases simultaneously. In the leave one out cross validation loo cv lrl sld a obtained the reliable AUC of 0.7760, demonstrating superiority performance of lrl sld a to previous methods and potential value for disease related l ncrna prediction and biomarker detection in the diagnosis, treatment, prognosis and prevention of human disease. We also classified test samples of l ncrna disease associations into distinct classes, and lrl sld a obtained reliable performance in different test classes. Plenty of potential disease l ncrna associations were publicly released for experimental verification. Some of the associations have been confirmed by recent results in biological experiments.
