non ribosomal peptide synthetases nrps s are multi modular enzymes, which bio synthesize many important peptide compounds produced by bacteria and fungi. Some studies have revealed that an individual domain within the nrps s shows significant substrate selectivity. The discovery and characterization of non ribosomal peptides are of great interest for the biotechnological industries. We have applied computational mining methods in order to build a database of nrps s modules that bind to specific substrates. We have used this database to build a hidden Markov model predictor of substrates that bind to a given NRPS. Availability: The database and the predictor are freely available on an easy to use website at www nrps spcom
introduction non ribosomal peptide synthetases nrps s are multi modular enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of natural products. A minimal NRPS module contains specific functional domains which are able to catalyze several activities, such as amino acid adenyl ation a activation thio esterification t thiol ation or acyl carrier domain) and peptide bond formation c condensation domain), allowing elongation of the nascent peptide (). The primary composition of the final product is determined by the sequential order of the a domains along the synthetase, because each a domain recruits a particular type of substrate. The crystal structure of the peptide synthetase grs a which was solved with a bound, a phenylalanine substrate molecule, has enabled the identification of 10 key residues in the a domain which are important for the substrate binding (). Accordingly, these residues can be determinant in the substrate specificity of a domains and their extraction from characterized a domains has achieved a collection of key residues signatures and general rules for deducing substrate specificity of non characterized a domains (). Moreover, machine learning techniques have been applied to build a classifier based on 20 key residues and on the physico-chemical properties of amino acids to gain prediction power (). Consequently, software tools and databases have been developed to collect NRPS products, such as NORINE () and nr psp ks (), and to predict * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the binding substrates of an NRPS such as nr psp ks (), np searcher (), pks nrps Analysis () and NRPSPredictor2 (). These prediction websites are mainly based on the generally accepted rule of analysing the active site within the a domains. However, it is known that this approach has difficulties analysing certain types of synthetases, especially those which belong to fungi species. Problems can be caused because the grs a crystal seems to be an inadequate model for them jen ke kodama and Dittmann 2009), or because the large number of sequence variants in the active centre does not allow a correct extraction of the key residues for prediction. This observation suggests the interest of developing new prediction methods supported by other approaches. One of these approaches could be the use of hidden Markov model (HMM) as have applied to functionally classify the acyl coa synthetase super-family members. This work suggests that the application of HMM profiles to classify this superfamily outperforms the predictions based on a limited number of active site residues (). The methods stated above can also be applied to a more ambitious goal, such as the determination of the substrate that binds to an adenyl ation domain. The current omics era has enabled the exponential growth of the sequenced NRPS. This implies that a tool which could predict the specificity of their A domains is of increasing interest, and its training could be beneficial with the new annotated NRPS. These facts, the previous experience of our group in the area, and the cited publications, have enabled the presented work, whose ultimate goal is to develop a new bioinformatic tool in order to achieve the collection, annotation, storage and prediction of substrates, which bind to adenyl ation domains in nrps s. This open software tool applies a new approach in the areas of, the prediction based on HMM, enlarged training sets applying mining techniques, the regular update of its database and its design for the functional analysis of incoming NGS data.
