Motivation: Mass spectrometry based it raq protein quantification is a high throughput assay for determining relative protein expressions and identifying disease biomarkers. Processing and analysis of these large and complex data involves a number of distinct components and it is desirable to have a pipeline to efficiently integrate these together. To date, there are limited public available comprehensive analysis pipelines for it raq data and many of these existing pipelines have limited visualization tools and no convenient interfaces with downstream analyses. We have developed a new open source comprehensive it raq analysis pipeline, OCAP, integrating a wavelet based preprocessing algorithm which provides better peak picking, a new quantification algorithm and a suite of visual iz sation tools. OCAP is mainly developed in C++ and is provided as a standalone version ocap standalone as well as an R package. The R package (OCAP) provides the necessary interfaces with downstream statistical analysis. Availability: OCAP is freely available and can be downloaded at

introduction accurate identification and quantification of protein expressions are crucial in developing new diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic products for the treatment of various diseases. With the introduction of isobaric quantification technologies, such as it raq and TMT, researchers are able to determine relative expressions of thousands of proteins simultaneously. However, analysis of it raq data remains a very challenging task. Typical workflow of it raq data analysis can be viewed as two major components, the preprocessing of the data and higher statistical analysis. The first component can be further divided into three main stages: (i) spectrum peak picking; (ii) peptide and protein identification; and (iii) protein quantification. The second component consists of quality control, and higher level statistical analyses such as identification of differentially expressed proteins and prediction. Some and or all of the components are usually combined in an analysis pipeline. Currently, there are several pipelines designed for other purposes, e.g. to pp () for label free quantification, max quant () for sila c analysis. However, there are a limited number of public available pipelines specifically * To whom correspondence should be addressed. designed for it raq from the initial preprocessing phase right through to higher level statistical analysis, and existing pipelines include the trans proteomic Pipeline (TPP;), multi q () and msn base (). Many existing open source pipelines that support it raq focus primarily on preprocess sing of it raq data and offer limited visualization tools for efficiently exploring the data, e.g. TPP pipeline. As the eventual aim of it raq analysis includes identifying differentially expressed proteins and finding biomarkers for good prediction outcome, it is important that the output from the three main stages from the preprocessing component is effectively integrated with major statistical softwares such as R, SPSS and SAS to facilitate downstream analyses. To this end, we have developed a new comprehensive it raq data analysis pipeline with the three main stages of the first component forming a standalone software. In addition, we have provided an r interface (OCAP) of this software that includes additional visualization tools for exploring the data. This interface also provides easy access to the suite of downstream analytical packages including limma (), pa mr () and isoBar ().

conclusion being open source, OCAP can be easily extended and modified to fit specific analyses. It provides an alternative workflow to the TPP pipeline. OCAP also incorporates a range of visualization tools for exploring the it raq data and a convenient interface to many downstream analyses, greatly facilitating the understanding of the underlying biological problem.
