Motivation: The evolution of resistance in Plasmodium falciparum malaria against most available treatments is a major global health threat. Population genetics approaches are commonly used to model the spread of drug resistance. Due to uncommon features in malaria biology, existing forward time population genetics simulators can not suitably model Plasmodium falciparum malaria. Results: Here we present o garak a population genetics simulator for modelling the spread of drug resistant malaria. o garak is designed to make malaria simulation computationally tractable as it models infections, not individual parasites. o garak is also able to model the life cycle of the parasite which includes both haploid and diploid phases and sexual and a sexual reproduction. We also allow for the simulation of different inbreeding levels, an important difference between high and low transmission areas and a fundamental factor influencing the outcome of strategies to control or eliminate malaria.

introduction malaria is a major public health concern, as one third of the human population is estimated to be exposed to the threat of the most virulent species, Plasmodium falciparum. Antimalarial drug resistance has emerged as one of the major challenges facing malaria control. Drug resistance became widespread to most first line therapies and treatment failures are now being observed for their replacements, Artemisinin Combination Therapies (ACTs) (). Mathematical and computational models of the spread of drug resistance are an important tool to understand the emergence and spread of drug resistance. Most mathematical and computational modelling of malaria have been based on epidemiology (e.g.) or population genetics (e.g.), though complex simulation models have also been developed (). While many forward time population genetics simulators do exist (e.g.), they are not suitable to model malaria, therefore all existing computational studies using a population genetics approach are based on applications and scripts * To whom correspondence should be addressed. developed for each study and not directly subjected to peer review or publicly available. Standard individual based forward time population genetics simulators are not suitable to model malaria biology for two main reasons: (i) population size in malaria can rise up to 10 12 parasites per human host, making it computationally infeasible to simulate all individuals and (ii) the malaria life cycle includes both haploid and diploid phases and most existing simulators do not allow for the modelling of different genotypic structures over time. In order to address these issues, we developed o garak a population genetics simulator designed to study the spread of drug resistance in p falciparum malaria.

discussion o garak is able to easily simulate most existing population genetics models studying the spread of drug resistance in malaria. It is made available as a public framework which can be used to evaluate new models or re-use old ones for new analysis. For instance, it was already used and tested to research the impact of epistasis on linkage disequilibrium between loci involved in drug resistance () and can also simulate, from a population genetics perspective, promising drug deployment strategies (). We focused on modelling how resistance spreads and not de novo emergence, given that emergence is a rare event and that it is already widespread to most drugs, therefore making the management of existing resistance a major concern. Nonetheless o garak supports mutation, therefore permitting the study of de novo emergence. While o garak was developed with malaria modelling in mind, epistasis and spacial and temporal selection patterns have clear parallels with some known models in sex theory (), as temporal selection heterogeneity is the fundamental concept behind the red queen Hypothesis, and spacial selection heterogeneity has also been proposed as one explanation for sex and recombination. o garak can, therefore, be used to easily simulate and test some models relevant to sex theory. o garak can serve as a framework to more easily evaluate drug deployment policies and help enhance the understanding of fundamental variables underlying the spread of drug resistant malaria.
