Motivation: Quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) is one of the most widely used methods to measure gene expression. Despite extensive research in qPCR laboratory protocols, normalization and statistical analysis, little attention has been given to qPCR non detects those reactions failing to produce a minimum amount of signal. Results: We show that the common methods of handling qPCR non detects lead to biased inference. Furthermore, we show that non detects do not represent data missing completely at random and likely represent missing data occurring not at random. We propose a model of the missing data mechanism and develop a method to directly model non detects as missing data. Finally, we show that our approach results in a sizeable reduction in bias when estimating both absolute and differential gene expression. Availability and implementation: The proposed algorithm is implemented in the R package, non detects. This package also contains the raw data for the three example datasets used in this manuscript. The package is freely available at http://mnmccall.com/software and as part of the Bioconductor project. Contact:

introduction quantitative real time PCR (qPCR) () remains the gold standard for measuring gene expression due to a combination of greater sensitivity and lower cost than gene expression microarrays or rna sequencing. It is commonly used to validate results from high throughput studies and to develop clinical biomarkers. Recently, qpcr based technologies have been developed to simultaneously measure thousands of transcripts, e.g. the TaqMan open array real time PCR Plates contain 3072 wells. These plates have been used, for example, to simultaneously measure the expression of all microRNAs in a sample. The increased use of qPCR () has prompted research examining qPCR laboratory protocols () and more recently normalization () and statistical analysis strategies (). In 2009, the Minimum Information for Publication of Quantitative real time PCR Experiments mi qe guidelines were published. These guidelines are designed to 'encourage better experimental practice, allowing more reliable and unequivocal interpretation of qPCR results' (). Briefly, qPCR is used to measure the expression of a set of target genes in a given sample through repeated cycles of sequence specific DNA amplification followed by expression measurements. Between subsequent cycles, the amount of each target transcript approximately doubles during the exponential phase of amplification. The cycle at which the observed expression first exceeds a fixed threshold is commonly called the threshold cycle (Ct) or quantification cycle (Cq). The latter is the mi qe preferred nomenclature but is not currently widely used. These Ct values represent a quantitative assessment of gene expression and are often treated as the raw data for subsequent analyses. However, relatively little attention has been given to handling non detects those reactions failing to attain the prespecified minimum signal intensity. Currently, there is no consensus manner in which to handle these non detects in subsequent analyses. The default in the Applied Biosystems data assist v3.0 software is to set non detects equal to the number of PCR cycles performed (typically 40). One has the option of setting a lower Maximum Allowable Ct Value to which any greater value is set or excluding these values from subsequent calculations (Life). integro mics real time stat miner distinguishes between two types of non detects undetermined values are those that do not exceed the Ct threshold and absent values are those for which no reaction occurred. real time stat minder handles non detects by setting undetermined values to a maximum Ct (e.g. 40) and absent values to the median of the detected replicates (). Researchers have also developed their own methods to handle non detects that combine filtering and thresholding, for example, summarizing replicates with a value of 40 when the majority are non detects and with an average of the detected Ct values otherwise ().

discussion in this manuscript, we have shown that the default procedure of replacing qPCR non detects with the maximum PCR cycle number (typically 40) introduces a large bias in subsequent inference. We have carefully examined the nature of non detects and shown that they likely represent data missing not at random. Furthermore, we have shown that many non detects represent an amplification failure rather than a true Ct value 440. Finally, we propose a relatively simple EM algorithm and show that it is able to greatly reduce the bias caused by non detects. The flexibility of our approach allows one to easily tailor the method described here to one's own analyses. Specifically, one could easily use a different normalization procedure or perform a more complex statistical analysis. Additionally, any analysis based on imputed values (rather than direct estimation of a parameter of interest) would benefit from a multiple imputation procedure.
