Contact: ognjenarandjelvoicg mailcom This article concerns my publication Discovering hospital admission patterns using models learnt from electronic hospital records, which has recently appeared in Bioinformatics ar and jel ovi c, 2015a) and the comments regarding its contributions made thereafter by lopez campos et al. (2016). lopez campos et al. (2016) begin by observing a mismatch between the descriptions of certain ICD codes as stated in my article ar and jel ovi c, 2015a) and those published by the World Health Organization. This observation is correct and, needless to say, while I greatly regret the error, I am genuinely grateful for having this brought to my attention so that a timely erratum can be published. It is important to stress that the mismatch in question in no way affects the main content of the article, its contribution, or any of the results: the method described in the original publication does not use any semantic information about the codes and their meanings are stated merely for the sake of illustration and context. The unfortunate error in the description of the codes is likely to have taken place in the editing stages of the original article when the presentation and the content of the relevant table and the related information in the text underwent changes several times. More pertinent to the actual methodological contribution of my work are the opinions of lopez campos et al. (2016) on the manner in which the aforesaid codes are used and in particular what lopez campos et al. (2016) refer to as the intended use and the spirit of the codes. There are several arguments which speak against this stance. First, on the fundamental philosophical level, the intention behind the design per se is inherently inconsequential. Rather the relevant question is whether the codes, such as they are, contain the structure and information which permit prediction. The results I present which show that the proposed method achieves far better prediction than more primitive models adapted
