Motivation: For samples of unrelated individuals, we propose a general analysis framework in which hundred thousands of genetic loci can be tested simultaneously for association with complex phenotypes. The approach is built on spatial clustering methodology, assuming that genetic loci that are associated with the target phenotype cluster in certain genomic regions. In contrast to standard methodology for multilocus analysis, which has focused on the dimension reduction of the data, our multilocus association clustering test profits from the availability of large numbers of genetic loci by detecting clusters of loci that are associated with the phenotype. Results: The approach is computationally fast and powerful, enabling the simultaneous association testing of large genomic regions. Even the entire genome or certain chromosomes can be tested simultaneously. Using simulation studies, the properties of the approach are evaluated. In an application to a genome wide association study for chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, we illustrate the practical relevance of the proposed method by simultaneously testing all genotyped loci of the genome wide association study and by testing each chromosome individually. Our findings suggest that statistical methodology that incorporates spatial clustering information will be especially useful in whole genome sequencing studies in which millions or billions of base pairs are recorded and grouped by genomic regions or genes, and are tested jointly for association.

introduction in the search for disease susceptibility loci (DSLs), genome wide association studies g was have been a successful instrument for the identification of replicable genetic associations (). For most complex diseases and phenotypes, they discovered numerous genetic associations that can be validated in independent populations, although the genetic effect sizes of the loci are relatively small. Despite the large number of detected loci, g was association signals are only able to explain a small fraction of the overall predicted heritability (), i.e. the phenomenon of 'missing heritability'. One possible explanation for this phenomenon is 'synthetic associations'(). Simulation studies, theoretical considerations and empirical evidence () suggest that genetic associations, as they are detected by g was can be caused by multiple rare variants (RVs). Because common variants are poor proxies for RVs or are not in linkage disequilibrium (LD) with rare disease causing variants, it may be difficult to identify or characterize rare DSLs in g was data. Another plausible explanation for the phenomenon of 'missing heritability' is insufficient statistical power due to the multiple testing problem. In a g was millions of genetic loci are tested individually for association with the target phenotype, and the test results have to be adjusted for multiple comparisons, leading to extremely small p value thresholds for overall statistical significance. The standard approach has been aimed to increase the sample size of g was as much as possible. For example, several meta analyses of gw ass () have contained the data of 4100 000 study subjects. However, such large sample sizes hold the danger of increased study heterogeneity and do not necessarily lead to increased statistical power. The fundamental issue with the standard analysis approach to g was (single locus association testing and adjustment for multiple comparisons) is that an increase in genomic resolution, i.e. adding more and more genetic loci to the analysis, does not increase the probability to detect DSLs, but diminishes the statistical power of the approach. To address this issue, multilocus tests have been suggested. For example, gene based analysis has been advocated () to complement allelic association analysis of single locus. This is motivated by the idea that causal variants for one disease tend to reside in proximity to each other and variants in adjacent regulatory regions are more likely to have functional relevance (). PLINK (*To whom correspondence should be addressed.), the versatile gene based test (VEGAS) test () and the LASSO regression method for g was () have been proposed. Later on proposed a gene wide significance gw is test, which estimates the number of independent effects within a gene. For next generation sequencing data, methods that aggregate over a set of RVs to search for associated genomic regions with the disease status are shown to be more powerful than single locus approaches, e.g. the cohort allelic sums test (CAST) (), the combined multivariate and collapsing (CMC) method (), the weighted sum statistic by Madsen and Browning (), the kernel based adaptive clustering kb ac test (), the sequence kernel association test (SKAT) (), replication based test (RBT) () and so forth. There are several advantages of such gene based tests over single loci tests. First, collapsing the small effects across the variants within a gene could give larger effect size to detect the association. Second, due to the smaller number of genes to be tested, the multiple testing problem is reduced. Moreover, the associations of genes across different populations can be directly compared even though there could be different LD patterns within the genes across the populations (). However, most of the approaches can handle only a limited number of genetic loci, i.e. typically 5100. None of them is able to incorporate the information about the physical location of the loci and their clustering. In this article, we are proposing a novel approach called the Bin test that can test a large genomic region for association with the target phenotype by taking into account the physical location of the variants that show evidence for association and their physical clustering. The genomic region can refer to one gene, a specified segment of the genome, a pathway, an entire chromosome or the complete genome. The approach is computationally fast and applicable to binary and complex phenotypes. The methodology is evaluated in simulation studies using a g was dataset from the copd gene study and is applied to several collaborating chronic obstructive pulmonary disease (COPD) genetic studies. The simulation studies and the application results suggest that the approach has sufficient power to test simultaneously all genotyped loci on the entire genome or a specific chromosome.
