Recent major cancer genome sequencing studies have used whole genome sequencing to detect various types of genomic variation. However, a number of these studies have continued to rely on SNP array information to provide additional results for copy number and loss of heterozygosity estimation and assessing tumour purity. on co snp seq is a statistical model based approach for inferring copy number profiles directly from high coverage whole genome sequencing data that is able to account for unknown tumour purity and ploidy.

introduction many cancers are characterized by complex structural rearrangements involving copy number alterations (CNAs) and or losses of heterozygosity (LOH) events (). Genetic abnormalities in specific regions may be related to the aggressiveness of a cancer and be associated with clinical outcomes (). on co snp seq is a statistical model based approach for identifying CNAs and LOH events directly from next generation sequencing data that builds on the on co snp tool for SNP array analysis (). The statistical model used differs from previous methods such as bic seq (), control free c () and apollo hhmm copy () by addressing three major issues in the analysis of cancer samples: (i) normal cell contamination, (ii) intra tumour hetero genie ty and (iii) polyploidy, within a fully integrated statistical framework for using both read depth and allele specific information in high coverage experiments. In the following, we describe the statistical model and its application to a publicly available normal cancer cell line dataset, simulated mixtures and a heterogeneous cancer.

conclusion on co snp seq is a tool for automatic detection of CNAs and LOH regions using high coverage (60 and above) whole genome sequencing data. high coverage data allows allele specific information to be utilized, and, in the case of tumour samples, on co snp seq uses this information to evaluate the level of contamination by normal cells as well as allowing for degrees of intra tumour heterogeneity. The formal assessment of the accuracy of this latter capability will need to be ascertained using independent assays, e.g. FISH, in future studies. For polyploid tumours, on co snp seq provides a probabilistic means of evaluating different ploidy configurations. The software is written in MATLAB, and the source codes are freely available for modification, re-engineering or incorporation into genomic analysis pipelines.. Tumour purity estimation and copy number loh discordance for simulated normal cancer mixtures
