Motivation: Gene fusions resulting from chromosomal aberrations are an important cause of cancer. The complexity of genomic changes in certain cancer types has hampered the identification of gene fusions by molecular cytogenetic methods, especially in carcinomas. This is changing with the advent of next generation sequencing, which is detecting a substantial number of new fusion transcripts in individual cancer genomes. However, this poses the challenge of identifying those fusions with greater oncogenic potential amid a background of passenger fusion sequences. Results: In the present work, we have used some recently identified genomic hallmarks of oncogenic fusion genes to develop a pipeline for the classification of fusion sequences, namely, onc of use. The pipeline predicts the oncogenic potential of novel fusion genes, calculating the probability that a fusion sequence behaves as driver of the oncogenic process based on features present in known oncogenic fusions. cross validation and extensive validation tests on independent data-sets suggest a robust behavior with good precision and recall rates. We believe that onc of use could become a useful tool to guide experimental validation studies of novel fusion sequences found during next generation sequencing analysis of cancer transcriptome s. Availability and implementation: onc of use is a naive Bayes Network Classifier trained and tested using Weka machine learning package.

introduction one of the most common types of somatic mutation in the human cancer gene census involves chromosomal translocations that fuse two different genes, resulting in a chimeric transcript (). It is estimated that $20% of all cancers are caused by gene fusions driven by chromosomal translocations (), and the number of reported clinical cases is growing rapidly. There is compelling evidence that fusions represent an initial event in oncogenesis () and play an important role in aggressive cancer cases (). Many gene fusions are translated as fusion proteins with oncogenic potential due to the presence of protein domains that are normally located in separate proteins. Examples of recurrent fusions are BCR-ABL1, which is present in chronic myeloid leukemia cases (), or TMPRSS2ERG, found in prostate cancers (). Most chromosomal translocations involved in cancer cases are described in several databases. For example, hundreds of gene fusions associated with clinical reports are included in Mitelman database (http://cgap.nci.nih.gov/Chro-mosomes/Mitelman), although it does not contain sequence data. Our database of fusion sequences tic db (; http://www.unav. es genetic ati cdb allows the precise mapping of breakpoint positions and facilitates analysis of the structure of fusion genes. Another database, chimerDB2.0 (; http://ercsb.ewha.ac.kr:8080/FusionGene/), contains several thousand putative fusions predicted solely from sequences present in publicly available databases. Owing to the complex type of rearrangements sustained by the genomes of solid tumors, most gene fusions have been identified and characterized in hematological (HEM) neoplasms. However, novel next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies coupled with sophisticated algorithms allow the detection of gene fusions with extraordinary sensitivity even in solid tumors: some reliable predictions detect fusion junctions at50.05 sequencing reads per million (). It is reasonable to expect that this unprecedented sensitivity will lead to the discovery of hundreds of novel and rare fusion sequences in various cancer types, raising the question of how many of these mutations are important for cancer development and not just passenger events. This is even more relevant in the context of emerging data obtained from high throughput studies (), which demonstrate the presence of fusion transcripts in normal cells, as had been suggested in earlier studies (). To solve this issue, a deep understanding of fusion driven oncogenesis is required. The enrichment of certain combinations of functional domains and domain families in gene fusions has been highlighted by previous studies (). Likewise, we have recently identified some genomic hallmarks of oncogenic fusion genes using information from public databases (). In addition to promoter or untranslated region (UTR) swapping that leads to well known expression changes in fusion proteins, these hallmarks include the combination of specific protein domains and protein interaction interfaces pi is with novel oncogenic functions, as well as features related to replication timing. We reasoned that this set of features could be used to predict the oncogenic potential of novel fusion sequences found in tumor *To whom correspondence should be addressed. samples. In this work, we present onc of use a robust Bayesian classifier that identifies fusion genes that could be have as 'drivers' of the oncogenic process, based on their shared properties with known oncogenic fusions. A previous work by represented the first attempt to distinguish 'driver' and 'passenger' mutations by incorporating interactome, pathway and Gene Ontology (GO) information to rank the genes under consideration. Here, we have followed a different approach, as our goal is to predict whether a given fusion sequence is 'driver'. In this regard, our tool is focused on fusion sequences, whereas previous strategies were gene centered (predicting whether a gene is likely to undergo a fusion). Notably, a recent article deals with the problem of distinguishing 'driver' and 'passenger' missense point mutations (not gene fusions) using a classifier trained on a large number of protein sequence features from positive and negative sets (). Although not directly comparable with our pipeline, that study highlights the potential of classification strategies for the identification of 'driver' mutations in cancer.

discussion it is estimated that $20% of all cancers are caused by gene fusions driven by chromosomal translocations (), but it is reasonable to predict that this figure will increase during the next years, as more samples from solid tumors, notably EPI, will be analyzed with NGS technologies. Sequencing of cancer transcriptome s will yield large lists of chimeric fusion genes, and it will be a challenge to identify which of those are actually contributing to the initiation or progression of cancer. The oncogenic role of gene fusions, like other types of mutations, is usually judged by their recurrence: if they are found in different samples or in different tumor types they are considered to be important for cancer development. However, this view is probably over simplistic considering recent findings showing that many mutations important for cancer development are 'private' (i.e. non recurrent because the same biological pathways can be inactivated by mutations in different genes (). Furthermore, it is unclear that all recurrent fusion sequences must necessarily be oncogenic. For instance, we found four recurrent fusions in NGS data from cancer cells that were also present as natural read through transcripts in normal cells. It is reasonable to predict that the increasing use of rnase q to interrogate cancer genomes will yield 'recurrent' fusions that will turn out to be passenger events, rendering recurrence a weaker argument for oncogenic potential. Therefore, it is necessary to develop tools to reliably predict the oncogenic potential of gene fusions that play a significant role in cancer development, regardless of whether they are recurrent. In this article, we present onc of use a novel algorithm that provides an accurate classification of 'driver' and 'passenger' fusion genes with probability estimates, which could be of great help to rank fusions detected by NGS in tumor samples and thus prioritize experimental validation studies. A summary of the analysis pipeline used in this study is presented in Supplementary. Building on our previous identification of several genomic hallmarks of oncogenic ('driver') fusion sequences, we generated a carefully selected set of genomic features that were used to train a Bayesian classifier showing good precision and recall rates in cross validation studies. Thus, when a researcher is faced with a list of fusion genes detected by NGS studies in cancer genomes, onc of use will extract the same set of genomic features and will return a p value for the probability that each fusion in the list is 'driver', as well as some additional information about its functional profile. We observed that functional profiles of fusion proteins provide a substantial amount of information on whether a fusion is likely to be 'driver'. Molecular functions related to TF, transcription co-factor, kinase, histone modification, protein isomerization and gtpase related are enriched in 'driver' fusion proteins. This is consistent with our previous observations in HEM malignancies () and seems to be a common hallmark of all 'driver' gene fusions, regardless their tissue of origin (NGS#1 and NGS#2 datasets used in this study are exclusively of EPI origin). This is a important point because it justifies the use of the same classifier for fusions from different sources by adjusting only gene expression features. The fact that tissue specific expression patterns of 5' fusion partner genes are robustly replicated for the three tissues examined in this study helps to explain that onc of use assigns more significant p values in the tissue where a fusion was identified compared with other tissues. Thus, even though the original features used to construct the classifier were based on insights taken mostly from HEM malignancies, onc of use will also classify gene fusions from MES and EPI cancers if expression data of both partner genes are provided. Although there are a few algorithms for the identification of chimeric fusion sequences in NGS data, the only attempt (to the best of our knowledge) to distinguish 'driver' from 'passenger' rearrangements was performed by chinna i yan and colleagues in 2009 (). However, our strategy is different in several important aspects. First, Wang et al. made their predictions based on the properties of entire partner genes, such as GO annotations and their position in the interactome, whereas we use features retained or lost in fusion genes (or in the proteins encoded by them). These features, like the loss of specific protein domains, the co occurrence of domain combinations or promoter and 3 0-UTR swapping, could yield information that is not correctly described by simply summarizing the annotations of the parent genes (Frenkel). Moreover, we show that the analysis of protein domains yields meaningful functional signatures that allow the distinction between driver and passenger gene fusions. Another important difference is that our pipeline takes into account expression data, as changes in the expression of partner genes are common in gene fusions (). Notably, among the top 60 genes identified by Wang et al. as those more likely to undergo a fusion, there is a 13-fold enrichment for CGC protooncogene s not reported to be involved in translocations, whereas protooncogene s present in Mitelman database (i.e. involved in translocations) are enriched only 10-fold. This suggests that their predictions (some of which have been validated experimentally) are biased towards known oncogenes, whether involved in fusions or not. Although our approach might also be affected by this bias in favor of known oncogenes (50% of CGC oncogenes are predicted to be 'driver',), we have tried to minimize this problem by including features that are retained or lost as a result of the fusion; therefore, the predictive accuracy of our pipeline should be even better. Even though these results support a robust behavior of the classifier, we set out to validate it in various ways using results from several independent datasets containing several thousand fusions reported in recent NGS and est mrna studies. We found that they were moderately but significantly enriched in predicted 'driver' fusions, whereas only a small number of false positives were found among chimeric transcripts identified in normal cells. Likewise, those datasets with more confident gene fusion predictions showed a higher percentage of fusions classified as 'driver' by onc of use. Furthermore, pathway analysis showed that fusions predicted to be 'driver' in these datasets involve genes that participate in key oncogenic pathways. For example, we found that many predicted 'driver' fusions could lead to oncogenesis by disrupting normal cell adhesion, which is one of the hallmarks of cancer (). This is an interesting finding, especially given the fact that the datasets analyzed were obtained mostly from EPI tissues in which this pathway plays a significant role in carcinogenesis (Martin). Finally, we were able to test the performance of onc of use in new datasets that have been made available since its construction. First, onc of use would have correctly classified 79% of the gene fusions published in cancer samples in this period (until April 2013). Second, we tested the classifier on the lists of candidates detected by gene fusion detection algorithms in rnase q studies. Although the real number of gene fusions with oncogenic properties in such datasets is unknown, because only a few candidates are tested experimentally, fusions with support from published experimental studies were given higher probabilities of being 'driver'. In summary, we present a robust Bayesian classifier supported by extensive validation studies. We believe that onc of use could become a useful computational tool to aid in the prediction of the oncogenic potential of novel fusion genes detected by NGS in the transcriptome s of cancer samples. In this way, it should help to prioritize which candidates should be tested experimentally and thus speed up the identification of novel fusion genes with a relevant role in the diagnosis, classification and treatment of cancer patients.
