on dex Web is a new web based implementation of the network visualization and exploration tools from the on dex data integration platform. New features such as context sensitive menus and annotation tools provide users with intuitive ways to explore and manipulate the appearance of heterogeneous biological networks. on dex Web is open source, written in Java and can be easily embedded into Web sites as an applet. on dex Web supports loading data from a variety of network formats, such as xg mml NWB, paje k and o xl. Availability and implementation:

introduction the integrative approach to systems biology studies the interactions between molecular or cellular components to understand how a behavior or phenotype might emerge from the properties or structure of the interactions. This approach generally requires data from diverse sources to be integrated and analyzed together. It is common in systems biology to adopt network formalisms to represent, visualize and explore interaction information, and a number of web based applications are available for the visualization of biological networks (). A well known example is Cytoscape Web (); version 1 of which is implemented using flex actionscript and a JavaScript API. Cytoscape Web can visualize small to medium sized networks, (i.e. a few hundred nodes and edges). The visual styles (e.g. color, size and opacity) of nodes and edges can be dynamically changed by the client. However, loading of data and customization of its appearance in Cytoscape Web require extensive JavaScript programming skills. We have previously developed the on dex software suite () www on de xorg to provide a general framework for the integration of heterogeneous biological data. We describe here a new implementation of the visualization software from the on dex suite that enables integrated networks and associated quantitative data to be presented in a web browser. This enables delivery of results from pre integrated datasets to end users as featured in the qtl net miner system (http:// on dex rothamsted ac uk qtl net miner and overcomes the significant obstacle encountered by many biologists of installing and learning complex data integration software system. on dex Web has been built as a Java applet, reusing proven functions and plugins from the on dex desktop application. This results in a richer repertoire of functions for exploring and manipulating heterogeneous information networks () than currently available in Cytoscape Web. on dex Web provides new features not described before, including easy to use search functions for loaded data and across web services (e.g. ch embl UniProtKB). The network appearance can be changed using dedicated plugins, and another new feature is the extensive context sensitive menus on nodes and edges (). on dex Web has direct support for loading data in common network formats such as cytoscape s xg mml (), NWB (NWB, 2006), paje k (). The on dex desktop application can be used to prepare datasets integrated from a large range of input formats (see http://ondex.org/formats.html) and exported in o xl format () for use in on dex Web. Example data sets are available for download (http://ondex.org/doc.html).

conclusion heterogeneous biological networks require good exploration and visualization tools. on dex Web is free, open source and can easily be embedded on Web sites to visualize networks. It comes with a rich and intuitive set of functions to explore and manipulate biological networks. For an example application of on dex Web, visit qtl net miner (http://ondex.rothamsted.ac. uk qtl net miner where it is used to visualize evidence networks supporting candidate gene selections. Funding: Rothamsted Research receives grant in aid from the Biotechnology and Biological Sciences Research Council (BBSRC). BBSRC SABR award (BB/F006039/1) and TSB project (TP 5082-33372). Conflict of Interest: none declared.
