Bio3D-web is an online application for analyzing the sequence, structure and conform-ational heterogeneity of protein families. Major functionality is provided for identifying protein structure sets for analysis, their alignment and refined structure superposition, sequence and structure conservation analysis, mapping and clustering of conformations and the quantitative comparison of their predicted structural dynamics. Availability: Bio3D-web is based on the Bio3D and Shiny R packages. All major browsers are supported and full source code is available under a GPL2 license from http://thegrantlab.org/bio3d-web.

introduction many structures are now available for homologous proteins determined under different crystallization conditions and oligomerization states. Detailed comparison of these structures can inform on structural dynamic mechanisms critical for protein function including ligand binding, enzymatic catalysis, allosteric regulation and bimolecular recognition. A wide range of bioinformatics tools and online servers enable researchers to explore and analyze individual biomolecular structures. Notable examples include molecular visualization, pairwise structural alignment and biophysics based tools including various normal mode analysis servers (). However, existing tools for detailed quantitative analysis of the sequence, structure and dynamics of large heterogeneous protein families often require significant computational expertise and typically remain accessible only to expert users with relevant programming skills. For example, the Bio3D package requires R (), prod y requires python and Maven requires Matlab knowledge (). A recent contribution to making such analysis more widely available online is the pdb flex database (). pdb flex catalogues the structural variation of the same protein (PDB structures sharing 95% or more sequence identity). However, more in depth interactive analysis of user defined structure sets across species and diverse protein families is not currently available. To this end we have developed Bio3D-weba web application that implements a complete workflow for user customized investigation of protein sequence structure dynamic relationships. Bio3D-web provides unparalleled online functionality including intercon former relationship mapping with principal component analysis pc a and quantitative comparison of predicted internal dynamics across protein families via new ensemble normal mode analysis en ma. Together with conventional sequence and structure analysis methods these approaches allow researchers to map the structural dynamic properties of proteins for which PDB structures are available. Bio3D-web requires no programming knowledge and thus decreases the entry barrier to performing advanced comparative sequence, structure and dynamics analysis. Bio3D-web is powered by the previously described Bio3D R package for structural bioinformatics (). In particular, Bio3D approaches for identification of related protein structures, multiple alignment, rigid core identification, optimal superposition, pc a and en ma form the basis of the application (Supplementary). Structure and sequence annotations are derived from the RCSB PDB () and PFAM databases (). Bio3D-web employs shiny s reactive programming and web application framework to provide its interactive online interface (Shiny, http://shiny.rstudio.com).
