Motivation: Data collection in spreadsheets is ubiquitous, but current solutions lack support for collaborative semantic annotation that would promote shared and interdisciplinary annotation practices, supporting geographically distributed players. Results: on tomato n is an open source solution that brings ontology lookup and tagging capabilities into a cloud based collaborative editing environment, harnessing Google Spreadsheets and the n cbo Web services. It is a general purpose, format agnostic tool that may serve as a component of the is a software suite. on tomato n can also be used to assist the ontology development process. Availability: on tomato n is freely available from Google widgets under the c pal open source license; documentation and examples at: https://github.com/ISA-tools/OntoMaton.

introduction well annotated and shared bioscience research data offer new discovery opportunities and drive science of the future. Several data management plans and sharing policies have emerged, along with a growing number of community developed guidelines and ontologies to harmonize the reporting of experiments from different domains so that these can be comprehensible and in turn, reproducible and reusable. In many research projects however, the generation and collection of experimental data occur in a multicentric, distributed fashion; and a variety of data types are generated often in a single experiment. Use of spreadsheets and related editors, such as Microsoft Excel for collecting experimental description is widespread among researchers due to their flexibility, low learning curve and above all ubiquity of tooling. However, misalignment, conflicting versions, the heterogeneity of free text, and also silent and unwanted auto corrections are major shortcomings to be addressed (). This scenario and the current budgetary restrictions require 'invest to save' solutions to promote consistent annotation and collaborative editing of bioscience experiments, assisting researchers in complying with reporting policies and community standards. on tomato n is an open source tool that leverages the collaborative environment and editing functionalities brought by Google Spreadsheets, and provides access to ontology look-up and tagging functionalities served by the n cbo bio portal and Annotator web services ().

discussion developed by harnessing the Google Spreadsheet environment and the term lookup and annotation power of the n cbo Web services, on tomato n is an effective tool assisting both collaborative semantic annotation of experiments and the ontology development process. Several annotation tools exist () but not all have support for community driven guidelines and ontologies, and none of them allow collaborative annotation. Moreover, excel based tools (Jones and cote cote cote 2008) tend to be platform and version dependent. Google Spreadsheets on the other hand work across all platforms. A comparison of tools attempting to mix spreadsheets with access to vocabulary servers is available at http://goo.gl/NV3lZ. Ongoing development of on tomato n focuses on: (i) transformation of data into the Resource Description Framework and Linked Data; (ii) support for cell level, vocabulary drop down list as soon as the Google API supports it; and (iii) further integration with the is a software suite as requested by users.
