Motivation: Identification of post translationally modified proteins has become one of the central issues of current proteomics. Spectral library search is a new and promising computational approach to mass spectrometry based protein identification. However, its potential in identification of unanticipated post-translational modifications has rarely been explored. The existing spectral library search tools are designed to match the query spectrum to the reference library spectra with the same peptide mass. Thus, spectra of peptides with unanticipated modifications can not be identified. Results: In this article, we present an open spectral library search tool, named p match. It extends the existing library search algorithms in at least three aspects to support the identification of unanticipated modifications. First, the spectra in library are optimized with the full peptide sequence information to better tolerate the peptide fragmentation pattern variations caused by some modification(s). Second, a new scoring system is devised, which uses charge dependent mass shifts for peak matching and combines a probability based model with the general spectral dot product for scoring. Third, a target decoy strategy is used for false discovery rate control. To demonstrate the effectiveness of p match a library search experiment was conducted on a public dataset with over 40 000 spectra in comparison with spectra st the most popular library search engine. Additional validations were done on four published datasets including over 150 000 spectra. The results showed that p match can effectively identify unanticipated modifications and significantly increase spectral identification rate.

introduction liquid chromatography coupled with tandem mass spectrometry lcms ms is the key experimental method for large scale protein identification. In this method, proteins are digested into peptides, which are then ionized and dissociated in a mass spectrometer. The mass to charge ratios (m/z) and the intensities of the resulting product ions are measured to produce MS/MS spectra. To identify the peptides and proteins, sequence database search has achieved great success in the past years, and a variety of search tools have been developed, e.g. se quest (), Mascot () and p find (). Such an approach is implemented by comparing the similarities between the experimental spectra and the theoretical spectra predicted from peptide sequences in a database. Unfortunately, due to insufficient understanding of the factors that determine peptide fragmentation, most current search tools employ simplified fragmentation models, such as the uniform backbone dissociation model, leading to many unidentified or misidentified spectra. In recent years, with the availability of millions of confidently identified MS/MS spectra, an alternative as well as complementary approach called spectral library search has emerged. Its essential idea is to build a library of experimental reference spectra rather than theoretically predicted ones. Since this approach was first introduced to the field of protein identification by, the last decade has witnessed a group of mass spectral library search tools, such as spectra st (), NIST ms pep search (http://peptide.nist.gov/), biblio spec (), x hunter (), prom ex (), hm match () and ms dash (). Compared to the sequence database search, the spectral library search takes advantage of the previously obtained knowledge and has three obvious merits. First, improved sensitivity. Spectral library search takes into account the fragmentation pattern individually for each experimental spectrum. It yields more discriminative match scores than does the sequence database search. Second, high search speed. Experiments show that in shotgun proteomics some peptides are detected all the time while some are never (). Thus a well organized spectral library consisting of empirically observed experimental spectra permits a smaller and more accurate search space. Third, convenient identification of extraordinary spectra, such as those produced from peptides with unusual posttranslational modifications (PTMs). These spectra are big challenges to sequence database search engines, but could be identified as easily as the ordinary ones by spectral library search (). Apparently, the above merits are based on reliable and comprehensive spectral libraries. One of the main obstacles is library coverage (). Many efforts have been made on library constructions, such as NIST (http://peptide.nist.gov/) and peptide atlas (http://www.peptideatlas.org/speclib/). However, it remains difficult considering that PTMs may generate substantial modified forms of a peptide. Note that there have been hundreds of known modifications (e.g. 512 entries recorded in the RESID modification database by) and only a few of them, e.g. phosphorylation, were extensively studied in the past.

conclusion we have presented a novel spectral library search tool, p match deliberately designed for the open search mode. Its ability to identify spectra with unanticipated PTMs was demonstrated on several datasets. In cooperation with traditional sequence database search, p match is able to push up the spectral identification rate to a large extent. The key points to contributing the success of this method lie in three aspects: the consideration of accurate mass shifts for peak matching; the use of full peptide sequence information for consensus spectral optimization; a new scoring function that combines the general intensity based dot product with a probabilistic model of peak matching.
