opens eg spim is an open access and user friendly 3D automatic quantitative analysis tool for Single Plane Illumination Microscopy data. The software is designed to extract, in a user friendly way, quantitative relevant information from SPIM image stacks, such as the number of nu-clei or cells. It provides quantitative measurement (volume, sphericity, distance, intensity) on Light Sheet Fluorescent Microscopy images. Availability and implementation: freely available from

introduction single Plane Illumination Microscopy (SPIM) was developed in 2004 by Stelzer and colleagues () to image 4D live developing embryos. Further improvements have been made by () and more recently (). Intrinsic to the concept of SPIM was low phototoxicity and photo damage. Development on SPIM technology over the last 10 years has led to the more general term of Light Sheet Fluorescent Microscopy ls fm to describe this imaging technique. The advent of opens pim () and open spin () has opened a new era in ls fm. These two projects provide detailed information and resources to allow any scientist to build and start ls fm. Importantly, these Open projects, are associated with websites and the ability to interact with the developers. Here, we provide details of an image processing tool, opens eg spim which is made available on the same basis as open spin and opens pim. The combination of open spin opens pim and opens eg spim allows image generation to be connected to image processing, allowing the automated extraction of quantitative information from ls fm images. ls fm generates large numbers of raw image stacks (Gigabytes, going to Terabytes in a time series) that require initial processing steps such as registration of multiple view and deconvolution to reconstruct the data (). Acquisition, visualization and quantitative analysis are the 3 milestones to go from a biological sample to quantitative results. We propose opens eg spim here as a user friendly tool to perform the quantitative analysis step. To obtain the information on a cell by cell basis, the objects in the 3D stacks should be separated from each other, i.e. segmented, before further quantitative analysis. A variety of algorithms () are available for segmentation of nuclei, including: watershed, iterative voting methods, level set approach based on gradient flow and flexible contour model. However the implementation of these algorithms to segment ls fm data is not straightforward, due to complex installation procedures, or difficulty in tuning the parameters for individual biological samples. Moreover, a good segmentation result relies not only on an efficient segmentation algorithm but also on a sequence of steps preparing the image so that the segmentation algorithm can perform efficiently. Therefore, putting all these steps together requires a systematic design of the pipeline and the interface. Currently, few graphical user interfaces are specifically designed for nuclei segmentation in 3D especially cell aggregates. Modular Interactive Nuclei Segmentation was developed as a user interface to segment early mouse embryo () but it is only available for Matlab License owner. Dedicated effort is urgently needed to build user friendly interface for ls fm users.
