Motivation: Molecular profiles of tumour samples have been widely and successfully used for classification problems. A number of algorithms have been proposed to predict classes of tumor samples based on expression profiles with relatively high performance. However, prediction of response to cancer treatment has proved to be more challenging and novel approaches with improved generalizability are still highly needed. Recent studies have clearly demonstrated the advantages of integrating protein protein interaction (PPI) data with gene expression profiles for the development of subnetwork markers in classification problems. Results: We describe a novel network based classification algorithm opt dis using color coding technique to identify optimally discriminative subnetwork markers. Focusing on PPI networks, we apply our algorithm to drug response studies: we evaluate our algorithm using published cohorts of breast cancer patients treated with combination chemotherapy. We show that our opt dis method improves over previously published subnetwork methods and provides better and more stable performance compared with other subnetwork and single gene methods. We also show that our subnetwork method produces predictive markers that are more reproducible across independent cohorts and offer valuable insight into biological processes underlying response to therapy.

introduction in the treatment of cancers, patients presenting tumors with similar clinical characteristics will often respond differentially to the same chemotherapy (van't). In fact, for many types of cancer, only a minority of treated patients will observe regression of tumor growth. This is the case for both conventional chemotherapeutic agents and newer targeted therapies that affect specific molecules. To achieve an effective cancer treatment, it is critical to identify the underlying mechanisms that confer chemo resistance in some tumors but not others. The advent of genome wide expression profiling technologies has allowed the discovery of novel biomarkers for cancer diagnosis, prognosis and treatment (van't). While some progress has been made toward identifying reliable prognostic markers for breast and other cancers, development of molecular markers predictive of response to chemotherapy has proved to be far more difficult (van't). In recent years, a number of studies have used genome wide expression profiling to identify genes that could be used as predictors of drug response in breast cancer (). In these studies, single gene marker methods were used, where each gene is individually ranked for differential expression and the top genes were selected as predictors known as single gene markers. Additional study () required single gene markers not only to be differentially expressed but also to have similar coexpression between the training and test cohorts. While some of these predictive markers have shown promising results in a limited number of patient cohorts, many of these signatures have failed to achieve similar performance in additional validation studies (). In addition, single gene markers developed from different cohorts have been shown to have very little overlap (). A further limitation of single gene markers is that they provide relatively limited insight into the biological mechanisms underlying response to drug response. Thus, predictive markers with robust performance, greater reproducibility and improved insights into drug action which are critical for clinical application still remains elusive. Previous studies have observed that gene products associated with cancer tend to be highly clustered in coexpression networks and have more 'interactions'. Inspired by this observation introduced the use of all members of a protein protein interaction (PPI) subnetwork as a meta gene marker for predicting metastasis in breast cancer demonstrated that subnetwork markers are more robust, i.e. their results tend to provide more reproducible results across different cohorts of patients. Motivated by the limitations in predicting drug response using single gene markers and the better performance promised by subnetwork markers, this article aims to identify subnetwork markers to predict chemotherapeutic response, as detailed below defined subnetwork activity as the aggregate expression of genes in a given subnetwork. The discriminative score of a subnetwork which reflects how well the subnetwork discriminates samples of different phenotypes (or classes was derived from mutual information between subnetwork activity and the phenotype. The study presented greedy algorithms for identifying subnetworks with the highest discriminative scores and page i206 i205i213
