Motivation: A plethora of bioinformatics analysis has led to the discovery of numerous gene sets, which can be interpreted as discrete measurements emitted from latent signaling pathways. Their potential to infer signaling pathway structures, however, has not been sufficiently exploited. Existing methods accommodating discrete data do not explicitly consider signal cascading mechanisms that characterize a signaling pathway. Novel computational methods are thus needed to fully utilize gene sets and broaden the scope from focusing only on pairwise interactions to the more general cascading events in the inference of signaling pathway structures. Results: We propose a gene set based simulated annealing (SA) algorithm for the reconstruction of signaling pathway structures. A signaling pathway structure is a directed graph containing up to a few hundred nodes and many overlapping signal cascades, where each cascade represents a chain of molecular interactions from the cell surface to the nucleus. Gene sets in our context refer to discrete sets of genes participating in signal cascades, the basic building blocks of a signaling pathway, with no prior information about gene orderings in the cascades. From a compendium of gene sets related to a pathway, SA aims to search for signal cascades that characterize the optimal signaling pathway structure. In the search process, the extent of overlap among signal cascades is used to measure the optimality of a structure. Throughout, we treat gene sets as random samples from a first order Markov chain model. We evaluated the performance of SA in three case studies. In the first study conducted on 83 KEGG pathways, SA demonstrated a significantly better performance than Bayesian network methods. Since both SA and Bayesian network methods accommodate discrete data, use a search and score network learning strategy and output a directed network, they can be compared in terms of performance and computational time. In the second study, we compared SA and Bayesian network methods using four benchmark datasets from DREAM. In our final study, we showcased two context specific signaling pathways activated in breast cancer.

introduction the main goal of computational systems biology is to reveal and explain general organizing principles of living systems. In particular, the structural inference of signaling pathways is important to better understand fundamental cell functions such as growth, metabolism, differentiation and apoptosis, which are driven by simultaneous action of several cascades of reactions from the cell surface to the nucleus (). Since signaling cascades represent the basic building blocks of signaling pathways, it is necessary to extract useful insights about them from various molecular profiling data. In recent years, gene set compendiums and tools for their analysis have become increasingly available due to rapid advancements in high throughput data acquisition methods (e.g.). However, challenges remain in exploring signal cascading mechanisms from such data, which can be interpreted as discrete measurements emitted from latent signaling pathway structures. Many algorithms for biological network inference accommodate discrete inputs (e.g. Altay and emmert streib 2010a). Discretization has especially proved useful in the structural inference of signaling pathways, which are directed networks containing up to a few hundred nodes and several overlapping signal cascades where each cascade represents a directed or ordered chain of molecular interactions. For example, existing non metabolic pathway structures in the KEGG database () contain up to 400 nodes. Significant efforts in the inference of signaling pathway structures include Boolean or Probabilistic Boolean networks (e.g.) and Bayesian networks (e.g.), which directly benefit from reduced computational complexity by utilizing discrete inputs. Even in the inference of large scale undirected network topologies using ar acne (), C3NET (), CLR (), mr net () and Relevance Networks or RNs (), discrete measurements are employed to estimate mutual information (MI) between gene pairs. Therefore, it is increasingly clear that discrete measurements hold promises for inferring biological networks. Bayesian network methods are commonly used in the inference of signaling pathway structures. However, these methods primarily focus on statistical causal interactions. Thus, the learned networks need not represent signal cascading mechanisms. How to better use discrete measurements available in the form of unordered gene sets, which may be thought of as the observed overlapping and incomplete page 547 546556

conclusion in this article, we presented a novel SA approach to learn the optimal signaling pathway structures from gene sets. We hypothesized a true signaling pathway structure as an ensemble of overlapping signal cascades. We then translated its reconstruction from unordered gene sets corresponding to signaling cascades into a discrete optimization problem. Throughout we treated gene sets as random variables and their orders as random. We also introduced a novel energy
