We present oq tans an open source workbench for quantitative tran-scriptome analysis, that is integrated in Galaxy. Its distinguishing features include customizable computational workflows and a modular pipeline architecture that facilitates comparative assessment of tool and data quality. oq tans integrates an assortment of machine learning powered tools into Galaxy, which show superior or equal performance to state of the art tools. Implemented tools comprise a complete transcriptome analysis workflow: short read alignment, transcript identification quantification and differential expression analysis. oq tans and Galaxy facilitate persistent storage, data exchange and documentation of intermediate results and analysis workflows. We illustrate how oq tans aids the interpretation of data from different experiments in easy to understand use cases. Users can easily create their own workflows and extend oq tans by integrating specific tools. oq tans is available as (i) a cloud machine image with a demo instance at cloud o qt ansorg (ii) a public Galaxy instance at galaxy cbio mskcc. org, (iii) a git repository containing all installed software o qt ansorg git); most of which is also available from (iv) the Galaxy Toolshed and (v) a share string to use along with Galaxy cloud man
introduction technological advance in large scale sequencing has revolutionized molecular biology. Its application to profiling the transcriptome, the total complement of cellular RNA, called rnase q provides an unmatched dynamic range for expression quantification and single base pair resolution for the discovery of new transcripts (). However, analyzing these complex data to their full potential requires computational frameworks here we present oq tans the online platform for quantitative rnase q data analysis (online since 2010). Its integration into the Galaxy framework ensures transparent and reproducible computational analyses. oq tans provides a Galaxy interface to many recently developed rnase q analysis tools, and this way considerably extends the standard repertoire of the Galaxy toolbox use galaxy org. To reach non expert users and experienced developers, we provide the oq tans tool suite in five incarnations i as a cloud machine image (see cloud o qt ansorg for a demo), (ii) as a public Galaxy instance at galaxy cbio mskcc org (iii) as a git repository o qt ansorg git most of these tools are moreover available from (iv) the Galaxy Toolshed and (v) a preconfigured share string to launch Galaxy cloud man using sharing instance functionality.
