The experimental determination of membrane protein orientation within the lipid bi-layer is extremely challenging, such that computational methods are most often the only solution. Moreover, obtaining all atom 3D structures of membrane proteins is also technically difficult, and many of the available data are either experimental low resolution structures or theoretical models, whose structural quality needs to be evaluated. Here, to address these two crucial problems, we propose orem pro a web server capable of both (i) positioning a helical and b sheet transmem-brane domains in the lipid bilayer and (ii) assessing their structural quality. Most importantly, orem pro uses the sole alpha carbon coordinates, which makes it the only web server compatible with both high and low structural resolutions. Finally, orem pro is also interesting in its ability to process coarse grained protein models, by using coordinates of backbone beads in place of alpha carbons. Availability and Implementation: http://www.dsimb.inserm.fr/OREMPRO/

introduction determining the orientation of membrane protein structures in the lipid bilayer is necessary to understand their function with numerous medical and industrial applications. Membrane proteins are difficult to study, due to the laborious and expensive solubilization, purification and reconstitution methods they require. This is worsened by the need of working on multimeric complexes, since membrane proteins often function as such. Actually, the orientational disorder that exists in the lipid bilayer makes membrane positioning so difficult that data are available for only $20 proteins (), which most often makes computational methods the last resort (besides visual analysis). Moreover, the determination of an all atom structure of membrane protein is already a challenge, and the relevance of positioning side chains in environments that strongly differ from a biological lipid bilayer (i.e. detergents and solvents) is questionable. These difficulties result in an important number of low resolution structures n caco backbones and ca only the quality of which needs to be evaluated. The same goes for the modelling of membrane protein structure, which is less advanced than for globular proteins, due to the complexity of the lipid environment, therefore making low resolution and coarse grained approaches widely used. Here, we present orem pro the first web server aimed at orienting and evaluating membrane protein structures (alpha and beta) from the sole Ca coordinates, and thus compatible with both high and low structural resolutions. Our web server is also able to process coarse grained structures, such as those used with the MARTINI force field (), by using coordinates of backbone beads ('BB') in place of Ca. V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com
conclusion thanks to the use of a minimalistic representation of protein structures, orem pro is the first web server capable of processing low resolution and coarse grained models of membrane proteins, thus meeting the need for treating the growing number of these structures. Our web server offers a complementary combination of membrane assignment and structural quality assessment, by integrating the innovative ANVIL membrane positioning algorithm and the MAIDEN statistical potential into a user friendly interface. Despite its dual function, orem pro is fast and processes most protein structures within a minute.
