Motivation: Orphan genes, also known as or fans are newly evolved genes in a genome that enable the organism to adapt to specific living environment. The gene content of every sequenced genome can be classified into different age groups, based on how widely narrowly a genes homo-logs are distributed in the context of species taxonomy. Those having homologs restricted to organisms of particular taxonomic ranks are classified as taxonomically restricted or fans. Results: Implementing this idea, we have developed an open source program named or fan finder and a free web server to allow automated classification of a genomes gene content and identification of or fans at different taxonomic ranks. or fan finder and its web server will contribute to the comparative genomics field by facilitating the study of the origin of new genes and the emergence of lineage specific traits in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. Availability and implementation: http://cys.

introduction or fans stand for orphan Open Reading Frames (). In addition to or fans in literature orphan genes are also known as new genes, lineage specific genes l sgs and taxonomically restricted genes trg s (), although some terms are used in very specific contexts, e.g. de novo originated new genes. Orphan genes (hereafter or fans are new inventions of a genome that enable the organism to adapt to its specific living environment. They are fundamentally important for the origin of new species and the emergence of lineage specific traits, e.g. morphological diversity, metabolic innovation and pathogenicity (). or fans are usually identified by using sequence similarity search tools such as BLAST (). The simple BLAST method tends to identify very narrowly distributed or fans and can not classify or fans into groups of different ages. Therefore the phylogeny based approach was developed to map BLAST hits onto a species phylogeny, which allows identifying or fans of different ages. One method using this approach () required a well accepted species phylogeny, often not available for non model organisms. Another method termed phylo stratigraphy approach () also required a phylogeny, which however is derived from the query species' taxonomic lineage. Although the phylo stratigraphy approach was recently shown to have some limitations (), it has been widely used to study or fans in various organisms (e.g.). However, the phylogeny based methods are more difficult to automate and often need human intervention. Here, we present a new tool or fan finder and its web server. or fan finder is fully automated and the results are completely reproducible. While the algorithm behind or fan finder is essentially based on the phylo stratigraphy approach (), it is more strictly formulated for the purpose of complete automation. To our knowledge or fan finder is the only open source computer software and the first online server for or fan identification and classification.
