end to end next generation sequencing microbiology data analysis requires a diversity of tools covering bacterial resequencing, de novo assembly, scaffolding, bacterial rnase q gene annotation and meta genomics. However, the construction of computational pipelines that use different software packages is difficult owing to a lack of interoperability, reproducibility and transparency. To overcome these limitations we present orion e a galaxy based framework consisting of publicly available research software and specifically designed pipelines to build complex, reproducible workflows for next generation sequencing microbiology data analysis. Enabling microbiology researchers to conduct their own custom analysis and data manipulation without software installation or programming, orion e provides new opportunities for data intensive computational analyses in microbiology and meta genomics. Availability and implementation: orion e is available online at http://

introduction application of next generation sequencing (NGS) in microbiology is becoming a common practice with a profound impact on research, diagnostic and clinical microbiology (). Recent applications include genomic sequencing, differential transcription analysis, variant investigation, as well as meta genomics studies. Major challenges include draft assemblies finishing followed by reliable genome annotation or robust dissection of microbial communities including those associated with human health and disease. Furthermore, there is an increasing need to process and present data in a fashion that is transparent and reproducible and to provide analysis frameworks that are usable and cost effective for biomedical researchers. To address these challenges, we developed orion e an online framework for integrative analysis of NGS microbiology data. orion e is based on Galaxy (), an open platform for reproducible data intensive computational analysis used in many diverse biomedical research environment. orion e is the first freely available platform that supports the whole life cycle of microbiology research data from production and annotation to publication and sharing. Other commercial alternative exists (e.g. CLC Genomics Workbench by CLC Bio), but orion e is unique in transparently combining the most used open source bioinformatics tools for microbiology. orion e is currently applied to a variety of microbiological projects including bacteria resequencing, de novo assembling and microbio me investigations; see http://goo.gl/DwbgPD for a list. Furthermore, orion e is part of an ongoing project to integrate Galaxy with had oop based tools to provide scalable computing (); a specialized version of omer o () to model biomedical data and the chain of actions that connect them; and i rods () to efficiently support inter-institutional data sharing. This infrastructure is already used in production at Center for Advanced Studies, Research and Development in Sardinia for the automated processing of sequencing data () and for quality control in gene therapy applications (). Preprocessing, quality control and trimming. The fundamental step before any NGS analysis is the quality control of reads and their trimming. To cope with long reads and paired end technology, fast x (http://goo.gl/GxqyV) and fast qc (http://goo.gl/6TUqD) were complemented with specifically developed tools (see also workflow #1 in the Supplementary information). Reads mapping. Mapping is a key step in many NGS applications from bacteria resequencing to variant calling. The most widely used aligners are integrated in orion e including BWA (), Bowtie1 (), Bowtie2 (), SOAP () and MOSAIK (http://git.io/QrYWXg). We further added BLAT (), SHRiMP (), last z () and b fast () for use with long reads from 454 Roche. De novo assembly. De novo assembly produces contigs without the aid of a reference genome. Different methods, either based on a de Bruijn graph [Velvet (), ABySS () and SPAdes (or on a greedy approach s sake eden a (, are available in orion e. Scaffolding. After mapping, contigs are ordered and oriented to produce even longer sequences called scaffolds, exploiting the mate pair paired end information. orion e includes the most established scaffold ers such as s sake s space SEQuel and SOPRA. Post assembly, contigs statistics, (multi) aligning and variant calling. This section of orion e includes tools we have developed covering task such as genome scale alignment, high quality contigs extraction, statistics over contigs or draft genomes (N50/ NG50 values, contigs length distribution, high low quality regions gaps in draft genomes). Annotation. Annotation is the process of identifying meaningful biological information from sequences. Glimmer and trnascan se () were wrapped into orion e together with the pro kk a pipeline, enabling easy genbank ddj ben a submission. rnase q. We integrated edge pro tool for bacterial rnase q analysis. As edge pro requires genome annotation files, we developed an accessory tool ('Get edge pro files') that retrieves them directly from the NCBI RefSeq repository. meta genomics and other tools. We added to the standard Galaxy meta genomics pipeline meta phl an () and meta velvet (). The meta genemark () annotation tool has been added for gene prediction in meta genomic sequences and a workflow has been developed for (bacterial) meta transcriptome analysis. We complete this section with instruments for data filtering, conversion and taxonomy abundance displaying into the Krona visualizer ().
