Motivation: rnase q technology is promising to uncover many novel alternative splicing events, gene fusions and other variations in RNA transcripts. For an accurate detection and quantification of transcripts, it is important to resolve the mapping ambiguity for those rnase q reads that can be mapped to multiple loci: 417% of the reads from mouse rnase q data and 50% of the reads from some plant rnase q data have multiple mapping loci. In this study, we show how to resolve the mapping ambiguity in the presence of novel transcript omic events such as exon skipping and novel indels towards accurate downstream analysis. We introduce or man (Optimal Resolution of multi mapping Ambiguity of rnase q Reads), which aims to compute the minimum number of potential transcript products for each gene and to assign each multi mapping read to one of these transcripts based on the estimated distribution of the region covering the read. or man achieves this objective through a combinatorial optimization formulation, which is solved through well known approximation algorithms, integer linear programs and heuristics. Results: On a simulated rnase q dataset including a random subset of transcripts from the UCSC database, the performance of several state of the art methods for identifying and quantifying novel transcripts, such as Cufflinks, iso lasso and cli iq is significantly improved through the use of or man. Furthermore, in an experiment using real rnase q reads, we show that or man is able to resolve multi mapping to produce coverage values that are similar to the original distribution, even in genes with highly non-uniform coverage. Availability: or man is available at http://orman.sf.net Contact:

introduction massively parallel RNA sequencing rnase q technologies are replacing microarrays in determining the structure and dynamics of the transcriptome. Analysis of rnase q data helps to uncover many novel alternative splicing events, gene fusions and other variations in RNA transcripts. Unfortunately, there are many rnase q reads that can be mapped to several loci equally well, and it is of key importance to resolve their mapping ambiguity in order to perform a comprehensive and accurate analysis of the whole rnase q data. There are several mappers that can align rnase q reads to a reference genome or previously known transcript sequences (). Owing to the presence of paralogs and homologous regions within a gene, rnase q mappers typically report a fraction of multi reads i.e. reads that map to multiple loci on a reference genome. Based on top hat mappings on the human reference genome, $10% of human rnase q reads are multi reads. Similarly, $17% of mouse and 50% of some plant rnase q reads are multi reads (). The presence of multi reads complicates the downstream analysis such as determining alternative splicing patterns, gene fusions and other variations. The common practice for handling multi reads is ignoring them in the downstream analysis. This leads to inaccurate estimation of the abundance of expressed transcripts (). A simple approach for determining the exact genomic location of a multi read is 'RESCUE' (). Here, the initial gene expression values are calculated based on the unique reads that map to them. Each multi read is then assigned to the gene with the fraction equal to the ratio between the gene's initial expression value and the total expression value of all genes that the multi read maps to. A more complex approach based on expected maximization (EM) () is designed to handle mapping ambiguity of a read to two or more homologous genes for the purpose of determining the expression value of each of these genes and not to determine or quantify isoforms. Finally, r sem (), is oem () and i reckon () are EM methods based on statistical generative models for sequencing processes to resolve mapping ambiguity. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first four authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. Many of the above approaches are designed specially for estimating expression values of known annotated isoforms. Their performance is highly dependent on the completeness of the isoform database in use. Furthermore, they can not handle alternative splicing events such as novel exon skipping, alternative 5 0 donor and 3 0 accept or sites, intron retention and other structural differences such as insertions or deletions. Some recent computational approaches, in particular iso lasso (), cli iq () and Cufflinks (), can identify and quantify unknown isoforms and certain types of transcript omic variations. Unfortunately, neither iso lasso nor cli iq takes into account multi reads and Cufflinks handles multi reads through a simple rescue based approach. In this article, we show how to resolve the multi mapping ambiguity in the presence of novel isoforms involving exon skipping, intron retention and small indels towards accurate downstream analysis. To be mathematically precise, we introduce the notion of a partial transcript a substring of a potential transcript product of a gene, which satisfies certain conditions (a formal definition is provided in the next section). The objective of our multi read resolution approach, or man (Optimal Resolution of multi mapping Ambiguity of rnase q Reads), is (i) to compute the minimum number of partial transcripts that cover all the multi reads and (ii) to assign each multi read to one of these partial transcripts such that each partial transcript is covered according to the estimated local distribution. We achieve the first objective approximately through a reduction to the standard set cover problem. We achieve the second objective through an integer linear programming formulation, which we handle using available integer linear program (ILP) solvers such as CPLEX, or through greedy heuristics we describe in this article. We evaluate or man on both simulated and real human rnase q datasets. For the first experiment, we generate paired end rnase q reads from a random subset of transcripts from the University of California, Santa Cruz (UCSC) database with the expression distribution modelled after a real human dataset. On this simulated data, we show that the performance of state of the art methods for identifying and quantifying transcripts such as cli iq Cufflinks and iso lasso is typically improved through the use of our multi read resolution approach. Notably, when combined with iso lasso or cli iq or man gives the most accurate and comprehensive novel isoform detection and quantification pipeline available. To evaluate or man in a more 'real world' setting, we also design an experiment using real rnase q data from a cancer patient (). For this experiment, we implant artificial genomic repeats into several genes and compare the performance of or man with that of RESCUE in resolving the multi reads mapping to these regions. We show that on this dataset, the multi read assignment by or man approximates the original distributions quite well with a maximum relative error of 0.3.
