Motivation: Protein interaction networks contain a wealth of biological information, but their large size often hinders cross organism comparisons. We present ortho nets a Cytoscape plugin that displays protein protein interaction (PPI) networks from two organisms simultaneously, highlighting orthology relationships and aggregating several types of biomedical annotations. ortho nets also allows PPI networks derived from experiments to be overlaid on networks extracted from public databases, supporting the identification and verification of new interactors. Any newly identified pp is can be validated by checking whether their orthologs interact in another organism. Availability: ortho nets is freely available at http://wodaklab.org/ ortho nets
introduction recent technological advances have contributed to a rapid growth in the amount of data on gene and protein interactions as well as on protein and gene function (). Although organisms such as yeast are comparatively well characterized, others including human have data for only a small fraction of their predicted genomes or proteomes. In this case, orthology relationships can be used to transfer information on function and interactions from one organism to another, thus assisting the prediction and validation of new interactors (). The ortho nets plug-in for Cytoscape () enables simultaneous visual analysis of protein protein interaction (PPI) networks in multiple organisms. By default, the plugin provides direct access to updated networks from five model organisms yeast mouse, human, fly and worm consolidated from 10 major PPI databases () and available from the i ref web resource () resource (http://wodaklab.org/iRefWeb). Interactions are annotated with supporting information, such as interaction type, experimental detection methods and supporting publications. Interacting proteins in ortho nets are further annotated with domain architectures * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(), Gene Ontology terms and (if applicable) disease information from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database ().
