Motivation: RNA binding proteins r bps play important roles in post-transcriptional control of gene expression, including splicing, transport, polyadenylation and RNA stability. To model protein rna interactions by considering all available sources of information, it is necessary to integrate the rapidly growing RBP experimental data with the latest genome annotation, gene function, RNA sequence and structure. Such integration is possible by matrix factorization, where current approaches have an undesired tendency to identify only a small number of the strongest patterns with overlapping features. Because protein rna interactions are orchestrated by multiple factors, methods that identify discriminative patterns of varying strengths are needed. Results: We have developed an integrative orthogonality regularized nonnegative matrix factoriza-tion ion mf to integrate multiple data sources and discover non-overlapping, class specific RNA binding patterns of varying strengths. The orthogonality constraint halves the effective size of the factor model and outperforms other NMF models in predicting RBP interaction sites on RNA. We have integrated the largest data compendium to date, which includes 31 CLIP experiments on 19 r bps involved in splicing (such as hnrnp s U2AF2, ELAVL1, TDP-43 and f us and processing of 3UTR (Ago, IGF2BP). We show that the integration of multiple data sources improves the pre-dictive accuracy of retrieval of RNA binding sites. In our study the key predictive factors of protein– RNA interactions were the position of RNA structure and sequence motifs, RBP co binding and gene region type. We report on a number of protein specific patterns, many of which are consistent with experimentally determined properties of r bps. Availability and implementation: The ion mf implementation and example datasets are available at https://github.com/mstrazar/ionmf.

introduction rna binding proteins r bps play a major role in the control of gene expression. mis regulation of r bps is associated with diseases such as fragile X syndrome, neurologic disorders and cancer (). Our understanding of protein rna interaction has been greatly improved by the use of genomic methods such as individual nucleotide resolution UV crosslinking and immunoprecipitation i clip which identifies RBP crosslinking sites on a genome wide scale. Past i clip studies have shown that r bps bind and regulate a large number of transcripts. Computational analysis and prediction of these interactions is therefore critical to gain a comprehensive understanding of RBP functions (). Current approaches to model protein rna interactions focus on individual data sources and require precise structural knowledge of the involved proteins (). They rarely exploit other available omics data. General approaches such as Bayesian networks (), Hidden Markov models (), or SVMs (), have been applied to model protein rna interactions using multiple data sources. However, their application was limited to individual r bps and the importance of only a limited number of features governing protein rna interaction were highlighted, such as single degenerate motifs. The lack of presented features is partly due to the difficulties associated with interpretation of inferred models. We have developed a modeling technique based on multiple matrix factorization that is capable of integrating data sources for multiple r bps. The generated models are both accurate and interpretable. New biological knowledge can be gained by exploring the identified combinatorial effects among various features of data sources that define patterns of protein rna binding sites on RNA. Nonnegative matrix factorization (NMF) methods have been extensively applied in machine learning for clustering, community detection, classification, etc. (). The classic NMF algorithm () finds an approximation of a data matrix that is described as a product of two or more matrices with lower ranks  a factor model. An advantage of NMF is the interpretable, parts based representation of patterns present in the data. This is due to the latent factors being constrained to non-negative values, which can then be combined in an additive way to approximate the original data. Integrative NMF approaches provide biologically meaningful results in various bioinformatics applications. For example, NMF was used to integrate multiple matrices with a common dimension and to discover miRNA and gene regulatory modules (), or to discover modules of genes, miRNA targets and DNA methylation markers in cancer patients (). Various improvements of the NMF algorithm have been suggested to obtain more comprehensive models. The sparsity of factor models improves the interpretability and modularity of projections. Sparsity is achieved by including L 1 norm constraints on the model coefficients. Alternatively, the L 1 =L 2 norm ratio of the resulting projection can be explicitly tuned (), which produces sparser solutions, but does not guarantee modularity. Other methods constrain the basis vectors to convex sets (). The mentioned methods, however, do not focus on modular decompositions where samples and features do not overlap within clusters. This is a substantial drawback when classes are discriminated by multiple patterns of varying strengths. This phenomenon is common in the domain of protein rna interactions, as strong patterns, e.g. U-rich tracts present in binding sites () of many proteins, may occlude weaker signals that discriminate between proteins. A possible solution is to require the basis vectors found by NMF to be orthogonal. One such example is the orthogonality constrained NMF () that assumes an initial orthogonal model, e.g. obtained by k means clustering, which may bias the final model. We have developed an integrative, orthogonality regularized nonnegative matrix factorization method ion mf. The method finds modular projections of data matrices, where data instances are assigned to modules described by non-overlapping features. In a supervised setting, orthogonality regularization prevents multicollinearity (), where a feature vector can be expressed as a linear combination of a subset of remaining feature vectors. This is important, as r bps differ in specificity and their binding target patterns differ in number and strength. We applied ion mf on the largest integrative analysis in the number of r bps and different data sources used. The analysis included a compendium of 31 published CLIP experiments on 19 r bps and other genomic data sources to predict RBP crosslinking sites at a nucleotide resolution. We discovered discriminative patterns across different data sources and learned a comprehensive model of protein rna interaction for each of the 19 r bps. We visualized the discovered patterns and used them to cluster r bps into functionally related groups. Our results demonstrate the applicability of ion mf for fast and accurate prediction of RBP target sites on a genome wide scale.

conclusion computational approaches already play a crucial role in protein RNA interaction prediction by aiding experiment planning and interpretation of results. genome wide assays of protein rna interaction mapping () has identified close to a thousand human rna binding proteins. Data on RNA binding proteins is growing rapidly, emphasizing the need for integrative methods which jointly consider all available data sources. An interesting finding of our study is that in addition to RNA structure and sequence, the position relative to genomic features (exons, etc.) and CLIP data of other r bps is informative for predicting binding sites of a specific RBP. Genomic regions are informative as many proteins bind at specific positions relative to these features, e.g. U2AF2 generally binds upstream of exons (). We show that CLIP data are predictive, as subsets of examined r bps exhibit similar binding patterns (, Supplementary Figs S6S13 and Supplementary Section S8.4). Importantly, overlap is only seen between a subset of r bps but we find no evidence that some sites or features are generally shared across all r bps. While contribution of non-specific background should be considered, we find it most likely that co binding profiles result from biologically relevant features. For example, many r bps bind to similar RNA sequences or structures (Supplementary Figs S6S9, S13). Several of the examined r bps are known to bind similar motifs, such as the U-rich motifs bound by el avl TIA, hnrnp c and U2AF2, which are also detected in our analyses (). Moreover, r bps may interact at the protein level, either directly or indirectly via co-factors, which could stabilize their binding to proximal RNA sites. Few experimental studies have explored the impact of protein protein interactions on coordinated RNA binding, but our analyses could be used to explore such potential interactions in the future. Data integration in ion mf yields improvements in accuracy when compared to state of the art approaches. Orthogonality regularization favors non-overlapping and sparse solutions, which are desired by domain experts, providing class specific descriptions and model interpretation. The resulting predictions are in strong accordance with a published in vitro study and identified a number of promising candidates for further investigation. Together, our experimental findings establish ion mf as the data integration technique of choice where sparse, modular models are desired.
