Accurately mapping rnase q reads to the reference genome is a critical step for performing downstream analysis such as transcript assembly, isoform detection and quantification. Many tools have been developed; however, given the huge size of the next generation sequencing datasets and the complexity of the transcriptome, rnase q read mapping remains a challenge with the ever increasing amount of data. We develop omic soft sequence aligner (OSA), a fast and accurate alignment tool for rnase q data. Benchmarked with existing methods, OSA improves mapping speed 4–10-fold with better sensitivity and less false positives. Availability: OSA can be downloaded from http://omicsoft.com/osa. It is free to academic users. OSA has been tested extensively on Linux, Mac OS X and Windows platforms. Contact:

introduction rnase q a high throughput sequencing technology used to sequence complementary DNA, has been widely thought of as 'a revolutionary tool for transcript omics study' (). Compared with microarray technology, conventional expressed sequence tag (EST) or other tag based sequencing, it has less sampling bias, higher resolution and much broader expression range coverage (). For human, mouse and other mammalian organisms with a relatively well annotated genome, mapping short reads from next generation sequencing (NGS) to reference transcriptome genome is usually the first and essential step for rnase q data analysis. This reference based approach tends to be more sensitive and computationally efficient than a de novo assembly approach (). Many tools have been developed in recent years (). top hat () maps the reads to reference genome using bowtie (). The consensus islands are first clustered; the splice junctions are then generated by enumerating the canonical donor and accept or sites between the neighboring islands for putative introns. rnase q unified mapper (RUM) () and rnase qr () align the reads against both * To whom correspondence should be addressed. transcriptome and genome using bowtie. The results are merged and the un-mapped reads are further aligned to genome with blat (). soap splice () first maps reads to reference genome indexed with Burrows Wheeler transformation (BWT), and then unmapped reads are aligned again using two segment strategies. map splice () and splice map () also use similar break and assemble approach for longer reads. We introduce omic soft sequence aligner (OSA), an ultra-fast rnase q aligner mapper different from the majority of existing methods relying on Bowtie or BWA, which use a bwt based index. OSA uses a km er indexed genome hash table and avoids breaking down longer reads into sub reads and merging steps, which becomes increasingly computationally expensive with the longer reads from the newer sequencing machines. OSA is 410 times faster than popular rnase q aligners developed and used so far. It works well for both short and long reads and its performance does not deteriorate for high sequencing error data. OSA also significantly improves the ability to detect both short and long indels as well as exon junction sosa implements various optimization strategies at different stages of mapping pipeline to improve alignment speed and accuracy. All the reference and read sequence matching are achieved through super fast bitwise operations. For each read, where quality values are available, OSA will first scan the reads from 3-end until the first acceptable quality nucleotide is found. This trimming process removes the ambiguous reads at the end and significantly improves the alignments speed (). During alignment stage, a 'seed and extend' strategy is used to test each potential matching position. A similar strategy has been used in g snap () and blat (). In addition, OSA takes advantage of the properties of paired end reads to filter the alignment results and limit alignment space.
