Motivation: exo me sequencing has become a de facto standard method for Mendelian disease gene discovery in recent years, yet identifying disease causing mutations among thousands of candidate variants remains a non-trivial task. Results: Here we describe a new variant prioritization tool, OVA (ontology variant analysis), in which user provided phenotypic information is exploited to infer deeper biological context. OVA combines a knowledge based approach with a variant filtering framework. It reduces the number of candidate variants by considering genotype and predicted effect on protein sequence, and scores the remainder on biological relevance to the query phenotype. We take advantage of several ontologies in order to bridge knowledge across multiple biomedical domains and facilitate computational analysis of annotations pertaining to genes, diseases, phenotypes , tissues and pathways. In this way, OVA combines information regarding molecular and physical phenotypes and integrates both human and model organism data to effectively prioritize variants. By assessing performance on both known and novel disease mutations, we show that OVA performs biologically meaningful candidate variant prioritization and can be more accurate than another recently published candidate variant prioritization tool. Availability and implementation: OVA is freely accessible at

introduction the application of next generation sequencing for disease gene discovery or clinical diagnostics can generate large volumes of data, often resulting in identification of thousands of candidate disease genes or variants. A healthy individual genome can harbor more than a hundred genuine loss of function mutations (), making the identification of mutations responsible for a given phenotype a non-trivial task. As systematic experimental verification of each variant is infeasible, several computational prioritization methods have emerged in recent years that attempt to tackle this problem.

discussion the development of open biomedical ontologies has exploded in the last decade and alongside it the coverage and accuracy of annotations. Here we take advantage of this rich resource to bring together ontologies from across multiple domains to produce OVA, a knowledge based gene and variant prioritization tool. OVA utilizes human and model organism phenotypes, functional annotations, curated pathways, cellular localizations and anatomical terms to find genes most relevant to a query phenotype.), utilizing model organism phenotype data in a generalized gene prioritization approach is becoming more viable as coverage increases. Gene ontology annotations have proved to be one of the most frequently utilized sources of gene functional knowledge in computational biology, with numerous applications taking advantage of this structured and highly curated resource. GO has also been heavily utilized as a data source for various candidate disease gene prioritization applications. However, while candidate prioritization methods using Gene ontology semantic similarity measures have generally been demonstrated to be effective, there are a number of drawbacks that this type of methodology suffers from that can detract from usability, accuracy and utility the majority of tools catalogued at Gene Prioritization Portal () require the user to supply 'seed' genes genes already known to be associated with the disease and score candidates based on similarity to these. This is a major limitation of this approach, as in the case of rare or novel phenotypes, any prioritization based on similarity to known disease genes is impossible. Furthermore, the quality of available annotations of the supplied genes largely determines the success of this type of approach, while also allowing for little functional heterogeneity among disease genes. Here, we supplement this approach by building links across multiple ontologies. This allows enhancing the functional profile against which all candidate genes are scored by reasoning directly from a disease phenotype, as well as known genes. Consequently, this approach eliminates the requirement for the user to supply known 'seed' genes and reduces the reliance on quality seed gene annotations. The integration of data from across multiple ontologies can supplement knowledge where it may be incomplete or inadequate in a particular domain. Although most human genes now have GO annotations available, 'shallow' annotation sie. low IC terms are still prevalent. Similarly, there are a number of terms that while they may not be considered uninformative, are not meaningful for candidate gene prioritization without further context. Two genes annotated with the term 'regulation of transcription, dna templated (GO:0006355) would be considered highly functionally similar, and yet could participate in regulation of entirely different pathways. Accordingly, pathway ontology annotations can serve to fill in this knowledge gap, helping to decide whether a gene is truly relevant to the query phenotype and improving prioritization accuracy by removing noise. Here, we simulate novel gene discovery in well and poorly characterized diseases and show that our method is capable of meaningful candidate gene prioritization even when direct functional knowledge about the disease is lacking (). By inferring new gene disease associations through phenotype semantic similarity search and cross ontology bridges, OVA attempts to deduce missing annotations, enabling gene prioritization for new and rare human diseases and supplementing the functional profile of better characterized phenotypes. We show that our model distinguishes relevant genes accurately and, coupled with our variant filtering approach, performs better than another recently published variant prioritization tool (). knowledge based candidate gene variant prioritization methods have been known to perform worse than reported when predicting novel disease genes (). However, large scale assessment using novel disease genes is not feasible. cross validation based methods of individually removing direct disease gene associations can serve to simulate novel gene discovery by ensuring that the test gene does not contribute to the query annotation profile. However, there is a degree of knowledge circularity in ontology annotations that is difficult to account for. By prioritizing VCF files containing 20 newly reported mutations in novel disease genes, we show that there is agreement between these results and those obtained from a larger, simulated dataset (and), although the novel variant dataset prioritization was somewhat less accurate. Thus, we maintain that our results on previously described disease genes represent a reasonable approximation of the true accuracy of OVA. Through an interactive and intuitive web interface, OVA allows the user to control many aspects of the prioritization process. OVA employs The Human Phenotype Ontology to facilitate detailed phenotypes queries in addition to previously described diseases, enabling prioritization for novel diseases. OVA can be accessed freely at http://dna2.leeds.ac.uk:8080/OVA/index.jsp through any modern browser with JavaScript support.
