Motivation: Often during the analysis of biological data, it is of importance to interpret the correlation structure that exists between variables. Such correlations may reveal patterns of co regulation that are indicative of biochemical pathways or common mechanisms of response to a related set of treatments. However, analyses of correlations are usually conducted by either subjective interpretation of the univariate covariance matrix or by applying multivariate modeling techniques , which do not take prior biological knowledge into account. Over-representation analysis or a is a simple method for objectively deciding whether a set of variables of known or suspected biological relevance, such as a gene set or pathway, is more prevalent in a set of variables of interest than we expect by chance. However, or a is usually applied to a set of variables differentiating a single experimental variable and does not take into account correlations. Results: Over-representation of correlation analysis (ORCA) is a novel combination of or a and correlation analysis that provides a means to test whether more associations exist between two specific groups of variables than expected by chance. The method is exemplified by application to drug sensitivity and microRNA expression data from a panel of cancer cell lines (NCI60). ORCA highlighted a previously reported correlation between sensitivity to alkylating anticancer agents and topoisomerase inhibitors. We also used this approach to validate microRNA clusters predicted by mRNA correlations. These observations suggest that ORCA has the potential to reveal novel insights from these data, which are not readily apparent using classical or a. Availability and implementation: The R code of the method is available at https://github.com/ORCABioinfo/ORCAcode

introduction high throughput biological techniques such as gene expression microarray or high throughput sequencing have become a routine for most research laboratories in life sciences. Thousands of biomolecules in different conditions, e.g. mRNAs, microRNAs, proteins or metabolites, can be measured simultaneously. In complex diseases, such as cancer, these biomolecules in a group (such as a pathway or a gene set) are often altered together. Two conventional, but contrasting, approaches for analyzing coordinated responses in molecular profile data are correlation analysis and pathway analysis. In correlation or covariance analysis (and its multivariate extensions such as principal components analysis and canonical correlation analysis), there is a focus on quantitatively estimating the explanatory power of one variable over another to infer some fundamental link between the observed biomolecules. In pathway analysis, however, the objective is to use prior knowledge about interacting or otherwise related sets of biomolecules and to test specific hypotheses about the relationship between a particular set of those biomolecules (the 'pathway') and a given experimental condition. A conventional approach for pathway analysis of high throughput biological data is over-representation analysis or a. To perform or a firstly, the biomolecules, such as mRNA, proteins or microRNA, considered 'differentially expressed' in two or more conditions are identified. Secondly, the number of differentially expressed biomolecules in each pathway is determined. Finally, for each pathway, a probability value p value of obtaining the number of differentially expressed biomolecules against the background list of all biomolecules measured is calculated using a hypergeometric distribution. The first implementation of or a was by where transcriptional regulatory subnetworks in yeast were identified by using mRNA microarray profiling. Most implementations of or a are used to perform pathway analysis based on pathway information, such as Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) or other pathway databases (), or to infer important biological functions of two different conditions from biological categories, such as Gene Ontology (GO;). We introduce a novel method called Over-Representation of Correlation Analysis (ORCA) that seeks to combine both conventional approaches for analysis of coordinated biological responses and provide a new means to test for an unexpectedly high prevalence of informative associations between two sets of variables, which could be mRNA, microRNA or proteins, that comprise pathways groups deemed of importance a priori. The method first calculates the correlation coefficients between all the variables in the dataset, in which the variables can be divided into groups according to pre-defined criteria (exclusive groupings). Then, as an analogy to counting 'differentially' expressed *To whom correspondence should be addressed. genes in or a (which might be below or above a certain threshold of p values or other metrics), ORCA defines the number of correlation coefficients that are 'above' a certain threshold within each group. Finally, the probability of association between any two group pair is calculated in a similar fashion to the calculation of over-representation in the conventional or a. This probability value is calculated from the number of correlation coefficients that pass a threshold against the background number of correlation coefficients of the two group pairs and overall correlation coefficients by using the hypergeometric test. The correlation coefficient threshold can be empirically chosen or calculated by a Shannon's entropy based threshold selection. The method was applied to several biological datasets to demonstrate the concept and implications of ORCA in biological data analysis.

discussion orca can be used as pathway analysis tool, but the research question will be different from existing pathway or gene set analysis methods. Current methods identify pathways that are significantly enriched or depleted with respect to genes associated to a biological condition, while ORCA can identify pathways that are associated through correlations. Although the examples given here were not of typical pathways, ORCA can be applied to any type of pathway or gene set to determine pathways that are associated. In terms of pathway analysis, ORCA addresses some limitations of existing pathway analysis methods that were presented by. First, whereas or a does not take the actual levels of variables (such as gene expression or metabolite levels) into consideration, ORCA can take these values into account, although indirectly, through the correlation coefficient calculation, which means that ORCA does not weigh the variables equally. Second, by using correlation, ORCA does not assume that the variables are independent, which is usually an important assumption in typical or a implementations. Third, classical or a only uses variables, such as mRNAs or microRNAs, that are deemed most differentially expressed, while ORCA uses all the data in the calculation. Fourth, pathway analysis tools based on or a use multiple testing corrections that assume independence of each pathway. ORCA, on the other hand, assumes the opposite and looks for the association between two sets of variables. Because our method is based on the hypergeometric test, it could be argued that ORCA violates the assumptions of the independence of each data point by using correlation coefficients as the source data. This may lead to inaccurate p value calculations from the test. go eman and B uhlmann (2007) have shown in simulated data that when hypergeometric test was used in correlated datasets, the calculated p values will be underestimated. Possible remedies for the underestimated p values could be multiple comparisons procedures, such as Bonferroni correction or benjamin i hochberg FDR correction (which was applied in this study). A table showing the nominal alpha level for correlated data from go eman and B uhlmann (2007) can also be used to select a suitable alpha level according to a correlation threshold. A limitation of this approach is that in the simulation experiment mentioned above, all the data points have the same correlation coefficient. An alternative test that could be used instead of the hypergeometric test is the Wilcoxon rank sum test, where the comparison is between the number of correlation coefficients in one group pair and all other group pairs. ORCA can be used in pathway analysis in the same way as tools based on or a. However, the information that will be derived from ORCA relates specifically to the pathway interactions. For pathway or gene set analysis, ORCA can calculate the correlation coefficients between genes or metabolites and then find the pathway pairs that have more correlation coefficients that pass a certain threshold (determined by the threshold selection method or by other means) than expected. Our version of ORCA requires group membership of variables to be mutually exclusive. Therefore, it can not yet be used with pathway data where group members overlap, i.e. variables can not belong to more than one group. This is the subject of future work. Recently gene co function networks were used to identify cross category association between different GO classes (). However, cro go does not explicitly include gene expression values into the analysis and, therefore, could miss actual association between GO categories in the real biological context. In this regard, ORCA can be a crucial downstream analysis to cro go to highlight associations between GO categories that are of greatest importance, using gene expression to complement the associations identified by cro go. In conclusion, ORCA is a new method that combines analysis of correlation with or a and has the potential to reveal otherwise obscured associations between sets of variables, whether they are genes, proteins, metabolites or other molecular signals, in a wide variety of biological datasets. Although the method has clear application in '-omics' data analysis, ORCA can be profitable in any circumstance where an association network can be constructed between variables that can be classified into meaningful sets.
