Motivation: 5 methyl cytosine (5mC) and 5 hydroxymethyl cytosine (5hmC) are important epigen-etic regulators of gene expression. 5mC and 5hmC levels can be computationally inferred at single base resolution using sequencing or array data from paired DNA samples that have undergone bisulfite and oxidative bisulfite conversion. Current estimation methods have been shown to produce irregular estimates of 5hmC level or are extremely computation intensive. Results: We developed an efficient method ox bsm le based on binomial modeling of paired bisul-fite and oxidative bisulfite data from sequencing or array analysis. Evaluation in several datasets showed that it outperformed alternative methods in estimate accuracy and computation speed. Availability and Implementation: ox bsm le is implemented in Bioconductor package en mix. Contact:

introduction 5 methyl cytosine (5mC) is an essential epigenetic mark that regulates cell differentiation and gene expression. 5mC can be oxidized to 5 hydroxymethyl cytosine (5hmC) by activity of the ten eleven translocation (TET) enzyme (). 5hmC can function differently from 5mC in transcriptional control and is prevalent in embryonic stems cells (). Thus, it is desirable to separately quantify 5mC and 5hmC levels at single base resolution. Traditional bisulfite (BS) treatment commonly used in genome wide methylation studies can not distinguish 5mC from 5hmC: both are protected from conversion while unmodified cytosine s are converted to uracil (U). Selective oxidation of 5hmC to 5formyl cytosine (5fC) can be achieved by treatment with potassium per ru the nate (KRuO4), and 5fC converts to U following bisulfite treatment (). 5hmC level can be estimated using paired experiments on a DNA sample: bisulfite converted DNA can be used to estimate the proportion of 5mC  5hmC and oxidative bisulfite ox bs converted DNA can be used to estimate the proportion of 5mC. Measurement can be done in a genome wide manner using sequencing techniques, e.g. ox bs seq (); or for specific loci using array techniques, e.g. oxBS-450K () and ox bs array ().be non-negative. To overcome the limitation, a statistical approach, oxy bs () was proposed to estimate 5hmC and 5mC levels by assuming beta distributions for the two measurements. A limitation of this approach is that it is too computationally intensive for large studies. Here we propose a computationally efficient method ox bsm le (MLE stands for maximum likelihood estimate) to jointly estimate 5mC and 5hmC levels from the paired experimental data. Evaluations in real datasets show that it outperforms oxy bs and the nave nave method. ox bsm le has been implemented in the Bioconductor package en mix ().
