Motivation: Many computational methods for RNA secondary structure prediction, and, in particular, for the prediction of a consensus structure of an alignment of RNA sequences, have been developed. Most methods, however, ignore biophysical factors, such as the kin-etics of RNA folding; no current implementation considers both evolutionary information and folding kinetics, thus losing information that, when considered, might lead to better predictions. Results: We present an iterative algorithm, oxf old in the framework of stochastic context free grammars, that emulates the kinetics of RNA folding in a simplified way, in combination with a molecular evolution model. This method improves considerably on existing grammatical models that do not consider folding kinetics. Additionally, the model compares favourably to non kinetic thermodynamic models.

introduction the function of ribonucleic acid molecules (RNA) is known to depend on their 3D structure, which, in turn, depends on their secondary structure, a scaffold of base pairs formed by hydrogen bonds between nucleotides, for thermodynamic stability and molecular function. Accurate prediction of RNA secondary structures, however, falls short of being adequately solved. By contrast, the spreading of next generation sequencing technologies and new methods in transcript omics has increased the importance of RNA secondary structure prediction. This is exemplified by the growing amount of biological RNA data available in databases, such as rf am () and RNA STRAND (). Computational RNA secondary structure prediction methods have been used for a number of years: some of the first attempts (e.g.) simply evaluate the free energy of all possible secondary structures, postulating that the minimum free energy structure is the functional one. These thermodynamic models were later refined to take into account biological and thermodynamic principles and are used to great effect in algorithms such as rna fold () and una fold (), which rely on a large number of experimentally determined parameters. Alternative approaches use the framework of stochastic context free grammars sc fgs to find the most likely structure given their training data, postulating that this is the functional structure. Among the first to describe such models were Eddy and Durbin (1994). Many different grammatical models for RNA secondary structure prediction have been implemented (). If one seeks to build better grammatical models for RNA secondary structure prediction, one can take essentially two different routes build more complex grammars that express higher order dependencies, such as base pair stacking, and, for instance, thereby emulate the nearest neighbour model underlying thermodynamic approaches include additional biological and physical information about the sequences, for example, at the level of the previous pairing and un pairing probabilities of the grammar the former approach has been taken by Nebel and Scheid (2011) and. The latter developed a language to translate a wide variety of probabilistic and thermodynamic models for RNA secondary structure prediction into the language of sc fgs yielding highly complex grammars with a large number of parameters. However, we follow the latter approach, which was pioneered by, who coupled a simple grammar to an evolutionary model to obtain better estimates of the previous base pairing probabilities when folding an alignment of RNA sequences. Most current approaches to RNA secondary structure prediction are static, insofar as they assess structures based on their constituent elements like base pairs and loops but with no contribution from the path followed to form these *To whom correspondence should be addressed. elements, insofar as they fold sequences in one go, and thereby ignore the mechanisms of folding. The importance of folding mechanisms was noted by, who studied the folding of intermediary stems. We note that 'the differences between real structures and the minimum energy states are believed to be determined mainly by defects in the energy rules used or by the existence of specific folding pathways capturing molecules in local minima' (). Just as comparative structure prediction is based on the observation that structure is important for function and, hence, conserved, as folding kinetics is important for either guiding or determining structure formation, we would expect evolution to exert selection on the kinetics too. Previously, evolutionary models () and kinetic models (e.g.) have been implemented, but they have not been combined. It is, therefore, important to implement folding kinetics in an evolutionary framework. In this article, we work in the framework of the fundamental problem of predicting a consensus structure for a given fixed alignment of RNA sequences. We incorporate folding kinetics, in a simplified way, into an evolutionary grammatical model in an iterative framework. Further, we introduce a distance function to incorporate information about the relationships between different pairs of columns, thus adopting the second of the aforementioned approaches. The resulting model is benchmarked against pp fold (SukosdSuko), a parallelized implementation of the p fold algorithm of. Additionally, we compare it with a thermodynamic model, rna ali fold ().
