The use of sodium bisulfite (BS) treatment followed by hybridization to an Illumina Infinium bead chip human methylation 450 and methylation epic is a common method for interrogating 5 methyl cytosine (5mC) at single nucleotide resolution. However, standard treatment of DNA with BS does not allow disambiguation of 5mC from an additional cytosine modification, 5 hydroxymethyl cytosine (5hmC). Recently, it has been demonstrated that paired BS and oxidative bisulfite ox bs treatment on the same sample followed by hybridization to an Infinium microarray permits the differentiation of 5hmC from 5mC. Nevertheless, estimation of 5hmC and 5mC from tandem treated arrays has been shown to produce irregular estimates of cytosine modifications. Results: We present a novel method using maximum likelihood estimation to accurately estimate the parameters of unmethylated cytosine (5C), 5mC and 5hmC from Infinium microarray data given the signal intensities from the ox bs and BS replicates. Availability and Implementation: oxy bs is an R package available on CRAN.

introduction 5 methyl cytosine (5mC) is an essential epigenetic mark that controls gene expression or gene expression potential (). 5mC is the most widely studied epigenetic mark, and assays are available for mapping 5mC genome wide at a single base resolution (). Although whole genome bisulfite sequencing offers a complete characterization of the epi genome DNA methylation microarray after bisulfite (BS) treatment has been the most commonly used genome wide application (). Additional modifications to cytosine that modulate normal gene function have been implicated in disease development (). Indeed, the ten eleven translocation family of proteins has been shown to function as enzymes capable of altering the methylation status of DNA by oxidizing 5mC to 5 hydroxymethyl cytosine (5hmC). Emerging evidence has suggested that 5hmC may act both as a transient intermediate in the process of 5mC demethylation and a functional epigenetic mark that regulates transcription (). Treatment of DNA with BS alone is unable to disambiguate 5hmC from 5mC. A growing appreciation for the role of 5hmC in biological processes and disease prompted the addition of an oxidation step prior to BS treatment ox bs that selectively oxidizes 5hmC to resolve 'true' 5mC levels. Paired BS and ox bs treatment on the same samples followed by hybridization to the Illumina 450K array now permits the differentiation of 5hmC from 5mC (). However, nave nave estimation of 5hmC via the difference in values between ox bs and BS signals V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com results in some estimates with negative values and summed cytosine modification triplet estimates [unmodified cytosine (5C), 5mC and 5hmC] that exceed a value of 1.0. In the context of cytosine modifications, negative values of 5hmC and triplet sums exceeding 1.0 do not represent valid biological observations and these inconsistencies may represent artifacts of random assay noise.
