The r bioconductor package Protein Array Analyzer pa a facilitates a flexible analysis of protein microarrays for biomarker discovery (esp., proto arrays. It provides a complete data analysis workflow including preprocessing and quality control, uni and multivariate feature selection as well as several different plots and results tables to outline and evaluate the analysis results. As a main feature, pa as multivariate feature selection methods are based on recursive feature elimination (e.g. svm recursive feature elimination, svm rfe with stability ensuring strategies such as ensemble feature selection. This enables pa a to detect stable and reliable biomarker candidate panels. Availability and implementation: pa a is freely available (BSD 3 clause license) from http:// www bioconductor org packages pa a
introduction protein microarrays (PMs) such as the proto array by Thermo Fisher Scientific, Waltham, MA, USA, are used for autoimmune antibody screening studies, e.g. to discover biomarker candidate panels in human body fluids to discriminate two groups of samples (e.g. 'diseased' and 'controls'). For proto array data analysis the software Prospector is often used because it provides the advantageous univariate feature ranking approach minimum M statistic (mMs) () and a proto array specific robust linear model normalization (rlm) (). However, since Prospector provides hardly any further functionality for biomarker discovery it is a quite limited tool (). Therefore, we have adopted and extended Prospector's key features (mMs, rlm) and implemented pa a which provides a complete data analysis pipeline for proto arrays and other single color PMs.

conclusion pa a provides a comprehensive toolbox and an adaptable workflow for PM data analysis. It comprises the most important methods of Prospector and goes far beyond. Especially the multivariate feature selection based on RFE embedded in FFS or EFS, which is a cutting edge strategy for biomarker discovery, enables pa a to identify stable and reliable feature panels. Finally, pa a is flexible since the r bioconductor framework facilitates workflow extension and customization.
