Motivation: time series measurements of metabolite concentration have become increasingly more common, providing data for building kinetic models of metabolic networks using ordinary differential equations (ODEs). In practice, however, such time course data are usually incomplete and noisy, and the estimation of kinetic parameters from these data is challenging. Practical limitations due to data and computational aspects, such as solving stiff ODEs and finding global optimal solution to the estimation problem, give motivations to develop a new estimation procedure that can circumvent some of these constraints. Results: In this work, an incremental and iterative parameter estimation method is proposed that combines and iterates between two estimation phases. One phase involves a decoupling method, in which a subset of model parameters that are associated with measured metabolites, are estimated using the minimization of slope errors. Another phase follows, in which the ODE model is solved one equation at a time and the remaining model parameters are obtained by minimizing concentration errors. The performance of this two phase method was tested on a generic branched metabolic pathway and the glycolytic pathway of Lactococcus lactis. The results showed that the method is efficient in getting accurate parameter estimates, even when some information is missing.

introduction advancements in biological techniques have made time series measurements of metabolite concentration more readily available, providing data for the creation of kinetic metabolic network models in the form of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). time course data contain information about the structure and dynamics of the metabolic pathways, but such information is implicit and must be extracted using an inference method. This inverse modeling task has motivated the creation of various methods for parameter estimation and structure identification, as summarized in a recent review (). However, the inverse modeling of biological systems is often complicated by the lack of complete data, * To whom correspondence should be addressed poor data quality (noise) and the computational difficulty in solving model equations and optimization problems. Existing techniques often fail to yield accurate parameter estimates due to one or a combination of these reasons. time series datasets for metabolites are usually incomplete and noisy due to two roadblocks: complexity and technology. The high complexity of metabolic networks with a large number of metabolites means that the complete measurement of all relevant metabolites is not practically feasible. In addition, in order to accurately capture the dynamic behaviors of metabolites, the time course data should be measured frequently enough, which often challenges the limit of the available techniques. Furthermore, in experiments, several time points of metabolites could be missing because of various reasons (e.g. human error). While the issue of missing time points can be partly addressed by data interpolation, the complete loss of data from metabolites poses a more challenging problem in parameter estimation and is the focus of the present work. In few instances, it may be possible to obtain missing metabolite measurements by analyzing the convex basis of the left null space of the stoichiometric matrix, which gives the sets of metabolites whose total weighted concentration is time invariant (). Among canonical ODE models of metabolic networks, power law models within the Biochemical Systems Theory (BST) (), such as s system have drawn much attention due to many advantages (). The generic form of an s system model is given by where X is an n dimensional metabolite concentration vector and the parameter vector p consists of the rate constants ( i ,  i ) and kinetic orders (g ij , h ij ). The sign of the kinetic orders indicates the nature of the connectivity among metabolites, where a positive value represents a substrate or activation and a negative number

discussion the proposed iterative parameter estimation method builds on the strengths of the decoupling method and the ODE decomposition method. By decoupling the ODEs, this method is significantly faster than other methods that require integrating complete coupled ODEs at each objective function evaluation, while still giving good fit to measured concentration data. In addition, like the ODE decomposition method, the combined approach does not require complete measurements of all metabolites and has much reduced parameter search space. As shown in the applications to the two cases, the proposed method was superior to the two methods from which it was developed. When metabolite measurements were in completely available, the decoupling method could not be applied. Compared with the ODE decomposition method, the proposed method gave more accurate parameter estimates and better data fit (slope and concentration) at a much lower computational cost. While the fit to missing concentration measurement had an offset, it is noteworthy that the dynamic trend can be captured. The combination of slope and concentration fitting had also been used in several existing parameter estimation methods. For example, Wang and Liu had developed a method where kinetic
