Motivation: A current challenge in understanding cancer processes is to pinpoint which mutations influence the onset and progression of disease. Toward this goal, we describe a method called paradigm shift that can predict whether a mutational event is neutral, gain or loss of function in a tumor sample. The method uses a belief propagation algorithm to infer gene activity from gene expression and copy number data in the context of a set of pathway interactions. Results: The method was found to be both sensitive and specific on a set of positive and negative controls for multiple cancers for which pathway information was available. Application to the Cancer Genome Atlas glioblastoma, ovarian and lung squamous cancer datasets revealed several novel mutations with predicted high impact including several genes mutated at low frequency suggesting the approach will be complementary to current approaches that rely on the prevalence of events to reach statistical significance. Availability: All source code is available at the git hub repository

introduction a comprehensive cancer survey such as that being generated by the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) program uncovers numerous genomic events in tumors that are a mix of both causal, driving events and neutral, passenger events that accumulate as a result of dysregulated genomic surveillance and cell proliferation with clonal expansion over time. exo me and whole genome sequencing efforts uncover recurrent mutational events in a few genes and low frequency events in many other genes. Importantly, examples of such low frequency genes are known to be functionally important to disease. For example, although BRAF V600E is common in melanoma, it occurs in only 3% of non small cell lung cancer, but is clearly a driver when present (). Although there exist well described mutations in certain codons of key genes that drive oncogenesis, most somatic mutations in cancer are neutral with respect to overall cell fitness. Many approaches exist * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to predict the impact of a mutation. However, no existing method incorporates pathway level information into the assessment of the consequences of a mutation. Investigating the impact of a mutated gene on its pathway neighborhood may provide complementary information to existing approaches. Current methods often use the frequency of a mutated gene across a cohort, the location of a mutation in the gene, whether the mutations are silent or non silent frame-shifting, potentially protein domain altering, found in more evolutionarily conserved regions of the peptide sequence, or cluster together in the protein sequence or structure. Although such methods have shown tremendous success, they have limitations that impact their generality. For example, some methods must be trained from external datasets such as from the COSMIC database, which introduces possible circularity to the analysis and biases the discovery of genes whose mutational impact has already been characterized. The most popular approach builds gene signatures by training machine learning classifiers to recognize the presence and absence of mutations from molecular features such as gene expression data (). These methods can be applied to any number of genomic perturbations including mutations, focal copy number gains or losses, or chromatin methylation events and have the potential of detecting whether mutations in regulatory regions have functional significance. Genes with expression levels that are differentially associated with the presence (compared with the absence) of a mutation are candidates for inclusion in the gene signature using any number of a variety of univariate and multivariate machine learning and feature selection approaches. One major limitation is that signatures often fail to generalize from one dataset to another. If our pathway knowledge surrounding a particular gene is complete enough and we have enough data to provide information about the activity of neighboring genes, then we can estimate the pathway consequences of a mutation in a tumor sample (). Intuitively, if a mutation influences the function of a focus gene (FG) it may create a particular signature on FG's local pathway neighborhood. In the case of a loss of function l of event, the regulatory inputs to the FG would indicate that the gene should be turned on at the transcriptional and or post-transcriptional levels. For instance, a transcription factor and kinase that regulate different parts of FG's activity may themselves be active. However, when predicting the impact of a mutation based on the activity of a FG inferred from its local pathway context. l of is predicted when FG's downstream targets have activity consistent with a low activity of FG relative to what is expected given its upstream regulators. g of is predicted when the downstream regulators are consistent with a high activity of FG but the upstream regulators are not one inspects the activity of genes downstream of FG, one might find evidence that the FG is not active. For example, FG also may be a transcription factor with target genes exhibiting low or undetectable levels of expression. In the gain of function g of case, the opposite situation would occur where the downstream targets are consistent with a higher activity of the FG than what would be expected from FG's regulatory inputs. The method we introduce, paradigm shift detects a difference in the expected activity of a gene in its downstream neighborhood relative to what is expected given its upstream neighborhood. It makes use of two key pieces of information: (i) the known genetic interactions of a gene; and (ii) the activation or deactivation of these interacting genes to gauge the impact of a mutational event. Since the method uses the data of a sample to contrast the predicted regulatory input from the downstream output of a gene it should provide somewhat orthogonal information for annotating mutations than other approaches.

discussion our approach uses different information compared with protein sequence based approaches. It enables probing into infrequent events and can be used to detect the impact of non-coding mutations. In addition, it may be useful for detecting those cases that harbor passenger mutations where the mutation is either neutral or the cell has compensated somehow to keep the surrounding pathway intact. Finally, since our approach couples single gene mutation events with broader pathway activation signatures, it could be used to place genes with unknown little known function and provocative mutations, into new pathways, as suggested by the case of HUWE1. The method we describe has several limitations. Although absolute p shifts show a good overall correlation with mut sig several of the genes seem to have predictions on average in the opposite direction than expected (e.g. NF1 in GBM). Complex regulatory logic surrounding the gene may show a discrepancy but the direction of the discrepancy may not always be clear. It will take further investigation into these cases to determine if a reliable direction can be inferred from the sign of the p shift score. The selection of the upstream and downstream pathways are key steps for accurate prediction of events in individual samples. Because of the combinatorial complexity of the selection problem, research is needed to determine a neighborhood that gives maximum performance at identifying the presence and absence of mutations. Our results do indicate that even mild supervision of the neighborhood selection step gives slightly better performance. In addition, an SVM gene expression signature based approach provides higher accuracy in predicting the presence absence of mutations. Since the SVM can not be used to gauge the loss versus g of of a gene, using the p shift together with the SVM might improve the discrimination between mutant and non mutant samples as indicated in supplementary but it will be interesting to see if the directionality of the shift is also improved. In this investigation, it would be informative to perturb neighborhood members, connections, parameters and neighborhood selection policies to measure how the performance varies to errors in the pathways. Finally, the method can only be applied to genes with sufficient representation in the curated set of pathway interactions. Although current pathway databases have a biased coverage of cancer related genes, many of the genes with low frequency mutations are still among those with little pathway information. It is critical to expand pathways beyond the curated set to encompass such orphan genes into the analysis of mutation consequences. Indeed, current efforts are underway to expand pathway databases by including high throughput functional genomics results (). These efforts should greatly improve the breadth of genes to which pathway based mutation impact approaches can be applied.
