Motivation: Inferring large transcriptional networks using mutual information has been shown to be effective in several experimental setup. Unfortunately, this approach has two main drawbacks: (i) several mutual information estimators are prone to biases and (ii) available software still has large computational costs when processing thousand of genes. Results: Here, we present parmi gene (PARallel Mutual Information estimation for GEne NEtwork reconstruction), an R package that tries to fill the above gaps. It implements a mutual information estimator based on k nearest neighbor distances that is minimally biased with respect to the other methods and uses a parallel computing paradigm to reconstruct gene regulatory networks. We test parmi gene on in silico and real data. We show that parmi gene gives more precise results than existing softwares with strikingly less computational costs. Availability and Implementation: The parmi gene package is available on the CRAN network at http://cran.r-project.org/web/ packages/.

introduction inferring gene regulatory networks grn s is currently one of the most challenging task in systems biology. Several approaches have been proposed to reconstruct grn s using experimental data (paradigm of reverse engineering approach) such as Bayesian Networks (BN) (), Relevance Networks (RN), () and Graphical Gaussian Models (GGM) (); see for a comparative review. While BN and GGM should be able to distinguish between direct and indirect edges, RN does not. However, BN and GGM hardly work in the case of thousands of genes and with a small number of replicates, while RN have the ability to deal with them. The seminal paper of extends RN introducing an algorithm based on the Data Processing Inequality (DPI) for removing indirect edges. Their approach, called ar acne has been successfully applied to reconstruct the subnetwork of the MYC gene in human B cells. At the same time, other methodologies have been proposed to remove indirect edges: the CLR and the mr net algorithms; for additional details, see. Although successfully * To whom correspondence should be addressed. applied in the reconstruction of grn s RN based on MI estimation are still affected by two major drawbacks: (i) some MI estimators are biased (see Supplementary Material for details) and (ii) even if RN computational cost is comparatively lower than that of BN and GGM, the time required to reconstruct the GRN of several thousand genes is still extremely large. Here, we present parmi gene (PARallel Mutual Information calculation for GEne NEtwork reconstruction) a novel fast and parallel R package that (i) performs network inference implementing a minimally biased MI estimator, following kr askov s algorithm (hereafter knn mi () based on k nearest neighbor distances, and (ii) uses OpenMP to implement a parallel GRN reconstruction with a strikingly fast run times. In the following, we report (i) the bias obtained by knn mi compared with the other MI estimators, (ii) the precision obtained by parmi gene in the reconstruction of the MYC subnetwork using real data () and (iii) the computational costs for GRN reconstruction.

conclusion the MI estimator implemented in parmi gene gives almost unbiased results and, more importantly, more precise results on real data. In addition, parmi gene has strikingly fast execution times.
