The regulation of protein activity is a key aspect of life at the molecular level. Unveiling its details is thus crucial to understanding signalling and metabolic pathways. The most common and powerful mechanism of protein function regulation is all oster y which has been increasingly calling the attention of medicinal chemists due to its potential for the discovery of novel therapeutics. In this context, PARS is a simple and fast method that queries protein dynamics and structural conservation to identify pockets on a protein structure that may exert a regulatory effect on the binding of a small molecule ligand. Availability: PARS is freely available as a web server at http://bioinf. uab cat pars
introduction tight regulation of protein function is fundamental to life. Proteins involved in metabolic pathways, signalling cascades and genomic transcription, among other processes within the living cell, are commonly under allosteric regulation, i.e. their activity is modified through the binding of a ligand molecule to the protein in a site different from the active site. In fact, all oster y is one of the most powerful protein function regulation mechanisms, as it allows proteins to sense and immediately respond to changes in their environment (). Traditional drug design approaches focusing on active or primary binding sites can be, therefore, extended by exploiting allosteric sites, as shown by current efforts on GPCRs () or farnesyl pyrophosphate synthase (). An advantage of targeting allosteric sites therapeutically is a reduced risk of secondary adverse effects. This is because allosteric sites appear to be significantly less conserved than active sites across homolog proteins (), enabling the design of allosteric drugs with high specificity for a single protein within a family. This observation has motivated the development of allosteric drugs for the regulation of phosphodiesterase 4D, for which active site inhibitors cause emesis, a dose limiting side effect (). Moreover, a drug discovery approach based on allosteric sites may result in the development of not only novel drug like inhibitors but activators as well (). Other concepts such as the notion of serendipitous allosteric sites, which have no known ligand in nature but can become functional in the presence of an 'opportunistic' ligand () or the idea that almost any protein may be regulated allosteric ally (), contribute to the current interest in the pharmacological exploitation of allosteric sites. In this context, it is expected that a deeper understanding of the properties of allosteric sites and their identification would help streamlining the design and discovery of novel therapeutic drugs (). Despite growing efforts, the atomic level details that explain the functional relationship between distant sites in the same protein molecule have not been elucidated for most of the known cases of all oster y (). This has motivated a growth in the number of computational studies on protein allosteric sites, including the recent publication of three web servers: SPACER () and mc path (), which study the allosteric communication across residues in a protein structure, and allo site (), which predicts allosteric sites on protein structures using a machine learning approach. Here, we present PARS, which queries protein flexibility and structural conservation to predict the location of allosteric sites. The implementation emphasizes ease of use and speed, whereas maintaining high accuracy as benchmarked against a large set of known allosteric proteins. Even though our method (as the servers mentioned earlier in the text) requires a protein structure to work, we have added an initial homology modelling step that allows the user to run predictions starting from protein sequence in cases where a known structure is not available.

description the current perspective on allosteric transitions and associated regulatory events relies on the 'population shift' concept (). Briefly, the protein or protein complex explores different conformations (both active and inactive) in solution, and the allosteric ligand 'shifts' the population or ensemble of conformations on binding, effectively modulating the protein's activity rate (). The conformational space explored by the protein can be sampled using computational methods such as molecular dynamics () or normal mode analysis nm a (). In our approach, protein dynamics are queried *To whom correspondence should be addressed. through nm a allowing fast large scale (potentially genome wide analyses. The method developed previously () is now implemented as a web server working as follows: (i) initially, the user uploads a protein structure file (PDB format) and selects which chains and ligands should be considered for the calculations. Alternatively, the user may submit a protein sequence and the server will attempt to generate a structural model by homology to known structural templates (). (ii) Once the job is submitted, the lig site cs program () is used to predict putative ligand binding sites, where a simplified representation of a small molecule (i.e. a set of dummy atoms forming an octahedron) will be placed to simulate the presence of a ligand. (iii) nm a is carried out for the apo (unbound) structure. (iv) For each potential ligand binding site, an nm a is executed for the protein ligand complex using a simplified ligand representation; if a co crystallized ligand is selected, the calculation will be performed for the corresponding binding site. (v) If a significant difference is found between the nm a derived b factors of the apo and ligand bound states of the protein wilcoxon mann whitney s P 0.05), the binding site is marked as potentially allosteric. complement a rily if enough structural data are available for the protein family, the structural conservation of each pocket is also measured. We have previously shown that allosteric sites tend to be structurally conserved within a protein family () and that the incorporation of this measure improves the capacity of the method based on dynamics to correctly identify allosteric sites (). Immediately after submission the user is provided with a link where results can be accessed once the calculation has finished. Optionally, the user can choose to be notified by email when results are available. A standard run on a 500 residue protein will take 3 min. Even though calculation times increase exponentially with the number of residues, larger systems can be processed within reasonable time (e.g. 1000 residues 12 min). The results are delivered as a ranking and, if the browser allows it, the binding sites can be explored online on the 3D protein structure by means of the Jmol package (http://www.jmol.org/). To complement the analysis, active site residues are predicted and reported on the structure using a previously described methodology (). Binding sites and ligands are color coded according to given thresholds for the level of structural conservation ( 50%) and the predicted effect on protein dynamics (P 0.05). The protein structure file including the position of identified sites, a visualization script and a table with calculated values can be downloaded as well for further processing. Normal modes and derived b factors can be explored in detail using specifically designed interfaces that are available at the results web page. A more detailed description of the server and its parameters is provided as Supplementary Material and available as online documentation on the website. Predicting allosteric sites computationally is not trivial, and to illustrate the success rate that the user can expect, we have benchmarked PARS using 102 allosteric proteins. Briefly, the results show that if we consider all predicted cavities matching an allosteric site in the benchmark set, 44% appear in the first position and 18% on the second position of the PARS ranking, whereas a total of 73% are found in the top three positions. Full benchmark details and performance statistics are available as Supplementary Material. We expect that this easy to use and relatively fast web server will prove useful for medicinal chemists and other researchers studying the regulation of protein function for biochemical characterization and other applied tasks such as binding site prioritization for virtual drug screening.
