Motivation: Evolutionarily conserved amino acids within proteins characterize functional or structural regions. Conversely, less conserved amino acids within these regions are generally areas of evolutionary divergence. A priori knowledge of biological function and species can help interpret the amino acid differences between sequences. However, this information is often erroneous or unavailable , hampering discovery with supervised algorithms. Also, most of the current unsupervised methods depend on full sequence similarity, which become inaccurate when proteins diverge (e.g. inversions, deletions, insertions). Due to these and other shortcomings, we developed a novel un-supervised algorithm which discovers highly conserved regions and uses two types of information measures: (i) data measures computed from input sequences; and (ii) class measures computed using a priori class groupings in order to reveal subgroups (i.e. classes) or functional characteristics. Results: Using known and putative sequences of two proteins belonging to a relatively uncharac-terized protein family we were able to group evolutionarily related sequences and identify conserved regions, which are strong homologous association patterns called Aligned Pattern Clusters, within individual proteins and across the members of this family. An initial synthetic demonstration and in silico results reveal that (i) the data measures are unbiased and (ii) our class measures can accurately rank the quality of the evolutionarily relevant groupings. Furthermore, combining our data and class measures allowed us to interpret the results by inferring regions of biological importance within the binding domain of these proteins. Compared to popular supervised methods, our algorithm has a superior runtime and comparable accuracy.

introduction as sequencing technologies continue to improve, the amount of biological information has become more difficult to effectively analyze. Biologists often need to identify conserved regions in DNA or protein sequences as these are often essential for biological function conversely areas of low sequence homology are often useful in studying evolutionary divergence or novel function (). Herein, we develop an unsupervised aligned pattern clustering tool to facilitate the identification of areas of conservation and divergence in protein sequences. Using two members of the class A scavenger receptors, whose evolutionary origin and relatedness has been previously described based on phylo genic approaches (), we demonstrate that our method is as effective as multiple sequence alignments for motif discovery. In addition, our algorithm is more effective in grouping the two proteins across a wide range of organisms, including the identification of conserved and mutated amino acids within each protein and across the family of proteins, thus identifying regions of potential functional significance amongst homologs and orthologs. Protein families can consist of many thousands of members, and the distinction between these members becomes less clear with greater evolutionary distance. In supervised learning (also known as classification), the groups are predetermined as a priori knowledge, given as class labels, and the model is optimally learned to predict those labels (). In unsupervised clustering, the samples (i.e. sequences) are grouped or partitioned based on their similarity () or common features (i.e. amino acid sequences motifs with strong statistical association usually along the entire sequence) (). To show the uniqueness of our approach, we propose the following problem definition: Given a set of input sequences in pre-existing groups (i.e. with class labels), our algorithm discovers subsequences (i.e. motifs/ regions) with strong statistical association which distinguishes subgroups within the data and in turn reveal other biologically relevant information. We can rank the quality of these discovered patterns, and group their inherent characteristics using our data measures. By then using our class measures, we can identify whether these discovered patterns and their amino acid mutations partitioned subgroups match the pre-existing groups as reflected by the class labels. An example using the well known cytochrome c protein () is used to illustrate how local patterns can be related to species. Here the sequence patterns ca ech ca wch and cl q ch appear in the input sequences describing three class groups, namely plant, mammal and fungi. If these patterns were conserved amino acid sequences with presumed functional significance, the aligned patterns could reveal similarities and or differences for associating with the species (i.e. classes). Once conserved regions and their associated patterns are localized, information measures are able to partition group or class characteristics from the aligned patterns. Such information can then be used to describe the classes as well as to justify and assist classification.

discussion in this study (), we observed 7 out of the top 14 a pcs with positive IG scores that were able to partition the ca srs. Three of these a pcs have amino acid mutations with an IG value of 1, indicating that they partitioned the protein classes precisely. These a pcs contain amino acid mutations that are natural data partitions that match the class partitions. Some of these partitions have been observed previously and are thought to explain some of the functional differences between these proteins. For example, both MARCO and sra i contain a ligand binding, Scavenger Receptor Cysteine Rich src r domain. MARCO's src r domain contains a motif (RGRAEVYYSGT) which is not shared by sra i and is thought to explain some of the differences in the ligand binding capabilities of these two receptors (). we mine apc correctly identifies this motif as in the 11th ranking APC, NRGRAEVYY. Consistent with previous results, this motif is only found within the MARCO class and not within any sra i sequence. Additionally, the ninth ranking APC, wg tcdd rw was also recently identified by via fast ml and is hypothesized to be important structurally given its inclusion of a conserved cysteine residue. This demonstrates that SR2 can reveal subclass dependency even when class labels are unreliable or IG is 0. In summary, both of these patterns have been previously identified with methods other than we mine apc to represent motifs of known functional importance.
