We describe an R package designed for processing aligned reads from chromatin oriented high throughput sequencing experiments. Pasha (preprocessing of aligned sequences from HTS analyses) allows easy manipulation of aligned reads from short read sequencing technologies chips eq faire seq m nase seq. . .) and offers innovative approaches such as chips eq reads elongation, nucleosome midpoint piling strategy for positioning analyses, or the ability to subset paired end reads by groups of insert size that can contain biologically relevant information. Availability and implementation: Pasha is a multi-platform R package, available on CRAN repositories under GPL-3 license (https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Pasha/).

introduction transcription regulation analyses benefited from the transition to High Throughput Sequencing (HTS) technology, which offers an unprecedented coverage by sequencing a large number of small sequences in parallel. However, while library preparation protocols recommend the selection of sheared DNA fragments ranging from less than 100 bp to more than 500 bp, the read size generated by the sequencing process is often shorter (25100 bp). As a consequence, typical single end sequencing reads will display a gap between enrichments on both strands after alignment to the reference genome. In most analyses scenarios, peak detection algorithms are making use of the lag between the strands to infer the theoretical center of enrichment (). However, while the localization of binding events is a crucial step for analyzing stable binding factors in chips eq experiments, an additional layer of qualitative and quantitative analyses are often required for an exhaustive description of transient or dynamic chromatin association (e.g. RNA Polymerase). To characterize such profiles, it is critical to restore the missing coverage information from read sequences in order to preserve the qualitative and quantitative aspect of the data. Here, we describe a piling tool that addresses this question by transforming aligned reads to piled enrichment scores. The modular structure of this pipeline makes it adaptable to most experimental scenarios for chromatin oriented analyses, as well as short RNA sequencing. Pasha pipeline is for instance able to process seamlessly paired ends or single ends dataset by loading appropriate module, and allows the user to focus on biologically relevant parameters. Importantly, a versatile set of options decorates the core pipeline and enables innovative approaches for downstream analyses, such as an alternative midpoint piling strategy often used for nucleosome positioning analyses, or the ability to subset paired end reads by groups of insert size for a finer analysis of fragments population. Finally, in order to maximize the compatibility with public tools and facilitate the integration to existing pipelines, a broad range of input and output file formats were implemented (Supplementary).

Description
