pathways web is a resource based well documented web system that provides publicly available information on genes, biological pathways, Gene Ontology (GO) terms, gene gene interaction networks (importantly, with the directionality of interactions) and links to key related PubMed documents. The pathways web API simplifies the construction of applications that need to retrieve and interrelate information across multiple, pathway related data types from a variety of original data sources. pathways browser is a companion website that enables users to explore the same integrated pathway data. The pathways web system facilitates reproducible analyses by providing access to all versions of the integrated datasets. Although its GO subsystem includes data for mouse, pathways web currently focuses on human data. However, pathways for mouse and many other species can be inferred with a high success rate from human pathways. Availability and implementation: pathways web can be accessed via the Internet at

introduction although the inclusion of pathway and gene interaction information into novel bioinformatics analysis methods is widely expected to result in more powerful and sensitive bioinformatic analyses, we found it surprisingly difficult to assemble a comprehensive database of pathway information in a form suitable for our requirements. Specific challenges we faced included: @BULLET Finding a single comprehensive source of pathway related data that maintains consistent approved identifiers for genes and biological pathways across multiple data sources. @BULLET Finding data sources that provide coordinated snapshots of data from multiple sources at a given time to enable replication of results bullet Finding data licensed in a way that would allow us to make our tools freely available, not just to academic institutions or requiring an additional license agreement for use although many databases and application programming interfaces (APIs) exist for retrieving pathway related data for use in biological research, they provide data that are incomplete, use different data identifiers or include databases that are not in sync with one another. Those incompatibilities make the data difficult to merge. Furthermore, the APIs and data formats change often and without warning. Many systems have no API and require either the download of an entire database or parsing of web pages to access the data using an automated system. Some have severe limitations as to how much information can be retrieved using a single search. Because of the issues listed above, we have developed the pathways web system. To harmonize the data from various sources, we ensure that gene identifiers are based on gene symbols approved by the Human Gene Nomenclature Committee (HGNC) where possible. The system presents the combined harmonized data via an integrated web API. Each set of data loaded from the various sources is made available as an archived version that provides a snapshot of data from all of the sources at one point in time. That pattern of organization assists in reproducibility of analyses. The system is divided into two parts: (i) pathways web which provides data in XML or JSON format for use by automated software systems, and ii pathways browser which provides human friendly access via HTML pages viewable via standard web browsers. The code base and database are not currently available for download online but arrangements could be made available to provide this data. A new version of the data will be added every 6 months.
