cell designer provides a user friendly interface for graphical biochemical pathway description. Many pathway databases are not directly exportable to cell designer models. pathway access is an extensible suite of cell designer plugins, which connect cell designer directly to pathway databases using respective Java application programming interfaces. The process is streamlined for creating new pathway access plugins for specific pathway databases. Three pathway access plugins, met net access bio cyc access and reactome access directly connect cell designer to the pathway databases met net db bio cyc and Reactome. pathway access plugins enable cell designer users to expose pathway data to analytical cell designer functions, curate their pathway databases and visually integrate pathway data from different databases using standard Systems Biology Markup Language and Systems Biology Graphical Notation. Availability: Implemented in Java, pathway access plugins run with cell designer version 4.0.1 and were tested on Ubuntu Linux, Windows XP and 7, and MacOSX. Source code, binaries, documentation and video walkthroughs are freely available at

introduction cell designer () is a tool for graphically building biochemical pathway models, which integrate model representation by Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML;) with graphical representation by Systems Biology Graphical Notation s bgn. There exist many databases providing application programming interface (API) libraries enabling programmatic queries. These API libraries include many biologically meaningful objects, which carry out intuitive functions. For example, a pathway object can report the set of reaction objects it contains, a protein complex object can report the monomer objects that cont sr uct it and a metabolite object might report its SMILES and inch i codes. The problem is that a Pathway object in one API is not the same as a Pathway object in the API of a different database. The same biological concept is represented using independently developed in silico representations, preventing any single application from communicating and integrating across databases. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
