Motivation: The expansion of cancer genome sequencing continues to stimulate development of analytical tools for inferring relationships between somatic changes and tumor development. Pathway associations are especially consequential, but existing algorithms are demonstrably inadequate. Methods: Here, we propose the paths can significance test for the scenario where pathway mutations collectively contribute to tumor development. Its design addresses two aspects that established methods neglect. First, we account for variations in gene length and the consequent differences in their mutation probabilities under the standard null hypothesis of random mutation. The associated spike in computational effort is mitigated by accurate convolution based approximation. Second, we combine individual probabilities into a multiple sample value using fisher lancaster theory, thereby improving differentiation between a few highly mutated genes and many genes having only a few mutations a piece. We investigate accuracy, computational effort and power, reporting acceptable performance for each. Results: As an example calculation, we re-analyze kegg based lung adenocarcinoma pathway mutations from the Tumor Sequencing Project. Our test recapitulates the most significant pathways and finds that others for which the original test battery was inconclusive are not actually significant. It also identifies the focal adhesion pathway as being significantly mutated, a finding consistent with earlier studies. We also expand this analysis to other databases: Reactome, BioCarta, Pfam, PID and SMART, finding additional hits in ErbB and EPHA signaling pathways and regulation of telomerase. All have implications and plausible mechanistic roles in cancer. Finally, we discuss aspects of extending the method to integrate gene specific background rates and other types of genetic anomalies.

introduction the Human Genome Project (HGP) recently culminated in the first composite human reference sequence (International Human Genome Sequencing) and researchers have since been vigorously building upon this result. Much of the work targets medical applications, such as in cancer genomics, and a significant fraction of the sequencing enterprise is now shifting in that direction (). Indeed, instruments and automation have advanced to the point where the ability to sequence both the tumor and normal genomes from large numbers of patients is now emerging. Such whole genome data should allow somatic mutations to be reliably separated from germline variations for further study. The subsequent, more difficult challenge then becomes one of differentiating functionally related somatic 'driver' mutations from incidental 'passenger' variants (). In the early stages of a project, this task usually manifests itself as a hypothesis testing problem on the mutational significance of genes or pathways. The intent is to filter an initially large collection of candidates down to a better targeted set that will be examined more comprehensively (). Concerns at this stage revolve mainly around false positive and false negative errors, i.e. instances where an irrelevant feature is accepted and where a true feature is overlooked, respectively. Methods for statistical testing of cancer DNA sequence data are now actively being developed (), several of which are listed in. While there are certain subject specific nuances in applying the statistical method to cancer sequence data, these examples all share the commonality of being founded upon well established concepts from mathematical statistics. If history is any guide, we anticipate the development of additional types of tests and a subsequent 'toolbox' approach for statistical inference in cancer genomics studies (). While these remarks paint a pleasant picture of orderly development and application, the design of new statistical tools for cancer sequence has not been without its difficulties. Aside from the requirement that a test be constructed on a sound basis, i.e. the underlying hypothesis is scientifically relevant and the resultant p value is a reliable indicator on this hypothesis, it must also satisfy a more utilitarian 'computability' condition. That is, a test is unlikely to find broad application if it is inordinately difficult to evaluate (). This aspect is sometimes not sufficiently appreciated, as the odyssey of the Cancer mutation prevalence (CaMP) score () so dramatically illustrates. CaMP was roundly criticized as ipso facto incorrect because of its use of probability mass values rather than tailed p values (; Rubin and). Its designers countered that the CaMP concept is sound, but conceded that its form makes it very difficult in practice to compute (). Their claim, that mass values are a legitimate substitute, clearly contravenes standard theory (). Advances in cancer genomics will depend, among other things, on statistical tests that are sufficient in both rigor and economy. Given that a combinatorially large number and diversity of somatic events at the gene level tend to collapse at the pathway level, there is growing consensus that the search for drivers is best focused on the latter (). It is for this scenario that we wish to propose a significance test that we call paths can. Methodologically, it considers certain information that other tests neglect, specifically the distributions of both gene lengths within a pathway and of mutations among samples. We demonstrate that ignoring these factors greatly compromises resulting p values. The test is similar to those in in the sense that it relies on certain, well established probability concepts. Consequently, we do not claim any particular mathematical significance, but feel rather that our contribution lies in a well balanced combination of biological relevance, conceptual probity and efficient algorithmic implementation. These characteristics should render it useful for actual application.

discussion the basic idea of examining somatic events in the context of sets of genes using annotated databases is now a cornerstone of cancer genomics (). Mutational significance testing will play increasingly important roles as growing sequencing capacities allow for broader and deeper studies. Here, we formally characterize computational cost, approximation accuracy and power; these are aspects that have all generally been left unexplored for new tests. We also compare our method to some of the other available tests and illustrate its application via two calculations for lung adenocarcinoma.

conclusion the statistical testing spectrum for cancer DNA sequence is growing rapidly. We have proposed a new method that considers the variable Bernoulli probabilities for differing gene sizes under the null hypothesis and systematically treats the combination of sample specific p values in order to obtain a population based value for a large set of samples. In short, this procedure retains several important pieces of information that existing models discard. Moreover, the method accounts for these factors in a way that does not add significant computational liabilities by using the mathematical concepts of convolution and fisher lancaster theory. The model is easily extended to more general scenarios. For example, growing bodies of data will allow increasingly accurate assignments of gene specific background mutation rates,  i. Yet, because we already assume gene specific Bernoulli values, it is trivial to generalize Theorem 1 as b i = exp( i L i ) without incurring any net increase in CPU cost. This property will also permit integration of other phenomena, including copy number changes, structural variation and methylation and expression changes, should it become possible in the future to assign meaningful Bernoulli values to such events. This last aspect is especially relevant. The cancers are a complex family of diseases and it will be important to broaden investigations to integrate all the types of aberrations that could be linked to a specific phenotype. The integration problem is actually just one part of a broader research program of pathway analysis. For example, there remains no conclusive method to differentiate the action of a gene from that of a pathway in those cases where the mutation list is dominated by one gene. Although we have shown that paths can suffers vastly less from this phenomenon than other tests, it does not fully solve this problem. Development of supplemental 'exclusionary' tests that specifically examine distributions of mutations among member genes may be necessary. Moreover, models do not yet systematically account for relationships or conditioning that may exist between specific mutations in a network sense, i.e. considering the position and role of a mutated gene within its pathway, multiple gene functions, etc. paths can is applicable to any set of genes, , no matter how constructed, meaning it is useful both with pathway databases, as we have shown here, and in de novo network building methods that use interaction databases. The latter must ultimately evaluate network significance in the context of the associated somatic events and often still resort to elementary tests (). Irrespective of method, any calculation is necessarily limited by whatever databases it uses (). However, because the collective wealth of stored information continues to increase at a remarkable rate (), such concerns should diminish over time. These observations all suggest that future methods will necessarily become more sophisticated and increasingly focused on the deeper aspects of cancer genomic analysis. We feel that paths can represents an initial, though deliberate step in that direction.
