Pathway Processor 2.0 is a web application designed to analyze high throughput datasets, including but not limited to micro-array and next generation sequencing, using a pathway centric logic.

introduction the advance of high throughput methods, particularly because of the advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) provides an unprecedented amount of data from a single experiment. Although analysis method handling such data has considerably improved, comparing and especially integrating results between different platforms and analysis systems is still a challenge. For these reasons, there is a need for newer methods able to handle this type of data effectively and in a robust manner. In recent years, pathway based approaches have emerged as a way to compare, integrate and interpret results from different 'omics' experiments (). In particular, pathway based approaches can be useful methods to investigate complex phenotypes (). The main advantage of these methods is a greater ease of interpretation and increased comparability among different experiments, methodologies and platforms. Methods using pathways have evolved considerably as well, starting from the classical Fisher's test (), over more complex systems such as Gene Set Enrichment Analysis () and impact analysis (). In addition, newer methods have been proposed, which target rnase q datasets specifically in addition to microarrays: one of these is the Gene Set Variation Analysis gsv a (), which shifts the focus from gene expression to pathway expression through the generation of enrichment scores. Although methods like the Fisher's test are commonly available in bioinformatics software, more advanced algorithms are often just part of customized software pipelines, and as such are not potentially useful to biologists. Also, a part of this software was developed with microarrays in mind, and while most algorithms are platform agnostic, often adapting them to newer technologies requires a considerable effort. Here, we describe Pathway Processor 2.0, a substantial upgrade over the original Pathway Processor introduced in 2002 (). Developed as a web based software, Pathway Processor 2.0 aims at using pathway based approaches on omics data to extract meaningful and biologically sound information to support the biological hypothesis being tested. To do so, it offers well established statistical methods in addition to a new method to calculate differential pathway expression between two user supplied phenotypes.
