Motivation: Metabolomics is one of the most recent omics technologies and uses robust analytical techniques to screen low molecular mass metabolites in biological samples. It has evolved very quickly during the last decade. However, metabolomics datasets are considered highly complex when used to relate metabolite levels to metabolic pathway activity. Despite recent developments in bioinformatics, which have improved the quality of metabolomics data, there is still no straightforward method capable of correlating metabolite level to the activity of different metabolic pathways operating within the cells. Thus, this kind of analysis still depends on extremely laborious and time consuming processes. Results: Here, we present a new algorithm Pathway Activity Profiling (PAPi) with which we are able to compare metabolic pathway activities from metabolite profiles. The applicability and potential of PAPi was demonstrated using a previously published data from the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. PAPi was able to support the biological interpretations of the previously published observations and, in addition, generated new hypotheses in a straightforward manner. However, PAPi is time consuming to perform manually. Thus, we also present here a new r software package (PAPi) which implements the PAPi algorithm and facilitates its usage to quickly compare metabolic pathways activities between different experimental conditions. Using the identified metabolites and their respective abundances as input, the PAPi package calculates pathways Activity Scores, which represents the potential metabolic pathways activities and allows their comparison between conditions. PAPi also performs principal components analysis and analysis of variance or t test to investigate differences in activity level between experimental conditions. In addition, PAPi generates comparative graphs highlighting up and down-regulated pathway activity. Availability: These datasets are available in

introduction metabolomics is one of the newest omics technologies and has been evolving rapidly during recent years. Combined with robust analytical methods, metabolomics is capable of screening large numbers of low molecular mass metabolites in biological samples. Metabolites are intermediates of biochemical reactions and are essential in linking different pathways within a biological system. However, metabolites are synthesized and modified by enzymes that are products of gene transcription. Thus, metabolite level is determined by a complex network of reactions in which many regulatory processes involving metabolites, enzymes, mRNAs and genes play an important part. For this reason, metabolomics has been considered essential for the validation of datasets generated by other omics technologies () and has been largely applied as a functional genomics tool and as part of systems biology studies (). However, the convoluted nature of cell metabolism, where the same metabolite can participate in many different pathways, makes the pathway activity analysis, in particular, the most difficult omics data to interpret (). In addition, as with any other post genomic technology, metabolomics generates large datasets requiring sophisticated bioinformatics tools for their processing and analysis (). Despite the analytical aspects of metabolomics (e.g. quenching of metabolism, metabolite extraction and data acquisition) being well advanced (), the correlation between metabolite level and metabolic pathway activity is still considered a complex task to achieve. Consequently, the biological interpretation of metabolomics data remains major bottlenecks in metabo lome analysis (). As a result, to assist with post genomic data analysis of cell metabolism, a great number of proprietary and open source software packages have been developed during the last 10 years by different companies (e.g. analyzer pro for GC-MS and LC-MS data mining by spectral works Ltd; marker view TM for metabolomics and protein peptide biomarker profiling by Applied Biosystems; Mass Profiler Professional by Agilent Technology) and institutions (e.g. Bioconductor). In addition, many web based databases are now available and provide important information regarding metabolite diversity, metabolic pathways, biochemical reactions, enzymes and genes (). Among these, the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Gene and Genomes (KEGG) is one of the most popular databases and it is freely available through http://www.genome.jp/kegg/. In addition, KEGG has application programming interfaces (API) that allow its use by external software. Consequently, several computational tools the total number of metabolites associated with each pathway is recorded and the pathways are then ranked according to the number of metabolites with which they are associated. The percentage of detected metabolic intermediates is then calculated for each listed pathway d Finally, we sum over the scores for each pathway to obtain the total pathway score, S A , (E) and normalize it by dividing by the proportion of metabolites detected from its respective pathway. have been created to automatically access, extract and manipulate the information contained in these databases (http://www.genome jp kegg soap. R (), an open source software environment developed for statistical computing www r project org is among those with hundreds of available packages developed for different purposes, in particular kegg soap (), kegg db () and kegg orth () which enable access to and, therefore, use of data from the KEGG database in a flexible way. These significant advances in bioinformatics tools have improved the quality of both the data generated by omics studies and the subsequent biological interpretations. However, when relating metabolite level to pathway activity, there are only few tools available [e.g. met pa Pathway Hunter Tool, Ingenuity Pathway Analysis, Gene Set Enrichment Analysis g sea and Metabolite Set Enrichment Analysis m sea and most of them require extensive data pre-processing and demand great knowledge about cellular metabolisms, which increases the time spent and decreases the accessibility to the biological interpretation. Here, we present a new algorithm Pathway Activity Profiling (PAPi) that, using the metabolite profile and KEGG database, compares the activity of metabolic pathways between different experimental conditions. For this, we defined a new measure for pathway activity, which we called Activity Score (AS). Calculated for each pathway, the AS is based on the number of metabolites identified from each pathway and their relative abundances. As a result, the AS represents the likelihood that a metabolic pathway is active inside the cell and, consequently, allows the comparison of metabolic pathway activities. However, PAPi is considered time consuming if performed manually. Thus, we developed an R package, PAPi, which implements our new algorithm and facilitates its usage. PAPi uses the data extracted from metabolomics experiments together with the KEGG database to generate relative ASs. PAPi includes functions to perform principal component analysis pc a and either a t test or analysis of variance (ANOVA) on the ASs and to generate graphical summaries of the results. The functions also enable the use of (optional) pop-up dialog boxes making them more accessible to new R users.

description to facilitate the algorithm's description, we have divided it into six steps shown in. In the first step, the KEGG database is accessed and the pathway(s) associated with each metabolite Page: 2971 29692976

conclusion we introduced and validated here a new algorithm (PAPi) and an R package (PAPi) able to correlate metabolomics datasets and metabolic pathways activities in a high throughput way. Doing so, we are able to compare the activity of metabolic pathways under different conditions, which provides great support for hypothesis generation and facilitates the biological interpretation. Furthermore, as KEGG database also supports enquires using protein and gene transcription levels, PAPi has the potential to combine data from different omics in one unique framework, further simplifying the biological interpretation of the data.
