We introduce a web based tool, Peak Annotation and Visualization pav is for annotating and visualizing chips eq peak data. pav is is designed with non bioinformatic ians in mind and presents a straightforward user interface to facilitate biological interpretation of chips eq peak or other genomic enrichment data. pav is through association with annotation, provides relevant genomic context for each peak, such as peak location relative to genomic features including transcription start site, intron, exon or 5 0 /3 0 untranslated region. pav is reports the relative enrichment p values of peaks in these functionally distinct categories, and provides a summary plot of the relative proportion of peaks in each category. pav is unlike many other resources, provides a peak oriented annotation and visu-alization system, allowing dynamic visualization of tens to hundreds of loci from one or more chips eq experiments, simultaneously. pav is enables rapid, and easy examination and cross comparison of the genomic context and potential functions of the underlying genomic elements, thus supporting downstream hypothesis generation. Availability and Implementation: pav is is publicly accessed at http://manticore.niehs.nih.gov/pavis.

introduction the advance of sequencing technology and its exponential declining cost have made it possible to conduct many genome wide studies to understand complex biological processes such as gene regulation, epi genomic changes and chromatin remodeling. These studies have generated a large number of chips eq datasets that are subsequently parsed by peak calling programs () to report statistically significant peaks. For a genome wide study, the number of significant peaks can be tens to hundreds of thousands. The biological relevance of a chips eq peak and the functions of its underlying DNA element are often dependent on its position relative to nearby genes or other functional elements. It can be a challenging and time consuming task to examine all peaks, and to develop meaningful biological interpretations of their functional relevance. Motivated by this challenge, we developed the pav is tool to facilitate data comparison, interpretation and hypothesis generation from chips eq peak data. There are several existing software tools that can be used for annotation and visualization of chips eq peaks, e.g. cis genome () and peak analyzer peak annotator (). All of these tools are useful for chips eq peak data analysis and interpretation, but they each have limitations. peak analyzer peak annotator is a highly efficient tool with utilities not only for functional annotation of peaks, but also for sequence extraction supporting motif analysis. However, it does not provide peak visualization capability. cis genome provides capabilities similar to peak analyzer. cis genome however, does not support the annotation of many existing chips eq peak files including many of those from the ENCODE project (). Both the UCSC genome browser () and the Integrative Genomics Viewer () are powerful tools and have more capabilities, displaying multiple relevant data in different tracks. Their visualization capabilities, however, are designed to display maximal information for a single genomic region one at a time. As a complimentary tool, pav is is designed to display multiple loci simultaneously with each locus linked to the UCSC browser for additional information. Furthermore, pav is can be used to annotate chips eq peaks in the context of nearby gene features.
