Purpose: pax tools r package enables access to pathway data represented in the BioPAX format and made available through the Pathway Commons web service for users of the R language to aid in advanced pathway analyses. Features include the extraction, merging and validation of pathway data represented in the BioPAX format. This package also provides novel pathway datasets and advanced querying features for R users through the Pathway Commons web service allowing users to query, extract and retrieve data and integrate these data with local BioPAX datasets. Availability and implementation: The pax tools r package is compatible with versions of R 3.1.1 (and higher) on Windows, Mac OS X and Linux using Bioconductor 3.0 and is available through the Bioconductor R package repository along with source code and a tutorial vignette describing common tasks, such as data visualization and gene set enrichment analysis. Source code and documentation are at http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/paxtoolsr. This plugin is free, open source and licensed under the LGPL-3.

introduction the amount of biological pathway data in machine readable databases and formats continues to increase. Pathway analysis allows researchers to gain new understanding of the functions of biological systems. A common task has been to aggregate pathway data across databases. This task has been simplified through the creation of standardized data representations, such as the Biological Pathway Exchange (BioPAX) format (). Pathway Commons is an ongoing effort to aggregate pathway data over a number of databases supporting the BioPAX notation and web services to access these data (). The core component that facilitates the development of projects using data in the BioPAX format, such as Pathway Commons, has been pax tools a BioPAX application programming interface (API) written in Java (). Although the R programming language is widely used in areas of computational biology, there is a deficiency in the availability of pathway data provided through R packages. A recent review by) describes 12 R packages for working with pathway data. The majority of these packages including kegg graph path view and reactome pa utilizes and provides data from KEGG and Reactome. A number of the packages are generic parsers for a variety of formats, including the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML), KEGG Markup Language (KGML) and BioPAX. Through the pax tools r package, we extend the literature curated pathway data available to R users, we provide a number of pax tools API functions, and provide an interface to the Pathway Commons web service. Through this interface, pax tools r provides native support for the aggregated Pathway Commons database, including data imported from the NCI Pathway Interaction Database (PID), panther db human cyc Reactome, ph osho site plus and HPRD.

conclusion the pax tools r package extends the available biological pathway data available to researchers working primarily in an R environment. This package makes many of the features available from the BioPAX pax tools API and the Pathway Commons web service. The data and functionality provided here can be used for a wide range of biological pathway analysis studies and can be easily integrated with the rich ecosystem of existing R packages. Future development of this R package is expected as additions are made to the underlying pax tools Java library and Pathway Commons web service. Furthermore, we invite developers of network analysis R packages interested in the Pathway Commons data to work with us to help make the data we provide available to their methodologies.. Pathway Commons graph query of interactions between AKT1 and mt or using pax tools r and visualized using i graph. Data for the figure were retrieved with the command: graph pc source c " AKT1 " , " IRS1 " , " mt or " , IGF1R " ), kind " paths between " , format " binarys if " pax tools r
