Motivation: pac bio sequencers produce two types of characteristic reads (continuous long reads: long and high error rate and circular consensus sequencing: short and low error rate), both of which could be useful for de novo assembly of genomes. Currently, there is no available simulator that targets the specific generation of pac bio libraries. Results: Our analysis of 13 pac bio datasets showed characteristic features of pac bio reads (e.g. the read length of pac bio reads follows a log-normal distribution). We have developed a read simulator, pbs im that captures these features using either a model based or sampling based method. Using pbs im we conducted several hybrid error correction and assembly tests for pac bio reads, suggesting that a continuous long reads coverage depth of at least 15 in combination with a circular consensus sequencing coverage depth of at least 30 achieved extensive assembly results.

introduction the advent of high throughput sequencing technologies enables us to determine various genomes rapidly. A number of sequencers have been developed (e.g. Illumina, 454 and SOLiD), and Pacific Biosciences, or pac bio for short, has provided a unique sequencer, which produces two types of reads: (i) continuous long reads (CLR) (long reads with high error rates), and (ii) circular consensus sequencing (CCS) reads (short reads with low error rates) (see Supplementary Tables S1S3 for empirical statistics of CLR and CCS reads). These two types of read set could be useful for hybrid de novo genome assembly, and, using the pac bio sequencers, Chin and Sorenson (2011) have determined the genome sequences of two clinical Vibrio cholerae strains. There are several simulators for reads produced by high throughput sequencing technologies, such as pIRS (), ART (), Grinder (), flows im (), meta sim () and dwg sim in sam tools () (see also Supplementary). However, no read simulator has targeted the specific generation of pac bio libraries so far. We have therefore developed a simulator (called pbs im that simulates both CLR and CCS reads of pac bio sequencers. We adopted two simulation approaches: (i) a sampling based simulation (in which both length and quality scores are sampled from a real read set), and (ii) a model based simulation. In addition, we conducted hybrid error correction and assembly tests for datasets simulated by pbs im suggesting that a CLR coverage depth of at least 15 in combination with a CCS coverage depth of at least 30 achieved extensive assembly results.
