Motivation: Recent studies reveal an important role of non-coding circular RNA circ rna in the control of cellular processes. Because of differences in the organization of plant and mammal gen-omes, the sensitivity and accuracy of circ rna prediction programs using algorithms developed for animals and humans perform poorly for plants. Results: A circ rna prediction software for plants (termed pc irc rna finder was developed that is more sensitive in detecting circ rnas than other frequently used programs (such as find circ and circ explorer Based on analysis of simulated and real rrna rna ase R rnase q data from Arabidopsis thaliana and rice pc irc rna finder provides a more comprehensive sensitive, precise prediction method for plants circ rnas. Availability and Implementation

introduction noncoding circular RNA circ rna is a covalently continuous closed loop that usually originates from exonic regions (named exonic circ rna but can also arise from intronic and intergenic regions. circ rnas can function as a miRNA sponge () and have the potential to enhance transcription of their host genes (). The emergence of rrna depleted high throughput rnase q technology provides a revolutionary approach for the systematic discovery of circ rnas in various species, including human, mouse, Arabidopsis and rice (). A robust method for circ rna identification is an important tool for investigating the role of these molecules. The available circ rna prediction methods (e.g. find circ and circ explorer were primarily developed for use with human or animal datasets (). There are large differences between mammal and plant genomes and therefore the prediction accuracy and sensitivity of detecting circ rnas in plants using the currently available methods are relatively low (. In this study, we developed a software (termed pc irc rna finder that shows a more comprehensive ability and greater sensitivity and precision in predicting circ rnas in plants. false predictions dues to the high copy number of genes in plants (Supplementary Data). (ii) Annotator, that can be used to annotate the candidate exonic back splice sites based on available gene annotation. Recent studies have demonstrated that circ rnas back splicing site is flexible and alternative splicing of circ rnas is prevalent (). Much of the alternative splicing of circ rnas occurred near by canonical splicing sites () and therefore, 5-bp flanking the two canonical back splice sites accept or and donor) were allowed for our candidate back splice sites and (iii) Filter, which is a quality control module for the above candidate circ rnas. It creates a pseudo ref file with the flanking sequences of chiastic back splice sites and then maps raw reads to it and confirms the back splice sites. It also requires that the candidate circ rnas contain at least one of two kinds of splicing signals, either a U2 based spliceosome (usually with a consensus sequence of g tag and g cag and a u12 based minor spliceosome (usually with a consensus sequence of AT-AC) ().
