Recently, several new contact prediction methods have been published. They use (i) large sets of multiple aligned sequences and (ii) assume that correlations between columns in these alignments can be the results of indirect interaction. These methods are clearly superior to earlier methods when it comes to predicting contacts in proteins. Here, we demonstrate that combining predictions from two prediction methods, psi cov and plmd ca and two alignment methods , hh blits and jack hmmer at four different e-value cutoffs , provides a relative improvement of 20% in comparison with the best single method, exceeding 70% correct predictions for one contact prediction per residue. Availability: The source code for pc on sc along with supplementary

introduction protein structure prediction ab initio is one of the longest standing challenges in structural biology. Initial methods for prediction showed little success, when tested blindly, because of insurmountable dimensionality of the unrestrained search space. One approach to enhance the structure prediction of a protein is to predict interacting residues for use as constraints during the folding process. However, until recently, the accuracy of contact predictors has been limited. This was overcome by using a large number of sequences and applying a 'global' model describing direct and indirect interactions (). It has been shown that this information is sufficient for structure predictions (). Here, we examine whether it is possible to combine alternative alignment and prediction methods to improve the contact predictions further.

conclusion in conclusion, the benchmark data show that pc on sc a random forest approach, combining four jack hmmer alignments and four hh blits alignments at e-value cut-offs of 10 40 , 10 10 , 10 4 and 1 each and both psi cov and plmd ca provides a relative improvement of 420% in prediction precision ($12 percentage points in absolute terms). For pc on sc on average nearly three quarters of the top L predictions seem to be correct. This result is robust and holds also for other definitions of true and false contacts (e.g. C= distances, different distance cut-offs etc, Supplementary Material). The question of feasibility of predicted contacts for structure modeling is out of the scope of this article, as is the discussion on potential other causes of strong evolutionary couplings, such as alternative conformers, multimeric contacts and functional implications. It has not escaped our notice that the progress in the field of evolution based contact prediction has been absolutely remarkable. We have moved from being able to predict a handful of contacts per protein, with a relatively low precision (with mutual information methods), to predicting hundreds, with astounding accuracy.
