Motivation: Recently it has been shown that the quality of protein contact prediction from evolutionary information can be improved significantly if direct and indirect information is separated. Given sufficiently large protein families, the contact predictions contain sufficient information to predict the structure of many protein families. However, since the first studies contact prediction methods have improved. Here, we ask how much the final models are improved if improved contact predictions are used. Results: In a small benchmark of 15 proteins, we show that the tm scores of top ranked models are improved by on average 33% using p cons fold compared with the original version of ev fold. In a larger benchmark, we find that the quality is improved with 15–30% when using pc on sc in comparison with earlier contact prediction methods. Further, using Rosetta instead of CNS does not significantly improve global model accuracy, but the chemistry of models generated with Rosetta is improved. Availability: p cons fold is a fully automated pipeline for ab initio protein structure prediction based on evolutionary information. p cons fold is based on pc on sc contact prediction and uses the Rosetta folding protocol. Due to its modularity, the contact prediction tool can be easily exchanged. The source code of p cons fold is available on git hub at https://www.github.com

introduction the protein folding problem is one of the longest standing problems in structural biology. Although the problem of physically folding up a single protein chain in the computer remains largely unsolved, there have been continuous effort and progress, resulting in increased accuracy of predicted models (). The idea of using residue residue contacts predicted from analysis of correlated mutations observed in evolution for 3D protein structure prediction is not new (). However, until recently contacts predicted from multiple sequence alignments were not sufficiently accurate to facilitate structure prediction methods significantly (). This only became possible due to new statistical approaches to separate direct from indirect contact information () as well as a greatly increased corpus of sequence information. These efforts came to completion with the first demonstration of successful computation of correct folds with explicit atomic coordinates using maximum entropy derived contacts (). Analysis of the relative contribution of secondary structure and co-evolutionary information pointed to potential improvements in 3D accuracy (). Since then there has also been continuous effort to improve the quality of predicted contacts (). In addition to the initial predictions of soluble proteins () and protein complexes (), contacts predicted from evolutionary information have also been applied in structure prediction of membrane proteins (). To optimize protein structure prediction from predicted contacts, we developed p cons fold a pipeline for ab initio protein structure prediction of single domain proteins, see. p cons fold is based on predicted amino acid contacts from pc on sc. These contacts are used within Rosetta to fold a given protein sequence from scratch. We benchmark our method on two datasets and compare it with the CNS () protocol used in ev fold (). It was found that the improved quality of predicted contacts by pc on sc () increases quality and native likeliness of predicted structures by about 33% over ev fold and 16% over ev fold plm that is using the improved contact predictions from plmd ca ().

conclusion here we show that improved contact predictions from pc on sc () actually lead to improvements in protein structure prediction. Further, it is clear that for proteins with better predicted contacts, the generated models are of higher quality, i.e. future improvements in contact predictions will result in higher quality models. According to, there are 422 protein families without known structure that are suitable for coevolution based contact prediction methods. This number will surely increase due to improved contact prediction methods and growing sequence databases at increasing rates. A comparison between using Rosetta and CNS indicates that using similar contact predictions generates models of similar quality. However, Rosetta models are chemically more correct. Finally, it is also clear that in many top ranked models, the contacts are less well satisfied than in the native structures, i.e. an improved folding protocol would improve the models. One option would be to use model ppv as a measure of model quality, or as a stopping criterion for decoy generation, another option is to use both CNS and Rosetta and then try to identify the optimal model. Our results on different fold classes show that model quality, especially in beta sheet containing proteins, could this value was corrected, as in the original publication it showed the value for the best possible model. p value for a one sample t test of tm score difference to ev fold tm scores. p value for a one sample t test of tm score difference to ev fold plm tm scores
