pd best (PDB Enhanced Structures Toolkit) is a user friendly freely available platform for acquiring, manipulating and normalizing protein structures in a high throughput and seamless fashion. With an intuitive graphical interface it allows users with no programming background to download and manipulate their files. The platform also exports protocols, enabling users to easily share PDB searching and filtering criteria, enhancing analysis reproducibility. Availability and implementation: pd best installation packages are freely available for several platforms at http://www.pdbest.

introduction acquiring manipulating and filtering large sets of biomolecule files from repositories such as the Protein Data Bank, is a common and important preprocessing step prior to protein structure studies. By treating these files one aims to improve data quality, identifying and or removing common idiosyncrasies that could compromise and bias subsequent analysis. Common filtering tasks include, but are not limited to: filtering multiple occupancies and models, splitting files by chain, selecting subsets of atoms or residues, identifying missing atoms or residues, generating an assessment report. Given the relevance of Structural Biology and Bioinformatics, several initiatives have been successful in developing software tools and libraries for manipulating PDB files for different programming languages, such as Python (), Java (), R () and others (), which are widely used today. It is, however, a task of great relevance for both educational and scientific purposes to make the manipulation and study of such source of data more accessible to a larger public (from undergraduate students to researchers) without requiring a programming background, while taking into account the ever increasing scale of current data availability and guaranteeing the reproducibility of the process. Despite the efforts of the community to make these capabilities available as web services (), there still is a significant demand for an easy to use scalable platform for treating protein structures. To fill this gap, we have developed pd best (PDB Enhanced Structures Toolkit), a user friendly freely available platform for acquiring, manipulating and normalizing protein structures in a reproducible, high throughput and seamless fashion.
