Protein features are often displayed along the linear sequence of amino acids that make up that protein, but in reality these features occupy a position in the folded proteins 3D space. Mapping sequence features to known or predicted protein structures is useful when trying to deduce the function of those features and when evaluating sequence or structural predictions. To facilitate this goal, we developed pdb paint a simple tool that displays protein sequence features gathered from bioinformatics resources on top of protein structures, which are displayed in an interactive window (using the Jmol Java viewer). pdb paint can be used either with existing protein structures or with novel structures provided by the user. The current version of pdb paint allows the visualization of annotations from Pfam, ARD (detection of heat repeats UniProt, TMHMM2.0 and SignalP. Users can also add other annotations manually. Availability and Implementation: pdb paint is accessible at

introduction a protein's function is tightly dependant on its 3D structure. In particular, protein features such as catalytic centers, domains and post-translational modifications, have a shape in 3D space that is crucial to understand the function of the protein. However, in protein databases these features are usually defined by their locations in linear protein sequences only. It is actually easier to define and handle protein annotations in a 1D sequence. Second, protein sequence data is much more abundant than protein structure data, which require complex techniques to determine atomic coordinates. As a result, most protein annotations are mapped to protein sequences but not to protein structures (). Nevertheless, tagging available 3D structures with annotations can be extremely informative. This is used in some web tools and databases dealing with protein structures), SCOP (), Dali ()] or with domain predictions), Pfam (. Typically, users have to obtain a file with the atomic coordinates of a protein structure (e.g. in PDB format) and

conclusion pdb paint has been specifically designed as an easy to use tool for the tagging of PDB files with a comprehensive collection of features. Display of protein features such as Pfam or UniProt directly on the 3D structure help to better understand protein function; these also allow the user to test the accuracy of predictive methods and see directly their results on modeled or known structures. Researchers who have solved or predicted a novel protein structure can upload their structure and immediately view sequence features predicted for their protein in the context of the novel structure. In particular, we believe that pdb paint will facilitate the use of predicted protein structures when designing experiments.
