Motivation: Many drugs interact with numerous proteins besides their intended therapeutic targets and a substantial portion of these interactions is yet to be elucidated. protein drug Interaction Database p did addresses incompleteness of these data by providing access to putative protein– drug interactions that cover the entire structural human proteome. Results: p did covers 9652 structures from 3746 proteins and houses 16 800 putative interactions generated from close to 1.1 million accurate, all atom structure based predictions for several dozens of popular drugs. The predictions were generated with three modern methods: il bind s map and e find site. They are accompanied by propensity scores that quantify likelihood of interactions and coordinates of the putative location of the binding drugs in the corresponding protein structures. p did complements the current databases that focus on the curated interactions and the bio drug screen database that relies on docking to find putative interactions. Moreover, we also include experimentally curated interactions which are linked to their sources: drug bank binding db and Protein Data Bank. Our database can be used to facilitate studies related to poly pharmacology of drugs including repurposing and explaining side effects of drugs. Availability and implementation: p did database is freely available at

introduction majority of the molecular targets of drugs are proteins () and there are several databases of the already characterized protein drug interactions. drug bank () provides access to biochemical and pharmacological information about a large set of 7759 drugs, including 1600 Food and Drug Administration fda approved compounds, and their known 4104 protein targets. Therapeutic Target Database () offers a comprehensive coverage of over 20 000 drugs, including close to 15 000 experimental drugs, and their interactions with 2360 protein targets. This database also links targets and drugs to about 900 diseases. Other databases expand beyond the drug molecules to cover small drug like ligands. binding db () gives experimentally V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com measured binding affinities between about 7000 known protein targets and a large set of almost half a million of small ligands. ch embl () contains structures, physicochemical properties and bioactivity (e.g. binding constants, pharmacology data) of drug like small molecules. The current release of ch embl incorporates 1.7 million distinct compounds and 13.5 million bioactivity data points which are mapped to over 10 thousand protein targets, where the corresponding binding sites are defined at varying levels of granularity (protein, protein domain or residue level). SuperTarget () includes about 6200 protein targets from several dozens of species and close to 200 000 drug like compounds. It integrates drug related information from binding db drug bank and the super cyp database of cytochrome drug interactions (), adverse drug effects from SIDER (), drug metabolism and pathways and Gene Ontology (GO) terms for the target proteins. The PROMISCUOUS database (von) integrates data from drug bank SuperTarget and super cyp and covers about 6500 protein targets and over 25 thousands drug like compounds that are annotated with side effects. This database also provides facilities that can be used to predict novel targets based on structural similarity between drugs and between side effect profiles of drugs. STITCH () combines information from many sources of experimentally and manually curated interactions between small ligands and proteins including ch embl Protein Data Bank (PDB), drug bank Therapeutic Target Database, text mining of articles from MEDLINE and PubMed and several other resources. It currently houses data on 390 000 chemicals and 3.6 million proteins. The recently released int side database () links about 1000 drugs with their human protein targets collected from drug bank and STITCH, and with close to 1200 side effects and other annotations of associated diseases, pathways and cellular functions. Although most of these resources summarize the interactions at the protein or residue level, sc pdb () includes molecular level all atom information for native binding sites in proteins structures collected from PDB () that are suitable for docking of drug like ligands. It includes molecular level details of about 9200 binding sites all atom annotation of binding sites and list of ligand binding residues grouped by various types of bonds) and binding modes all atom position of ligand inside the site) in 3600 proteins, and summary of physicochemical properties of approximately 5600 drug like ligands. However, many of the established drugs interact not only with the intended therapeutic target protein(s) but also with other protein targets off targets. Individual compounds were shown to on average target 6.3 proteins (). Given a high degree of incompleteness of this information (), the number of off targets is likely substantially higher. To compare, drug bank includes 15 199 protein drug interactions for 7759 drugs with the average number of targets per drug at 1.96, which further substantiates incompleteness of the currently available data. Moreover, this poly pharmacology can be both beneficial if a given drug can be repurposed for a different disease and harmful, leading to side effects (). A couple of high profile examples include imatinib that was repurposed for treatment of gastrointestinal stromal tumors () and so rafe nib for the kidney and liver cancers (). The incompleteness of the data combined with the importance of poly pharmacology motivates research toward elucidation of novel protein drug interactions. Conventional non computational methods for the identification of novel off targets rely on an in vitro counter screen of a given drug against a 'large' set of enzymes and receptors (). Recognizing corresponding implications related to side effects, pharmaceutical companies have implemented screening protocols for the drugs that they currently develop. For instance, Novartis screens against interactions with a panel of 24 targets associated with serious side effects and high hit rates (), Pfizer screens against between 15 and 30 targets (), and Roche uses a panel of 48 targets (). Compared with the experimental screens, computational methods that find novel drug targets are more cost and time effective allow screening of a larger number of targets and provide insights into the molecular level mechanisms of protein drug interactions (). These in silico methods are successful in the context of drug repositioning and identification of off targets (). A couple of databases that focus on the putative protein drug and drug gable protein protein interactions pp is were recently released. bio drug screen () stores results of docking of about 1600 small drug like molecules against 1589 known proteins targets in human, which were annotated based on drug bank and hcp in () databases. Docking was ran for close to 2000 cavities on the surfaces of these proteins, for the total of about 3 million receptor ligand complexes. drug gable Protein Protein Interaction Assessment System (Dr. PIAS) () is a database of drug gable pp is predicted by a machine learning method. This database lists drug gable interactions predicted from over 83 thousand pp is in human, mouse and rat but they are not associated with specific compounds. We developed protein drug Interaction Database p did that complements existing repositories and addresses the lack of access to a comprehensive set of putative protein drug interactions. Based on close to 1.1 million of all atom predictions over the entire structural human proteome (10 thousand structures for over 3700 proteins), p did provides access to all putative targets (between 4444 and 7184, depending on the prediction method used) of several dozens of popular drugs. Unique features of our database are: @BULLET It incorporates accurate predictions generated by three methods, il bind (), s map () and e find site (), which are complementary and independent of docking that was used in the bio drug screen database @BULLET It uniformly covers the entire structural human proteome @BULLET It includes molecular level information on localization of the putative binding sites in the structures of the corresponding protein targets @BULLET It includes comprehensive annotations of known drug targets that are linked to their sources: drug bank binding db and PDB The methods that we use were shown empirically to provide high quality predictions of drug targets () and their results were already successfully used to predict novel off targets. Examples include applications to find new off targets of estrogen receptor modulators (), cholesteryl ester transfer protein inhibitors (), comtan (), inhibitors of Trypanosoma brucei RNA editing ligase 1 (), nelfinavir (), raloxifene () and cyclosporine A ().

discussion numerous drugs are highly promiscuous and we do not know many of their targets. p did database addresses this issue by providing access to a complete set of putative protein drug interactions and a set of known protein drug interactions in the structural human proteome. Our database includes data that otherwise would be accessible only to individuals and research groups with significant computational expertise and resources. The putative interactions were generated by three accurate predictors, il bind s map and e find site that were shown to produce results that led to finding new drug targets () and which complement the existing bio drug screen database that relies on docking. The database also integrates annotations of known protein targets collected across drug bank binding db and PDB, links proteins to the corresponding records in UniProt and provides coordinates of the location of binding sites in the structures of the putative drug targets. p did can be used to systematically catalog protein drug interactions and to facilitate various studies related to poly pharmacology of drugs (), such as explaining side effects caused by interactions with off targets and for the drug repurposing. Relevant recent examples include use of predictions with il bind to find three novel off targets of cyclosporine A that explain nephrotoxicity associated with use of this immunosuppressant (). Another example involves repurposing of raloxifene, which is used for prevention and treatment of osteoporosis, as a potential compound to treat Pseudomonas aeruginosa infections based on predictions with the s map method ().
