Specific recognition of DNA by proteins is a crucial step of many biological processes. pdi viz is a plugin for the PyMOL molecular visualization system that analyzes protein dna binding interfaces by comparing the solvent accessible surface area of the complex against the free protein and free DNA. The plugin provides three distinct three dimensional visualization modes to highlight interactions with DNA bases and backbone, major and minor groove, and with atoms of different pharmaco pho ric type (hydrogen bond donors acceptors hydrophobic and thymine methyl). Each mode comes in three styles to focus the visual analysis on the protein or DNA side of the interface, or on the nucleotide sequence. pdi viz allows for the generation of publication quality images, all calculated data can be written to disk, and a command line interface is provided for automating tasks. The plugin may be helpful for the detailed identification of regions involved in DNA base and shape readout, and can be particularly useful in rapidly pinpointing the overall mode of interaction. Availability and implementation: Freely available at http://melolab.org/pdiviz/ as a PyMOL plugin.

introduction specific recognition of DNA by proteins is a prerequisite of many biological processes and is essentially understood when analyzed at a three dimensional (3D) structural level. The steadily increasing number of protein nucleic acid complexes deposited in the Protein Data Bank (4500 by end of 2014;) now allows for a more fine grained structural analysis of the key determinants of protein dna interactions. These interactions may be broadly classified into base readout sequence dependent interactions with DNA bases via the major or minor groove) and shape readout (detection of global or local variation of the canonical DNA shape;). However, protein dna interactions are complex and a simple recognition code does likely not exist (). 3D visual analysis of protein dna complexes today often requires the use of several computer programs for contact analysis and visualization. Here we present pdi viz a plugin for the PyMOL molecular visualization system (Schr dinger, LLC) that is specifically designed to visualize protein dna interfaces and to focus visual analysis on various aspects of protein dna interactions.
