Motivation: When analyzing solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectra of proteins, assignment of resonances to nuclei and derivation of restraints for 3D structure calculations are challenging and time consuming processes. Simulated spectra that have been calculated based on, for example, chemical shift predictions and structural models can be of considerable help. Existing solutions are typically limited in the type of experiment they can consider and difficult to adapt to different settings. Results: Here, we present peak r a software to simulate solid state NMR spectra of proteins. It can generate simulated spectra based on numerous common types of internuclear correlations relevant for assignment and structure elucidation, can compare simulated and experimental spectra and produces lists and visualizations useful for analyzing measured spectra. Compared with other solutions, it is fast, versatile and user friendly. Availability and implementation: peak r is maintained under the GPL license and can be accessed at http://www.peakr.org. The source code can be obtained on request from the authors.

introduction in recent years, solid state nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) has made significant progress in studying structure and function of biomolecules such as membrane proteins and protein fibrils (for reviews, see). However, especially for larger proteins, resonance assignment and determination of restraints for 3D structure calculations are still difficult and time consuming processes owing to often limited spectral resolution and chemical shift ambiguity, as well as complex relationships between internuclear distances and signal intensities. These problems especially apply to through space correlations that can not be traced along the chemical bond network (). For the assignment of resonances and the extraction of restraints, it has been proven helpful to have simulated spectra (sometimes referred to as spectrum 'predictions') at hand. Simulated spectra can be calculated based on amino acid sequences, known or modeled 3D structures, chemical shift assignments or predictions from tools such as shift x () and the type of correlation probed in the respective experiment. This way, cross peak assignments can be suggested, and, for example, it can be investigated whether an experimental spectrum can be explained by a given structural model (). Simulated spectra can also be used in an iterative process of obtaining shift assignments and refining the molecular structure at the same time (). Existing software for the simulation of NMR spectra is usually tailored to calculating spectra of small molecules in solution (; ACD/ Labs NMR) or to specifically simulate NOESY spectra in the context of NMR protein structure determination (, and references therein). Some NMR data analysis software packages such as Sparky (Goddard and Kneller), nmr pipe () and ccp nmr () contain routines for simulation of protein NMR spectra, but these are often not straightforward to use or do not work in a stand-alone manner. Moreover, with the exception of recent additions to ccp nmr (), they are usually more adapted to solution state NMR correlation types. Thus far, spectrum simulation has typically been carried out using general purpose tools like spreadsheet software or custom made programs limited in flexibility and usability. Thus, it would be desirable to be able to simulate a wide range of solid state NMR experiments commonly used for resonance assignment and structure elucidation with a single software tool that is flexible enough to swiftly handle changes in input data such as chemical shift values, structural models or labeling patterns. We implemented peak r a software package that fulfills these requirements. Based on chemical shifts provided by the user or predicted by built in third party software tools, spectra for 2D ( 15 N, 13 C) and ( 13 C, 13 C) intra and inter residue as well as through space correlations can be computed quickly and can easily be adapted to specific needs. Using the calculated spectra, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. Presented in part at the 23rd International Conference on Magnetic Resonance in Biological Systems icmr bs August 2429, 2008, San Diego, CA, USA, and in odr on it z F., Genomics and phylogeny of motor proteins: tools and analyses, PhD thesis, University of gottingen gottingen Germany, 2008 (http://webdoc.sub.gwdg.de/diss/2008/odro nitz/). visual and numerical comparisons between simulated and measured data are possible. peak r is available through a web interface www peak r org
