Motivation: DNA methylation is a molecular modification of DNA that plays crucial roles in regulation of gene expression. Particularly, CpG rich regions are frequently hyper methylated in cancer tissues, but not methylated in normal tissues. However, there are not many methodological literatures of case control association studies for high dimensional DNA methylation data, compared with those of microarray gene expression. One key feature of DNA methylation data is a grouped structure among CpG sites from a gene that are possibly highly correlated. In this article, we proposed a penalized logistic regression model for correlated DNA methylation CpG sites within genes from high dimensional array data. Our regularization procedure is based on a combination of the l 1 penalty and squared l 2 penalty on degree scaled differences of coefficients of CpG sites within one gene, so it induces both sparsity and smoothness with respect to the correlated regression coefficients. We combined the penalized procedure with a stability selection procedure such that a selection probability of each regression coefficient was provided which helps us make a stable and confident selection of methylation CpG sites that are possibly truly associated with the outcome. Results: Using simulation studies we demonstrated that the proposed procedure outperforms existing mainstream regularization methods such as lasso and elastic net when data is correlated within a group. We also applied our method to identify important CpG sites and corresponding genes for ovarian cancer from over 20 000 CpGs generated from Illumina Infinium human methylation 27k bead chip. Some genes identified are potentially associated with cancers.

introduction dna methylation, which is the addition of a methyl group to the 5 position of cytosine in the context of a CpG dinucleotide, is a molecular modification of DNA that plays crucial roles in regulation of gene expression. Particularly, CpG rich regions are frequently hyper methylated in cancer tissues, but not methylated in normal tissues. Tremendous amounts of DNA methylation data have recently been generated from high throughput DNA methylation platforms. For example, the Illumina GoldenGate array, the Illumina Infinium human methylation 27k array and the most recent Illumina * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Infinium human methylation 450k array are popularly used. These platforms are based on geno tying bisulfite converted DNA. The results of the array, the methylation status of the interrogated CpG site are a sequence of -values, one for each locus, calculated as the average of approximately 30 replicates of the quantity (),where U is the fluorescent signal from an unmethylated allele on a single bead, and M is that from a methylated allele. A maximum between signal intensity and 0 is chosen to compensate for negative signals due to background subtraction. The constant 100 is to regularize -values where both M and U values are small. This -value ranges continuously from 0 (unmethylated) to 1 (completely methylated) and reflects the methylation level of each CpG site. Many researchers have applied statistical classification methods to select differently methylated loci (). Statistical approaches developed for gene expression data may not be applied directly to methylation data since many genes are methylated, while only a few genes are differently expressed. However, disease related CpG regions should still be sparse, in which case the problem is equivalent to identify a few relevant genes from high dimensional gene expression data. Compared with the case control studies of gene expression data, there are currently not many methodological developments for methylation data. Wang (2011) has recently proposed a likelihood based uniform normal mixture model to select differently methylated loci between case and control groups. One difference of methylation data from gene expression is that the former ranges between 0 and 1. But, this is not an issue in regression frameworks. Another key feature of DNA methylation data that has not been fully utilized is the group structure within a gene. With the Illumina human methylation 27k array, there are about 122 CpG sites per gene where methylation levels of CpG sites within a gene are usually correlated. Unlike genotype data with single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), -values  (0,1) are continuous thus correlations among them can be observed more precisely. Note that although CpG sites within a gene are correlated, some CpG sites might be neutral while some CpG sites might be causal. Therefore, considering these features of DNA methylation data, in this article we proposed a penalized logistic regression model for correlated CpG sites within a gene as predictors of a disease status. The proposed method can select CpG sites individually that associated with a disease while grouping effects are encouraged. The penalized logistic regression has been recently used to select SNPs or genes associated with a disease in high dimensional induce the overall sparsity and group sparsity, respectively. Consequently, predictors with stronger effects on responses are more likely to be selected into the model. However, none of the methods above are designed to encourage selection effects for highly correlated predictors. For the analysis of correlated microarray gene expression data, several variable selection methods have been developed in the past decade. The fused lasso () imposes the l 1 penalty on the absolute differences of the regression coefficients in order to account for some smoothness of the coefficients. The elastic net (Enet) procedure (), which is a compromise between a ridge regression penalty and a lasso penalty, encourages a grouping effect of highly correlated variables. When genetic network information such as a genetic pathway is available,) proposed a graph constrained regularization procedure. In their method, a Laplacian matrix representing a graph structure was imposed on a ridge regression penalty of the Enet procedure such that linked genes have a smoothness penalty on their regression coefficients. The authors demonstrated that when the information of gene networks is incorporated into the regularization procedure, it can select more relevant genes than the lasso and Enet procedures. Motivated by the graph constrained procedure by), we extended it to the logistic regression model for the analysis of case control DNA methylation data, where our Laplacian matrix represents CpG sites clustered within genes. The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we described our statistical model and regularization procedure for grouped and correlated predictors (CpG sites) together with the computational algorithm and the stability selection procedure. We then presented the simulation results in Section 3, where existing main-stream variable selection methods were compared with the proposed method when predictors within a group are correlated. Section 4 analyzed a real DNA methylation data in a case control study of ovarian cancer. Finally, we gave a brief discussion of the method and future research in Section 5.

discussion in this article, we proposed a penalized logistic regression model for correlated predictors within a group and applied it to high dimensional methylation data. In simulation studies we have demonstrated that the proposed procedure outperforms existing main-stream regularization methods such as lasso and Enet when data is correlated within a group bead chip. Some genes in our findings are known to be associated with other types of cancers. Since we mainly focused on identifying most likely associated CpG sites through selection probabilities, we did not discuss about estimation performance of our proposed method. In the case that prediction is desirable, we strongly recommend to re obtain un penalized likelihood estimates based on selected predictors. This un penalized MLE is often adopted for better prediction (). Our proposed selection method provides a way to potentially better select CpG sites that are truly related to the outcomes among tens of thousands of CpG sites who are correlated within genes. However, underlying true correlation structure of methylation data is much more complicated than what we assumed. Particularly, genes from a pathway may also be correlated with each other (). To incorporate a prior knowledge of genetic pathways may further improve the selection accuracy. We are currently pursuing the usage of genetic pathways information for the DNA methylation data analysis.
