Motivation: Recovering the gene structures is one of the important goals of genome assembly. In low quality assemblies, and even some high quality assemblies, certain gene regions are still incomplete ; thus, novel scaffolding approaches are required to complete gene regions. Results: We developed an efficient and fast genome scaffolding method called pep scaffold er using proteins to scaffold genomes. The pipeline aims to recover protein coding gene structures. We tested the method on human contigs; using human UniProt proteins as guides, the improvement on N50 size was 17% increase with an accuracy of 97%. pep scaffold er improved the proportion of fully covered proteins among all proteins, which was close to the proportion in the finished genome. The method provided a high accuracy of 91% using orthologs of distant species. Tested on simulated fly contigs, pep scaffold er outperformed other scaffold ers with the shortest running time and the highest accuracy.

introduction identifying genes is a major goal of genome sequencing projects for downstream functional study and evolutionary analysis. Although large insert libraries or long single molecule reads improve the genome N50 size, it remains difficult to complete all gene structures. Thus, new scaffolding approaches are needed to recover the gene regions. Many methods have been developed to increase the continuity of gene regions using transcripts or proteins as guides utilized paired rnase q data to scaffold Caenorhabditis nematode contigs. Nevertheless, the accuracy of this strategy and the improvement in the proportion of complete genes were not estimated. Previously, we developed l rna scaffold er using long single end rnase q reads for genome scaffolding, which was highly accurate (93.6%) (). However, these strategies require rnase q data, and genes that are not detected by rnase q will not be re-built. Different from using transcripts, ESPRIT () and sw ips () used proteins to link contigs. Based on the predicted genes using AUGUSTUS (), ESPRIT identified split protein coding regions and linked unassembled genomic segments. The accuracy of ESPRIT depends on that of predicted genes. The time consuming nature of de novo gene prediction also limits its application. sw ips determined coding contigs and exonic regions using tblastn and GeneWise (), and then scaffolded contigs by optimization of the overall protein to contig mappings. sw ips integrated multiple steps to refine the precise protein contig mapping; consequently, it has long running time. Herein, we present a novel and fast method to scaffold contigs using (homologous) proteins. The pep scaffold er has high scaffolding accuracy and is much faster than previous scaffold ers. The improved proportion of fully covered genes is close to that of the finished genome.

discussion we demonstrated that pep scaffold er is an efficient and fast scaffold er that improves the proportion of complete genes. The performance of pep scaffold er could be improved in several ways. Protein variations between species might influence the accuracy of pep scaffold er. We observed higher accuracy using proteins from the target species compared with proteins from close species (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). The annotations of Swiss-Prot proteins are created by manual analysis, whereas TrEMBL proteins are predicted automatically without manual annotation. Therefore, Swiss-Prot proteins are more credible than TrEMBL proteins. Our results showed that, using Swiss-Prot proteins, the accuracy of PEP_ scaffold er was higher than using TrEMBL proteins (Supplementary Tables S1 and S2). To overcome the above limitations, we recommend that more supporting proteins are used to construct more accurate scaffolds (Supplementary Methods 6 and). As shown in Supplementary, scaffolding performance is significantly correlated with genome coverage. Therefore, increasing the number of (homologous) proteins would improve the performance. pep scaffold er could be useful for the genome analysis of non model species, which lack high quality genome assemblies.
