Identifying biologically significant changes in protein abundance between two conditions is a key issue when analyzing proteomic data. One widely used approach centers on spectral counting, a label free method that sums all the tandem mass spectra for a protein observed in an analysis. To assess the significance of the results, we recently combined the t test and g test with random permutation analysis, and we validated this approach biochemically. To automate the statistical method, we developed PepC, a software program that balances the trade-off between the number of differentially expressed proteins identified and the false discovery rate. This tool can be applied to a wide range of proteomic datasets, making data analysis rapid, reproducible and easily interpretable by proteomics specialists and non specialists alike.

introduction two important objectives of proteomics global assessment of protein expression levels and biomarker discovery depend critically on measuring relative protein abundance. Mass spectrometry (MS) has emerged as the leading technology for this purpose because it is easily applied to high throughput analyses and provides broad coverage of the proteome (). A potential limitation is that results are generally semiquantitative (). Isotope labeling of peptides has been developed to circumvent this problem. Labeling methods are expensive and limited in the number of samples that can be coordinately interrogated, making application to samples from large scale clinical studies difficult. Spectral counting and peptide ion intensity are alternative, label free methods for quantifying relative protein abundance (). Spectral counting sums all MS/MS spectra observed for * To whom correspondence should be addressed. peptides derived from a single protein. Because abundant proteins are more likely to be identified during data dependent MS/MS scanning, spectral counting has the potential to quantify protein levels. Indeed, studies have shown strong correlations between relative protein abundance, as assessed by peptide ion intensities and spectral counting (). More recent studies have shown that the accuracy of spectral counting can be improved by normalization methods such as correction for sampling depth, protein molecular weight or number of tryptic peptides expected (reviewed in). A variety of statistical approaches have been developed to assess differences in spectral counts (). However, a key issue is correcting for multiple comparisons. Overly stringent significance cutoffs identify few differentially expressed proteins, while looser criteria identify more proteins at the expense of increased false discovery rates f drs. Therefore, the development of rigorous statistical strategies that maximize the identification of significant differences in protein expression while minimizing the FDR is of critical importance in proteomics. We recently developed a novel method for identifying statistically significant differences in protein abundance based on spectral counting, and validated our results biochemically. We then used this approach to identify an atherogenic protein network in macrophages (). In this application note, we describe freely accessible software, PepC, for automating our approach.
