We introduce PEPPER (Protein complex Expansion using Protein– Protein intERactions), a Cytoscape app designed to identify protein complexes as densely connected subnetworks from seed lists of proteins derived from proteomic studies. PEPPER identifies connected sub-graph by using multi-objective optimization involving two functions: (i) the coverage, a solution must contain as many proteins from the seed as possible, (ii) the density, the proteins of a solution must be as connected as possible, using only interactions from a proteome wide interaction network. Comparisons based on gold standard yeast and human datasets showed Peppers integrative approach as superior to standard protein complex discovery methods. The visualization and interpretation of the results are facilitated by an automated post-processing pipeline based on topological analysis and data integration about the predicted complex proteins. PEPPER is a user friendly tool that can be used to analyse any list of proteins.

introduction most cellular processes require a large number of proteins to assemble into functional complexes to perform their activity. Therefore, describing functional protein complexes taking part in given processes is critical to the underlying molecular mechanism understanding. Experimental protocols such as Affinity Purification followed by mass spectrometry (AP-MS) have been devised to pull down a protein of interest (bait) together with all the interacting proteins within the same protein complex (preys). However, these sets of preys may contain both false positives, proteins detected despite not actually interacting with the bait, and omit false negatives (), proteins interacting in the cellular context studied but not detected. Effective control experiments and usage of contaminants repositories can remove some false positives. However, false negative interacting partners identification, thereby the definition of the entire protein complex, remains challenging. Protein Protein Interaction (PPI) data represents abundant information that can be used for this purpose. Protein complexes extraction from PPI networks is a very active area of research and many methodologies have been developed to tackle this problem. These computational methods generally model protein complexes as dense subnetworks within the complete set of pp is and thus try to solve a graph clustering problem or to identify dense regions. Clustering approaches were shown to be efficient either on large PPI networks or with large scale experimental settings in which big numbers of baits result in context specific PPI networks (). However, these algorithms were not developed for use in small scale AP-MS experiments (e.g. using only a single bait protein) and are unable to integrate experimental data with repositories of PPI. We reasoned that although not all the protein partners may be detected in a given AP-MS experiment, these proteins may have been previously identified as interacting with either the bait or some of the preys of the experiment. Based on this hypothesis, we developed PEPPER, which addresses the problem of finding protein complexes by combining the experimental results of a single AP-MS assay with the available information from protein interactions in a global PPI network. PEPPER solves this non-trivial problem by using a multi-objective evolutionary algorithm (), which was tested to demonstrate the relevance of our integrative approach. To do so, we used publicly available AP-MS datasets for yeast and human species and compared PEPPER's results with those of state of the art protein complex discovery methods. Our findings highlight the relevance of integrating PPI repositories to the analysis of AP-MS experiments. We propose PEPPER as a Cytoscape application to further refine protein complex predictions through functional and topological analyses.
