Motivation: Peptides play important roles in signalling, regulation and immunity within an organism. Many have successfully been used as therapeutic products often mimicking naturally occurring peptides. Here we present peptide locator for the automated prediction of functional peptides in a protein sequence. Results: We have trained a machine learning algorithm to predict bio-active peptides within protein sequences. peptide locator performs well on training data achieving an area under the curve of 0.92 when tested in 5-fold cross validation on a set of 2202 redundancy reduced peptide containing protein sequences. It has predictive power when applied to antimicrobial peptides, cytokines, growth factors, peptide hormones, toxins, venoms and other peptides. It can be applied to refine the choice of experimental investigations in functional studies of proteins. Availability and implementation: peptide locator is freely available for academic users at

introduction peptides which are often generated by cleavage from precursor proteins, are important molecules found in all organisms and play a role in a wide range of biological processes. It is this universal distribution, along with the diversity of functions that they undertake, that make peptides interesting as putative therapeutic agents, for example, as antimicrobials () or analgesics (). Peptides can function as hormones and immunomodulating agents, through interactions with cytokines, receptors and other signalling proteins (), and have attracted significant interest with recent appreciation of their ability to act as inhibitors or antagonists of protein protein interaction networks (). Other diverse functions include quorum sensing in the regulation of gut bacteria populations (); inhibition or activation of enzymes (e.g. ACE inhibitors), membrane bound protein channels, transporters and receptors by toxin or venom peptides () and the disruption of cell membranes to facilitate the destruction of microbial cells by antimicrobial peptides. While most bioactive peptides have been defined with a view to being therapeutic, not all are so, including, for example, toxins produced by one organism that may limit the growth of another organism, or peptides found to inhibit an enzyme in an in vitro assay. The definition of 'bioactive' used here is a general catch all term for peptides having biological effects, and is representative of the concept that there may be some commonalities shared among diverse bioactive peptides derived from larger precursor proteins. Several health benefits have been associated with bioactive peptides, particularly those derived from food sources such as plants and bovine milk (). They have been shown to be functionally active, from simple dipeptides in ACE inhibition (), to larger milk peptides important in immunogenicity and nutrition in early development (). Specific health promoting properties of food peptides include antithrombotic, antimicrobial, mineral binding, opio d immune and cyto modulatory and blood pressure reduction, with many peptides exhibiting more than one function (). Functional additives in food are an increasingly interesting area of development given the potential to deliver improvements in diet, health and resistance to infection. Peptides offer a naturally derivable source of such functional foods, and as a result, there has been considerable interest in the identification of bioactive peptides in food products, particularly milk (). Several peptides have already been commercialized as nutraceuticals (), demonstrating the need for more methods for the detection and characterization of novel bioactive peptides in this area (). Many databases have been created cataloguing instances of bioactive peptides. These include pep bank (), peptide db (), bio pep () and the antimicrobial peptide databases, APD2 () and CAMP (). The peptide activity classes found in peptide db and bio pep include antimicrobial peptides, cytokines and growth factors, peptide hormones and toxin venom peptides, whereas APD2 and CAMP are limited to antimicrobial peptides such as antiviral to whom correspondence should be addressed. antifungal, antibacterial and antiparasitic peptides. Such databases have facilitated the bioinformatic analysis of peptides, promoting the creation of tools to aid in the identification of bioactive peptides. The identification of bioactive peptides within protein sequences is the first step in the development of a therapeutic product. In food based protein precursors, bioactive peptides can be isolated by bacterial fermentation, or through the use of gastrointestinal or alternative proteolytic enzymes (). In silico strategies used to detect novel bioactive peptides include the examination of sequence and structure homology as well as the emerging approaches of pept i do mics (). homology based prediction of bioactivity has successfully identified many instances of antimicrobial peptides (). Other bioinformatic methods have been used to predict peptide modulators of human platelet function (). As in many applications of bioinformatics, tools for the prediction of bioactivity have used propensity scales, which capture information about the statistical preferences of different amino acids to be bioactive peptides or not (). Other prediction tools have been based on Support Vector Machines (), hidden Markov models () or sequence alignments and feature selection (). Most tools focus on a particular class of bioactive peptide prediction, for example, antimicrobial peptides; however, peptide ranker (), which has been developed recently, is a general bioactive peptide predictor. These tools predict the bioactivity of stand-alone peptide sequences but they are not optimized for the discovery of bioactive peptides within larger parent protein sequences, ignoring the protein context of the bioactive peptide, which may provide additional information. Here, we have combined many classes of bioactive peptides that are functionally distinct, but nevertheless have shared properties. Using the precursor protein sequences of these peptides, retrieved from peptide db we have trained bidirectional recursive neural networks br nn which take as input the protein sequence and a number of predicted structural features of the protein, and predict bioactive peptides within the protein sequence. As far as we are aware, only one other method exists for the identification of potential bioactive peptide regions within a protein sequence, and this method is specialized for the prediction of antimicrobial peptides (). We have tested the performance of peptide ranker on an independent test set of antimicrobial peptides from APD2 and followed up with an analysis of 661 food proteins from the bio pep database.

conclusion peptide locator can accurately identify peptide regions in protein sequences according to the likelihood that they are bioactive. We have demonstrated the use of peptide locator as part of a targeted identification pipeline for food peptides with beneficial properties, for example, antimicrobial peptides. It can be used in conjunction with other tools and data, for example, food hydrolysates that provide information on the proteo lyic cleavage of proteins. By combining cleavage patterns with the bioactivity prediction from peptide locator it is possible to identify bioavailable peptides from common food, or other, proteins. Similarly, peptides predicted by peptide locator for a given precursor protein can act as a guide for the selection of specific enzymes that will result in their release. The utility of such an approach is demonstrated in our initial analysis of the bio pep dataset, showing the ability of peptide locator to identify peptides from a set of food proteins. There is a growing need for the identification of novel bioactive peptides in proteins and this web server is a useful addition to the repertoire of tools for investigating bioactivity. peptide locator is available as part of our web server for bioactive peptide discovery and annotation. The web server implementation of the algorithm requires as input a UniProt accession number, which the server uses to retrieve the sequence from UniProt (). A graphical representation of the score per residue at a given sequence position is included in the results page, along with i up red disorder prediction scores. The server builds an alignment of the orthologues of the protein sequence to provide the relative local conservation (RLC) score () as an additional plot in the output for metazoan sequences. The peptide locator score is unaffected by the presence of the RLC score for the protein; however, this is instructive in the interpretation of results. Similarly, interpretation of the likely biological context of the peptide is aided by the inclusion of disorder predictions from i up red (). peptide locator is designed to allow fast and reliable annotation of protein sequences and is freely available for academic users at http://bioware.ucd.ie/. A packaged version of the peptide locator code is available by contacting the authors directly or through the Bioware Users Group (details on the peptide locator web page). A web service version of the software has been registered on bio catalogue org () together with examples of how to run peptide locator programmatically by submitting jobs in an automated fashion.
