per mory is software for accelerated permutation testing of genome wide association studies g was. We have parallelized per mory using the message passing Interface resulting in a nearly linear speed up. Furthermore, we added accelerated analysis of g was using quantitative phenotypes, and an accurate estimation of the effective number of independent tests. Availability and implementation: Free download from http://

introduction a genome wide association study g was nowadays involves the statistical analysis of millions of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers. For the calculation of adjusted p values for genome wide testing, the Bonferroni method is highly conservative, because it ignores the correlation of markers caused by linkage disequilibrium. In contrast, a permutation based correction of p values fully accounts for this correlation and provides the highest statistical power among the procedures controlling genome wide type I error risk. While conventional permutation algorithms often required prohibitively long computation times for large datasets, the per mory algorithm of Pahl and sch fer (2010) has made permutation testing feasible for large scale g was analysis. In time, SNP chips with larger numbers of markers, such as Illumina  Human Omni with 5 Mio SNPs are available, and the next generation sequencing techniques will open the way for full sequence association studies adding another 10 or 20 million of rare variants. We therefore have undertaken one step further and developed the first freely available parallel algorithm for permutation testing in g was. Based on the original per mory algorithm, the computation process now can be spread to multiple processors in a cluster using MPI (Message Passing Interface Forum, 2009). In addition, we have further developed the original algorithm, being restricted to the analysis of dichotomous phenotypes, now to handle quantitative phenotypes as well. Moreover, for each dataset, per mory now also provides an accurate estimate of the effective number of independent tests (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
