Motivation: Identifying altered pathways in an individual is important for understanding disease mechanisms and for the future application of custom therapeutic decisions. Existing pathway analysis techniques are mainly focused on discovering altered pathways between normal and cancer groups and are not suitable for identifying the pathway aber rance that may occur in an individual sample. A simple way to identify individuals pathway aber rance is to compare normal and tumor data from the same individual. However, the matched normal data from the same individual are often unavailable in clinical situation. Therefore, we suggest a new approach for the personalized identification of altered pathways, making special use of accumulated normal data in cases when a patients matched normal data are unavailable. The philosophy behind our method is to quantify the aber rance of an individual samples pathway by comparing it with accumulated normal samples. We propose and examine personalized extensions of pathway statistics, overrepresentation analysis and functional class scoring , to generate individualized pathway aber rance score. Results: Collected microarray data of normal tissue of lung and colon mucosa are served as reference to investigate a number of cancer individuals of lung adenocarcinoma lu ad and colon cancer, respectively. Our method concurrently captures known facts of cancer survival pathways and identifies the pathway a berra nces that represent cancer differentiation status and survival. It also provides more improved validation rate of survival related pathways than when a single cancer sample is interpreted in the context of cancer only cohort. In addition, our method is useful in classifying unknown samples into cancer or normal groups. Particularly, we identified amino acid synthesis and interconversion pathway is a good indicator of lu ad (Area Under the Curve (AUC) 0.982 at independent validation). Clinical importance of the method is providing pathway interpretation of single cancer, even though its matched normal data are unavailable.

introduction cancer arises from normal cells and can evolve to become malignant, metastatic and or resistant to therapy. The analysis of altered pathways in an individual cancer patient may help to understand the disease status and suggest customized anticancer therapies. It is straightforward to compare the molecular profile of an individual's tumor and normal cells to discover molecular a berra nces specific to his her cancer. However, it may not be feasible in the current clinical practice environment to perform a metastatic tumor biopsy at the time of treatment resistance in patients with advanced cancer (). A case study of custom tailored medicine based on an individual's genome and transcriptome highlights this limitation (). A patient's tumor had metastasized to the lung after surgery at the primary site. A biopsy from his lung tumor was analyzed by mutation and transcription profiling; however, the patient's normal lung tissue was not biopsied. Because there was no matched normal tissue, messenger RNA (mRNA) expression in the patient's own blood and information collected from various normal tissues were used to identify differentially expressed genes (DEGs). The results of pathway analysis based on DEGs, integrated copy number variation and mutation information led the doctor to change the patient's drug treatment, and the disease was stabilized for 3 months. Although the personalized interpretation of pathways can be demanding, most current pathway analyses have been developed to investigate deregulated pathways between two phenotype groups classified these methods into three types: overrepresentation analysis or a functional class scoring (FCS) and a pathway topology pt based approach. or a approaches typically apply an arbitrary threshold value (e.g., fold change 42 or P50.05) on gene expression to assess whether the number of genes beyond threshold are significantly over or underrepresented in the given pathway. There are two drawbacks to or a. First, it uses only the most significant genes and discards others, thus resulting in information loss for marginally significant genes (). Second, it considers only the number of genes and does not consider the magnitude of expression changes, leading to information loss regarding the importance of genes (e.g. a gene with a fold change of 2.01 and a gene with a fold change of 4 are considered equally). Unlike or a FCS methods do not discard genes with an arbitrary threshold but use all available genes, which is an improvement over or a (). PT methods are essentially based on FCS methods with the addition that they consider network topology information. They compensate for the common limitation of or a and FCS in reporting false positive gene sets due to sets of overlapping genes. In our article, we focus on or a and FCS methods, extending and implementing each for personalized pathway analysis. There are two exceptional studies examining individualized pathway analysis (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com PARADIGM is a tool that infers a pathway status by using known functional structures. The method models the functional structure of pathway as a set of interconnected variables, where the variables are omic objects such as DNA, mRNA and protein, where the interaction between variables describes the functional status of a pathway. PARADIGM may perform better with multiple omics, as it uses known functional relationships between a gene or inter gene DNA and protein. Hence, it might not perform well with single layer omic data, such as from mRNA microarrays proposed a personal pathway deregulation score (PDS), which represents the distance of a single cancer sample from the median of normal samples on the principal curve. To calculate PDS, they reduced the dimensions by principal component analysis and found the best principal curve, using entire cohort samples containing both normal and or different stages of cancers. Drier's method performs better than PARADIGM in the mRNA only datasets of brain and colon cancers. Calculating PDS requires data dependent preprocessing steps, including selecting the number of principal components to be used and filtering out noisy gene data to obtain optimized principal curves. PDS fully uses whole cohort data to interpret an individual's pathway, which can be a drawback in that it requires a number of cohort data to extract principal curve to interpret a single patient data. It has a limitation to interpret a single sample such as a patient's recurrent tumor that is not accompanied with cohort dataset to extract the principal curve. Our proposed method is based on the comparison of one cancer sample with many accumulated normal samples (we use 'nRef' to refer to the accumulated normal samples) that is different from the previous studies in following sense. The proposed method is suitable to adopt single layer omics data and expendable to interpret a patient in the context of many published or user defined pathway gene sets. PARADIGM has less freedom in terms of data and gene sets, as it prefers multi-layered omics data and requires predefined functional structure among omics objects. Unlike PDS, which extracts the principal curve from entire cohort data, our method does not assume an individual sample belongs to a cohort. We introduce using accumulated normal tissue data as a reference. This is a simple and biologically intuitive guideline in such a case to interpret a single sample that lack cohort data. Our method provides a series of analysis steps, which consists of four parts: data processing, gene level statistics, individualized pathway aber rance score ip as and a significance test. To discover the most feasible method for ip as we extend existing pathway analysis techniques, namely, or a and FCS, to properly reflect the nature of testing one cancer to many normal samples. To demonstrate that ip as captures biologically and clinically relevant information in a sensible, valid and useful manner, we apply it to samples of lung and colon adenocarcinoma. We show that our representation generates clinically relevant stratifications and outcome predictors, which would not have been achieved when the same data are analyzed by the conventional method that does not use accumulated normal data. Our empirical study suggests two different strategies, depending on the biological question that ip as is focused on. In the case of cancer diagnosis, a method that uses the inter gene correlation structure of the accumulated normal samples performs best. In the case of cancer prognosis, a simple averaging of all member genes' standardized gene expression values performs best.
