Motivation: The prokaryotic genome Analysis Tool pg at is a web based database application for comparing gene content and sequence across multiple microbial genomes facilitating the discovery of genetic differences that may explain observed phenotypes. pg at supports database queries to identify genes that are present or absent in user selected genomes, comparison of sequence polymorphisms in sets of orthologous genes, multi genome display of regions surrounding a query gene, comparison of the distribution of genes in metabolic pathways and manual community annotation. Availability and Implementation: The pg at website may be accessed at http://nwrce.org/pgat.

introduction whole genome sequence comparison of related bacteria is increasing in scale owing to second generation sequencing technologies such as Illumina (http://www.illumina.com/) and 454 pyrosequencing (http://www.454.com) that can sequence more than a hundred bacterial genomes in few months. The main challenge currently presented by those technologies is the ability to compare a large number of draft sequences efficiently in order to elucidate the biological significance of the differences. Substantial progress has been made to accurately align whole genome sequences to uncover genetic polymorphisms (). However, linking polymorphisms with functional differences still requires examination of their effect on proteins encoded by these regions (e.g. non-synonymous substitutions, gene inactivation by frame shifts etc.). The motivation for the development of the prokaryotic genome Analysis Tool pg at was the need for a data mining tool by which draft genome sequences could be compared among themselves and with completed genomes to explore genetic differences that result in functional differences. The main features of pg at are as follows i implementation as a web based database application to support data mining; (ii) ability to efficiently integrate large numbers of genomes including draft genome assemblies; (iii) homogenization of genome annotation across the genomes; and (iv) support for manual community annotation. pg at integrates many features of current online resources such as the Integrated Microbial Genomes IMG (), the Burkholderia * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Genome Database () and Neisseria Base (). Its main difference is the homogenization of gene features across the genomes and the integrated functionality to compare gene content, single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in orthologous genes, and the resulting impact of SNPs and indels on the encoded proteins. Currently, pg at websites host Burkholderia pseudomallei b mallei Francisella tularensis, Yersinia pestis and Salmonella enterica.
