Motivation: Bacteriophages have two distinct lifestyles: virulent and temperate. The virulent lifestyle has many implications for phage therapy, genomics and microbiology. Determining which lifestyle a newly sequenced phage falls into is currently determined using standard culturing techniques. Such laboratory work is not only costly and time consuming, but also can not be used on phage genomes constructed from environmental sequencing. Therefore, a computational method that utilizes the sequence data of phage genomes is needed. Results: Phage Classification Tool Set ph acts utilizes a novel similarity algorithm and a supervised Random Forest classifier to make a prediction whether the lifestyle of a phage, described by its proteome, is virulent or temperate. The similarity algorithm creates a training set from phages with known lifestyles and along with the lifestyle annotation, trains a Random Forest to classify the lifestyle of a phage. ph acts predictions are shown to have a 99% precision rate. Availability and implementation: ph acts was implemented in the PERL programming language and utilizes the fast a program (Pearson and Lipman, 1988) and the R programming language library Random Forest (Liaw and Weiner, 2010). The ph acts software is open source and is available as downloadable stand-alone version or can be accessed online as a user friendly web interface. The source code, help files and online version are available at http://www. phantom e or gph acts
introduction viruses that infect bacteria are called bacteriophages or phages. It is estimated that there are 10 30 bacterial cells in biosphere (). Given that typical ratios of bacteria to phage are on the order of 1:10 (), it is estimated that there exist 10 31 phage particles on the planet. Viruses thus are the most abundant biological entities on the planet. Phages are ubiquitous and can be found in any environment where their bacterial hosts are present. Phages are found in high numbers in terrestrial * To whom correspondence should be addressed. environments such as soil, and in aquatic environments such as lakes and seawater (). Recent estimates suggest that there exist globally 100 million phage species (); however, only a small fraction of phages have so far been characterized. When a phage infects a bacterial cell, the phage enters into one of two distinct lifestyles: virulent or temperate. During a virulent lifestyle a phage infects a bacteria; its genome is replicated many times; and the newly created copies are released into the surrounding environment through lysis, extrusion or budding. In contrast during a temperate lifestyle, a phage infects a bacteria and either integrates its DNA into the bacterial genome or re circular izes its DNA into a stable plasmid. The temperate phage will live in this semi-stable lifestyle as a prophage as the host bacteria continues to grow and divide. The prophage will be carried through future bacterial cell divisions until appropriate environmental conditions cause the temperate phage to enter into a virulent lifestyle and release itself from the host bacterium. This switch into a virulent lifestyle is referred to as induction and is generally caused by host cell damage () or environmental stressors (). Not only does the characterization of phage lifestyles contribute to the understanding of phage population dynamics, genomics and microbiology; but also the virulent lifestyle has applications toward phage therapy and biocontrol (). Previously, the lifestyle of a phage was identified through culturing and isolation in the lab. This is not only time consuming but also costly. With the advent of shotgun sequencing, large numbers of phage are being sequenced at an increasing rate. As the ability to sequence new phages faster than culturing can identify the lifestyle, there is a need to computationally annotate genomic data and also to make predictions about the lifestyle. In addition, because many of these newly sequenced genomes are derived from entire environmental community sequencing methods, it may not be possible to isolate the phages for culturing. Computationally classifying phages based on their genomes is difficult due to the highly mosaic organization of their genomes (). Unlike bacteria, which have 16S rRNA and various other conserved genes that can be used for taxonomy and phylogeny, phages have no universally present gene that can be used for analysis (). The first attempt at using genomic data to classify phage by comparing structural proteins does not work well across all clades of phages (). An alternative methodology was created by Rohwer and Page: 615 614618
