pham db is a web application which creates databases of bacteriophage genes, grouped by gene similarity. It is backwards compatible with the existing pham erator desktop software while providing an improved database creation workflow. Key features include a graphical user interface, validation of uploaded GenBank files, and abilities to import phages from existing databases, modify existing databases and queue multiple jobs. Availability and implementation: Source code and installation instructions for Linux, Windows and Mac OSX are freely available at https://github.com/jglamine/phage. pham db is also distributed as a docker image which can be managed via kite matic. This docker image contains the application and all third party software dependencies as a pre-configured system, and is freely available via the installation instructions provided.

introduction pham erator is a tool developed for the purpose of comparing and analyzing bacteriophage (phage) genomes, allowing the visualization of the genomic mosaicism that characterize phage genomes (). pham erator has been an important instrument of analysis for thousands of undergraduate students participating in sea phages (Science Education Alliance  Phage Hunters Advancing Genomic and Evolutionary Sciences;; http://seaphages.org). Students and faculty have used pham erator in several publications (), including a recent comparison of a large number of phages (), greatly expanding knowledge of bacteriophage diversity and evolution. pham erator has largely been used with a single, shared database. However, it does have the ability to connect to other databases. As the sea phages program has grown and diversified its approaches for isolating new bacteriophages, including using new bacterial hosts, there has been an increasing need for faculty and student researchers to create and manage custom pham erator databases tailored to their bacterial host and unique research questions (). Here we describe pham db a web based application which provides an improved workflow for the creation and management of pham erator databases. A pham erator database contains genome information as well as computed information about gene similarity. Pairwise comparisons of the predicted amino acid sequences of genes are used to assign them to families, termed pham s. Whole genome pairwise comparisons are also made at the nucleotide level. Computed pham s and nucleotide comparisons are stored in a database, and pham erator allows researchers to view data and visualizations from this database (). Previously, databases for pham erator were created using a series of scripts, posing significant barriers to entry to non-technical users. Creating databases this way required comfort with the Unix command line, the completion of a number of sequential steps, and responding to error messages. This required a significant investment of time, and troubleshooting sometimes required communication with the researchers who develop and maintain pham erator. pham db eliminates this learning curve by providing an improved database creation workflow, including a web interface powered by a completely re-written database creation engine with a focus on input validation, early error detection, graceful error recovery, and actionable, human readable error reporting. When creating a database, the user can upload GenBank files or select phages from existing databases. GenBank files are then checked for the necessary elements and format to be used with pham erator and error messages for invalid files include a description of the problem and the line number where it occurs. The user can deselect uploaded phages or add additional phages before creating a database. Database creation operations are queued as jobs, with one job running at a time. This allows researchers to explore different research questions by queuing several new databases at once, rather than having to wait for the first database to be processed before creating another. After database construction, users can remove or add phages and reconstruct the database. Instructions for connecting pham erator to the correct server and databases are displayed for the user to copy and paste into pham erator preferences. Existing databases can be imported as .sql files, and databases can be exported as .sql files for backup purposes.
