Emerging evidence has revealed phased siRNAs pha sirnas as important endogenous regulators in plants. However, the integrated prediction tools for pha sirnas are still limited. In this article, we introduce a stand-alone package phase tank for systematically characterizing pha sirnas and their regulatory networks. (i) It can identify pha sir nastasi rnas functional cascades mirna pha sirna p has loci pha sirna target with high sensitivity and specificity. (ii) By one command analysis, it generates comprehensive annotation and quantification of the predicted p has genes from any given sequences. (iii) phase tank has no restriction with regards to prior information of sequence homology of unrestricted organism origins. Availability and implementation: phase tank is a free and open source tool. The package is available at http://phasetank.source

introduction secondary phased siRNAs pha sirnas play crucial roles in post-transcriptional regulatory networks in plants (). well characterized trans-acting siRNAs, as a special subgroup of pha sirnas are initiated by mirna mediated cleavage and converted to dsRNA, yielding siRNAs in a 21-nt phase (). Currently, eight TAS loci have been identified in Arabidopsis, and TAS3 is experimentally validated to suppress the juvenile to adult transition (). Moreover, pha sirna mediated regulation of nbl rr encoding disease resistance proteins appears to be widespread in dicots (). However, the significance and broad roles of pha sirnas remain unclear in plants (). next generation sequencing technology provides a powerful tool for genome wide screening of pha sirnas (), and several methods were proposed correspondingly (). However, no methods could systematically identify pha sirnas and their regulatory cascades, and none reports the detailed annotation and quantification of candidate p has loci (). In this study, we present a novel tool phase tank to identify p has loci, which contains our new sights and also incorporates the advantages of the previous methods. We propose that the relative small RNAs production r srp of p has loci is higher than that of the transcripts processed by random cleavage, inasmuch as the p has loci should generate considerable pha sirnas to maintain their biological functions (). In our method, the phased ratio, abundance and number of a pha sirna cluster are considered as three main contributors to score a candidate p has loci. Additionally, phase tank could detect both triggered miRNAs and pha sirna targets for predicted p has loci. Therefore, phase tank employs a new filter and scoring system to perform de novo prediction of p has loci and their regulatory cascades on a genome wide scale.

conclusion in conclusion, our results demonstrate that phase tank is an effective and highly applicable tool for comprehensive annotation and quantification of regulatory cascades involved in pha sirna pathways. Therefore, phase tank would help to elucidate the function and evolution of this special class of small RNAs in land plants.
