Motivation: next generation sequencing and other high throughput technology advances have promoted great interest in detecting associations between complex traits and genetic variants. Phenotype selection, quality control (QC) and control of confounders are crucial and can have a great impact on the ability to detect associations. Although there are programs to perform association analyses, e.g. PLINK and gen abel they can not be used for comprehensive management and QC of phenotype data. To address this need phenom an was developed: to select individuals based on multiple phenotype criteria or population membership; control for missing cov-ariate data; remove related individuals, duplicate samples and individuals with incorrect sex specification; recode primary traits and covariates; transform data; remove or winsor ize outliers; select cov-ariates for analysis; and create residuals. To ensure consistency and harmonization between analyses, a report is generated for every data-set. Summary statistics are also provided in graphical or text format. phenom an can be used for selection and manipulation of quantitative, disease and control data. Summary: phenom an is freeware that provides approaches for efficient exploration and management of phenotype data. Proper QC of phenotypes before proceeding to the association analysis is critical to ensure control of type I and II errors, reliable effect estimates and consistent results between studies. phenom an is highly beneficial for the preparation of qualitative and quantitative trait data for association studies using new datasets as well as those obtained from public repositories. Availability and implementation: code googlecom
introduction in recent years, next generation sequencing technologies have generated vast amounts of exo me and genome sequence data to be used for the detection of complex trait associations. Although association analyses play a crucial role in elucidating the genetic etiology of complex traits, type I error can be increased and power may be profoundly weakened by phenotypic outliers, related individuals, missing phenotypic values, population stratification, inclusion or exclusion of covariates to control for confounders and so forth (). Additionally, often between studies analysis of phenotypes are not consistent, e.g. phenotype selection, inclusion of covariates, treatment of outliers. It is important that all analysis steps e.g. determining which study subjects and covariates to include in the analysis are fully documented, so results are reproducible and additionally analyses are consistent between datasets, which is a key for both meta analysis and replication studies (). Although programs such as PLINK () and gen abel () can be used for association analysis, they can not be used for comprehensive management and quality control (QC) of phenotype data. Additionally, R www r project org could be used for data exploration, but it is not readily suitable to perform all necessary tasks to prepare phenotype data for association analysis; additionally the user must have expertise in writing R scripts. The phenom an software was developed to provide a universally powerful framework with simple commands, to integrate both quantitative and qualitative phenotype data exploration, QC and sample selection into a unified program. phenom an an interactive command line driven program, is written in Python and R.

DESCRIPTION

discussion for association studies, QC can be time consuming but it is necessary before the onset of data analysis. Proper QC of phenotypes before proceeding to association analysis is critical to ensure control of type I and II errors, reliable effect estimates and consistent results between studies. phenom an is designed to provide a convenient and comparable manner to obtain analysis ready phenotype data. Performing this important process contains two steps: (i) exploration use statistics and graphics to overview the data and (ii) solutions correct transform select and or remove identified 'erroneous' entities. Ultimately, we expect that phenom an will enhance the analysis of association data.
