Phosphorylation plays an important role in cellular signal transduction. Current phosphorylation related databases often focus on the phosphorylation sites, which are mainly determined by mass spectrometry. Here, we present phospho networks a phosphorylation database built on a high resolution map of phosphorylation networks. This high resolution map of phosphorylation networks provides not only the kinase substrate relationships ks rs but also the specific phosphorylation sites on which the kinases act on the substrates. The database contains the most comprehensive dataset for ks rs including the relationships from a recent high throughput project for identification of ks rs using protein microarrays, as well as known ks rs curated from the literature. In addition, the database also includes several analytical tools for dissecting phosphorylation networks. phospho networks is expected to play a prominent role in proteomics and phosphorylation related disease research. Availability and implementation: http://www.phosphonetworks.org

introduction the reversible phosphorylation of proteins regulates many aspects of cellular physiology. Abnormal phosphorylation is known to be both a cause and a consequence of many diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, heat attack, hypertension and rheumatoid arthritis (). The systematic study of phosphorylation can greatly benefit disease related biomedical research. In a recent project, we developed a combined protein microarray and bioinformatics approach to identify kinase substrate relationships ks rs in a high throughout manner (). Based on the results of these studies, we experimentally identified substrates for 289 unique kinases, resulting in 3656 high quality ks rs. The study generated more human ks rs than all previous studies combined. To facilitate the use of this information, we created the 'Database for a high resolution Map of Human Phosphorylation Networks phospho networks an integrated information system for the storage, retrieval, visualization and analysis of human phosphorylation data. To enhance the discovery of phosphorylation relationships between kinases and their downstream substrates, we also connected the kinases with the specific phosphorylation site on substrate protein sequences, which will help users design mutagenesis experiments of phosphorylation sites to block the phosphorylation event. Therefore, the phospho networks database provides not only a powerful information resource but also an integrated analysis platform.
