Motivation: Rich collections of biodiversity information such as spatial distributions, species descriptions and trait data are now synthesized in publicly available online sources such as GBIF. Also phylogenetic knowledge now provides a sound understanding of the origin of organisms and their place in the tree of life. We demonstrate with phylo jive that any phylogenetic tree can be linked to online biodiversity data in the browser. This evolutionary view of biodiversity data is demonstrated in a case study that suggests that this approach may be useful to scientists and non experts users.

introduction the growing catalogue of online biodiversity data sources has reached a scale where integration with phylogenies can inform comparative biology research in morphology, ecology, biogeography, disease resistance, ecosystem services, food security and climate change (). There are now mature services (e.g. GBIF, EOL and the ALA) that provide biodiversity data, including species profiles, morphological, distribution, images and taxonomic data, to researchers and the general public (). These data sources provide data in tax on profiles but not through phylogenies. The research community has generated dna based phylogenetic trees (), and many are stored in repositories such as tree base II (http://www.treebase.org/). Many data analysis and visualization suites are now available, which produce and display phylogenies () but none integrate data, such as morphological character states derived from web services, on a phylogeny. Here we demonstrate phylo jive (Phylogeny Javascript Information Visualiser and Explorer), a web based application that integrates biodiversity information aggregated from many sources with phylogenetic trees. phylo jive complements other initiatives that provide visualizations such as phylo widget one zoom (http://www.onezoom.org) and jspyhylosvg (). We do not seek to replicate what they do well; rather, we provide a convenient means to assemble online data in a phylogenetic context.
