phylo wood is a web service that uses JavaScript to generate in browser animations of biogeographic and phylo geographic histories from annotated phylogenetic input. The animations are interactive , allowing the user to adjust spatial and temporal resolution, and highlight phylogenetic lineages of interest. Availability and implementation: All documentation and source code for phylo wood is freely available at https://github.com/mlandis/phylo wood, and a live web application is available at https://mlandis.github. io phylo wood
introduction the fields of phylogeography and biogeography study the processes that give rise to the observed geographical distributions of life. Methods to infer migration processes and reconstruct ancestral geographical distributions in a phylogenetic context have recently enjoyed increased popularity (). The resulting ancestral reconstructions are inherently high dimensional; they describe distributions across space, time and phylogenetic lineage and consequently can be difficult to interpret. Here, we introduce phylo wood a web utility that generates interactive animations to facilitate the exploration and summarization of such complex reconstructions. phylo wood takes phylo geographic output from BEAST () or biogeographic output from bay area () in the form of NEWICK trees with internal nodes annotated with inferred ancestral locations. phylo wood plots the reconstructed geographic distributions and explores temporal dynamics through animation. Although similar in basic approach to the program SPREAD (), phylo wood is designed for ease of use and frictionless sharing. It is entirely implemented within the web browser, requiring no further software installation.

conclusion phylo geographic and biogeographic methods combine genetic and geographic data across individuals or across species to infer complex spatiotemporal processes. Joint phylogenetic and geographic reconstructions produced by these methods benefit from sophisticated visualization techniques that highlight connections between geography and genotype. As phylo geographic and biogeographic datasets continue to increase in size and complexity, harnessing appropriate visualization techniques will become increasingly important. We present phylo wood as a method to explore and share geographically tagged phylogenies. To learn more about phylo woods features, visit http://github. comm land is phylo wood wiki for help and tutorials of the phylogenetic tree has been masked using mouse issued commands, leaving two clades and their shared ancestry unmasked. The media slider indicates the current position of the animation with respect to the time calibrated phylogeny for which time six unmasked lineages are animated. For the current animation time, each extant lineage is allocated an equal width slice of the pie. For each color, the depth of the slice indicates the approximate marginal posterior probability of the lineage occupying the area at that time. Pie slices are sorted phylogenetically, making the relative position of absent slices informative. Consulting the geography panel, we find the tax a from the top clade appear to be allopatric with respect to tax a from the bottom clade at 15.5 Mya. The interactive animation is available at http://mlandis. gi thu bio phylo wood url examples vi rey an hx
