Phylogenetic trees are widely used to display estimates of how groups of species are evolved. Each phylogenetic tree can be seen as a collection of clusters, subgroups of the species that evolved from a common ancestor. When phylogenetic trees are obtained for several datasets (e.g. for different genes), then their clusters are often contradicting. Consequently, the set of all clusters of such a dataset can not be combined into a single phylogenetic tree. Phylogenetic networks are a generalization of phylogenetic trees that can be used to display more complex evolutionary histories, including reticulate events, such as hybridizations, recombinations and horizontal gene transfers. Here, we present the new CASS algorithm that can combine any set of clusters into a phylogenetic network. We show that the networks constructed by CASS are usually simpler than networks constructed by other available methods. Moreover, we show that CASS is guaranteed to produce a network with at most two reticulation s per biconnected component, whenever such a network exists. We have implemented CASS and integrated it into the freely available den dro scope software.

introduction phylogenetics studies the reconstruction of evolutionary histories from genetic data of currently living organisms. A (rooted) phylogenetic tree is a representation of such an evolutionary history in which species evolve by mutation and speciation. The leaves of the tree represent the species under consideration and the root of the tree represents their most recent common ancestor. Each internal node represents a speciation: 1 species splits into several new species. Thus, mathematically speaking, such a node has in degree 1 and out degree at least 2. In recent years, a lot of work has been done on developing methods for computing (rooted) phylogenetic networks (; D.H.), which form a generalization of phylogenetic trees. Next to nodes representing speciation, rooted phylogenetic networks can also contain reticulation s nodes with in degree at least 2. Such nodes can be used to represent the recombinations, hybridizations or horizontal gene transfers, depending on the biological context. In addition, phylogenetic networks can also be interpreted in a more abstract sense, as a visualization of contradictory phylogenetic information in a single diagram. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Suppose we wish to investigate the evolution of a set X of tax a (e.g. species or strains). Each edge of a rooted phylogenetic tree represents a cluster: a proper subset of the tax on set X. In more detail, an edge (u,v) represents the cluster containing those tax a that are descendants of v. Each phylogenetic tree T is uniquely defined by the set of clusters represented by T. Phylogenetic networks also represent clusters. Each of their edges represents one 'hardwired' and at least one soft wired cluster. An edge (u,v) of a phylogenetic network represents a cluster C  X in the hardwired sense if C equals the set of tax a that are descendants of v. Furthermore, (u,v) represents C in the soft wired sense if C equals the set of all tax a that can be reached from v when, for each reticulation r, exactly one incoming edge of r is 'switched on' and the other incoming edges of r are 'switched off'. An equivalent definition states that a phylogenetic network N represents a cluster C in the soft wired sense if there exists a tree T that is displayed by N (formally defined below) and represents C. In this article, we will always use 'represent' in the soft wired sense. It is usually the clusters in a tree that are of more interest, and less the actual trees themselves, as clusters represent putative monophyletic groups of related species. For a complete introduction to clusters see dh submitted for publication). In phylogenetic analysis, it is common to compute phylogenetic trees for more than one dataset. For example, a phylogenetic tree can be constructed for each gene separately, or several phylogenetic trees can be constructed using different methods. To accurately reconstruct the evolutionary history of all considered tax a one would preferably like to use the set C of all clusters represented by at least one of the constructed phylogenetic trees. In general, however, some of the clusters of the different trees will be incompatible, which means that there will be no single phylogenetic tree representing C. Therefore, several recent publications have studied the construction of a phylogenetic network representing c describe how a phylogenetic network can be constructed that represents C in the hardwired sense (a cluster network). A network is a galled network if it contains no path between two reticulation s that is contained in a single biconnected component (a maximal subgraph that can not be disconnected by removing a single node, see). Huson and klp per (2007) and describe an algorithm for constructing a galled network representing C in the soft wired sense. Related literature describes the construction of phylogenetic networks from phylogenetic trees or triplets (phylogenetic trees on three tax a. A tree or triplet T is displayed by a network N if there is a subgraph T of N that is a subdivision of T (i.e. T can be obtained from T by replacing edges by directed paths). Computing the minimum number of reticulation required in a showed that it is fixed parameter tractable (FPT), if parameterized by the minimum number of reticulation s. The downside of these algorithms is that they are very rigid in the sense that one generally needs very complex networks in order to display the given trees. The level of a binary network is the maximum number of reticulation s in a biconnected component, 1 and thus provides a measure of network complexity. Given an arbitrary number of trees on the same set of tax a describe a polynomial time algorithm that constructs a level 1 phylogenetic network that displays all trees and has a minimum number of reticulation s if such a network exists (which is unlikely in practice). Given a triplet for each combination of three tax a Jansson and coworkers () and give a polynomial time algorithm that constructs a level 1 network displaying all triplets, if such a network exists. The algorithm by van iers el and Kelk (2009) can be used to find such a network that also minimizes the number of reticulation s. These results have later been extended to level 2 (van) and more recently to level k for all k  N (). Although this work on triplets is theoretically interesting, it has the practical drawback that biologists do not work with triplets (but rather with trees or clusters) and that it is rather difficult to intuitively convey what it means for a triplet to be 'in' a network. An additional drawback is that these triplet algorithms need at least one triplet in the input for each combination of three tax a while some triplets might be difficult to derive correctly. If, for example, one induces triplets from a set of trees, then this is likely not to give you a triplet for each combination of three tax a if one or more input trees are not fully resolved or if some input trees do not have exactly the same set of tax a. In this article, we present the algorithm Cass, 2 which takes any set C of clusters as input and constructs a phylogenetic network that represents C (in the soft wired sense). Furthermore, the algorithm aims at minimizing the level of the constructed network and in this sense Cass is the first algorithm to combine the flexibility of clusters with the power of level minimization. Cass constructs a phylogenetic tree representing C whenever such a tree exists. 1 In Section 2, we generalize the notion of level to non binary networks. 2 Named after the Cass Field Station in New Zealand.) for C ={{a,b,f ,g,i}, abc f ,g,i}, {a,b,f ,i}, {b,c,f ,i}, cd eh {d,e,h}, {b,c,f ,h,i}, b cdf ,h,i}, {b,c,i}, {a,g}, {b,i}, {c,i}, {d,h}} and (b) the network constructed by Cass for the same input. Moreover, we prove that Cass constructs a level 1 or level 2 network representing C whenever there exists a level 1 or level 2 network representing C, respectively. Experimental results show that also when no level 2 network representing C exists, Cass usually constructs a network with a significantly lower level and lower number of reticulation s compared with other algorithms. In fact, we conjecture that similar arguments as in our proof for level 2 can be used to show that Cass always constructs a level k network with minimum k. We prove a decomposition theorem for level k networks that supports this conjecture. Finally, we prove that Cass runs in polynomial time if the level of the output network is bounded by a constant. We have implemented Cass and added it to our popular tree drawing program den dro scope (), where it can be used as an alternative for the cluster network () and galled network () algorithms. Experiments show that, although Cass needs more time than these other algorithms, it constructs a simpler network representing the same set of clusters. For example shows a set of clusters and the galled network with four reticulation s constructed by the algorithm in this dataset also a level 2 network with two reticulation s exists, and Cass can be used to find this network, see. den dro scope now combines the powers of Cass and the two previously existing algorithms for constructing galled and cluster networks.

discussion we have introduced the Cass algorithm, which can be used to combine any set of clusters into a phylogenetic network representing those clusters. We have shown that the algorithm performs well on practical data. It provides a useful addition to existing software, because it usually constructs a simpler network representing the same set of input clusters. Furthermore, we have shown that Cass provides a polynomial time algorithm for deciding whether a level 2 phylogenetic network exists that represents a given set of clusters. This algorithm is more useful in practice than algorithms for similar problems that take triplets as input (), because clusters are more biologically relevant than triplets and because the latter algorithms need at least one triplet for each combination of three tax a as input, while Cass can be used for any set of input clusters. Furthermore, Cass is also not restricted to two input trees, as the algorithms in the six gene trees of the Poaceae grass dataset, within 5 s. Clusters were used that were present in at least three of the six gene trees. For the same input galled network produced a level 5 network with 17 reticulation s and the cluster network algorithm produced a level 11 network with 32 reticulation s. all clusters in the multi labeled tree(s) and subsequently uses Cass to find a phylogenetic network representing these clusters. Several theoretical problems remain open. First of all, does Cass always construct a minimum level network, even if this minimum is three or more? Second, what is the complexity of constructing a minimum level network, if the minimum level k is not fixed but part of the input? Is this problem FPT when parameterized by k? Finally, it would be interesting to design an algorithm that finds a network representing a set of input clusters that has a minimum reticulation number. So far, not even a non-trivial exponential time algorithm is known for this problem.
