Targeted enrichment of conserved and ultra conserved genomic elements allows universal collection of phylo genomic data from hundreds of species at multiple time scales (5 Ma to  300 Ma). Prior to downstream inference, data from these types of targeted enrichment studies must undergo preprocessing to assemble contigs from sequence data; identify targeted, enriched loci from the off target background data; align enriched contigs representing conserved loci to one another; and prepare and manipulate these alignments for subsequent phylo genomic inference. phy luce is an efficient and easy to install software package that accomplishes these tasks across hundreds of tax a and thousands of enriched loci. Availability and Implementation: phy luce is written for Python 2.7. phy luce is supported on OSX and Linux redhat centos operating systems. phy luce source code is distributed under a bsd style license from https://www.github.com/faircloth-lab/phyluce/. phy luce is also available as a package (https://binstar.org/faircloth-lab/phyluce) for the Anaconda Python distribution that installs all dependencies, and users can request a phy luce instance on i plant Atmosphere (tag: phy luce. The software manual and a tutorial are available from http://phyluce.readthedocs.org/en/latest/ and test data are available from

introduction target enrichment of conserved and ultra conserved elements (hereafter 'conserved loci') allows universal phylo genomic analyses of non model organisms () at multiple time scales (). The strength of the approach derives from its ability to collect sequence data from thousands of loci across hundreds of species, permitting phylogenetic comparisons across deep phylogenetic breaks such as organismal Classes (200 300 Ma) and shallower evolutionary divergences such as populations (0.55 Ma). When the goal of data collection is to infer the evolutionary history of species, the subsequent analytical tasks are generally to:(i) assemble the sequencing reads, which may span tens to hundreds of individuals; (ii) identify putative orthologs among the assembled contigs on a sample by sample basis while removing putative paralogs; (iii) easily generate datasets that contain different individuals, individuals included from other experiments or conserved locus data harvested from individual genome sequences; (iv) identify and export sequence data from orthologs across all individuals in the set; (v) align the data and optionally trim resulting alignments in preparation for phylogenetic inference; (vi) compute summary statistics on the aligned data and (vii) perform utility functions on the sequence or alignment data to prepare them for downstream analyses using a variety of phylogenetic inference programs. phy luce (pronounced phylo o chee is the first open source easy to install software package to perform these tasks for target enriched, conserved loci in a computationally efficient manner.
