Motivation: All current mitochondrial haplogroup classification tools require variants to be detected from an alignment with the reference sequence and to be properly named according to the canonical nomenclature standards for describing mitochondrial variants, before they can be compared with the haplogroup determining polymorphisms. With the emergence of high throughput sequencing technologies and hence greater availability of mitochondrial genome sequences, there is a strong need for an automated haplogroup classification tool that is alignment free and agnostic to reference sequence. Results: We have developed a novel mitochondrial genome haplogroup defining algorithm using a km er approach namely p hymer. p hymer performs equally well as the leading haplogroup clas-sifier, haplo grep while avoiding the errors that may occur when preparing variants to required formats and notations. We have further expanded p hymer functionality such that next generation sequencing data can be used directly as input.

introduction human mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences can be divided into distinct lineages known as haplogroups, which are important for population genetics and disease studies. Conventional mtDNA haplogroup assignment involves alignment of the mtDNA sequence to a reference sequence and then matching the list of variants with the best fitting haplogroup in a phylogenetic classification tree, mostly phylo tree (http://www.phylotree.org) (van). Existing software tools include mi to tool (), haplo grep (), EMMA (), hmi to (http://sourceforge.net/projects/h-mito/), mt hap (http://dna.jameslick.com/mthap), haplo find (Vianello) and m toolbox (). Most of these tools, except m toolbox require a list of mtDNA variants properly denoted according to different conventions in use (). Moreover, there are currently two mitochondrial reference sequences in use: the traditional revised Cambridge Reference Sequence GenBank NC_012920 () and the recently created Reconstructed Sapiens Reference Sequence (). The same variant may be named differently depending on the reference sequence used. As a result, haplogroup classification remains cumbersome and error prone. Given the need to simplify this process, we developed an alignment free and reference independent algorithm that encompasses the entire process from sequence input to haplogroup output without requiring additional efforts from the end user.

discussion p hymer is a novel algorithm in that it avoids the alignment and variant calling step, unlike all other haplogroup classifiers, yet performs equally well with a single command as the leading haplogroup classifiers. p hymers km er library can be easily updated when there is a new release of phylo tree. Since it is implemented as a Python package with few dependencies, p hymer is platform independent. It can be run like a UNIX command, offered as a Web service, or incorporated into any NGS analysis pipeline. We anticipate wide applicability of p hymer given the ever increasing adoption of NGS technologies in both research and clinical care settings.
