Motivation: Deciphering the complex mechanisms by which regulatory networks control gene expression remains a major challenge. While some studies infer regulation from dependencies between the expression levels of putative regulators and their targets, others focus on measured physical interactions. Results: Here, we present Physical Module Networks, a unified framework that combines a Bayesian model describing modules of co-expressed genes and their shared regulation programs, and a physical interaction graph, describing the protein protein interactions and protein dna binding events that coherently underlie this regulation. Using synthetic data, we demonstrate that a Physical Module Network model has similar recall and improved precision compared to a simple Module Network, as it omits many false positive regulators. Finally, we show the power of Physical Module Networks to reconstruct meaningful regulatory pathways in the genetically perturbed yeast and during the yeast cell cycle, as well as during the response of primary epithelial human cells to infection with H1N1 influenza. Availability: The pm n software is available, free for academic use at

introduction transcription regulation plays a major role in controlling gene expression and cell function. Despite intensive research, the topology and function of most regulatory circuits remain largely unknown. The increasing availability of large scale datasets, such as genomics sequence, gene expression profiles and protein dna or protein protein interaction data, provides an opportunity to automatically infer regulatory circuits on a genome wide scale. Three main types of approaches have been used to infer regulatory models from genomic data (), each suffering from substantial limitations. Observational models, including Bayesian networks () and their extensions (e.g.), rely on dependencies between the expression profiles of regulators to those of their target genes. These can handle abundant expression data, but often fail to distinguish true regulation from co-expression (). perturbation al models associate targets to factors based on the effect of the factors' genetic manipulation on gene expression (; Capaldi * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint). These identify functional effects, but may fail to correctly distinguish direct from indirect targets (). Finally, physical models associate regulatory factors with the targets whose promoters they bind (), or where a cis regulatory site is present (e.g.). These identify molecular targets, but some of those may be functionally silent (). Thus, a major challenge is to build a realistic, molecular and functional model of gene regulation that combines changes in gene expression with the underlying physical interactions. Previous attempts toward this goal have mostly introduced new hypotheses only at one level, while using the other level to support them. These include works that detect functional modules by integrating phenotypic and physical data () or that reconstruct or annotate signaling pathways or binding events (). A notable exception () integrated binding, sequence and expression information in a Bayesian framework to identify both clusters of genes and their transcriptional regulators. However, this work did not consider upstream signaling pathways. Here, we present Physical Module Networks pm n a novel probabilistic graphical method that learns transcriptional networks by combining gene expression profiles, protein protein and protein dna binding data. The pm n model, based on Module Networks (), discovers modules of co-expressed genes, sets of regulators that control their activity, and a path of physical interactions that connects the regulators to their target module (). The modules, regulators and paths are inferred simultaneously, resulting in the most probable physical model of gene regulation that underlies the observed data. Using synthetic data, we show that the addition of physical interactions to the simple Module Network (MN) model improves the model's precision, without compromising recall. We evaluate the biological power of the model in two yeast systems (gene perturbations and cell cycle), and a human dataset (response of epithelial cells to flu infection). In each case, the learned modules and pathways are biologically sound, and lead to novel insights, emphasizing the power of integrated probabilistic models.

discussion here we presented PMNs, a probabilistic graphical method that learns transcriptional networks by combining phenotypic effects (changes in gene expression) with their underlying physical mechanism protein protein and protein dna interactions). We evaluated the model by comparing to a simple MN on synthetic data, and by reconstructing coherent pathways and regulation in yeast and human data. A pm n builds and sub tan tially extends on MNs, a special case of a Bayesian network that is defined over a set of gene modules rather than single genes (). The main drawback of a simple MN is that each regulator is chosen solely based on its expression pattern, limiting its ability to distinguish between true regulators and false positives. The pm n addresses this limitation by presenting additional constraints on the choice of regulators, requiring a physical pathway that connects it to some of the target genes. Indeed, as we have shown on synthetic data, the added physical interactions increase the model's precision without compromising recall. Furthermore, the pm n presents a new hypothesis for the regulation mechanism. We showed that it can determine coherent pathways and regulatory mechanisms that connect genetic perturbations to target genes (in yeast and human data), as well as coherent modules, regulators and pathways in the yeast cell cycle system. Notably, adding physical interactions also carries disadvantages, especially when interaction data are very partial and noisy. pm n may miss a true regulator if a full regulation path is missing (hurting recall), the reconstructed pathways are sensitive to noise in the interaction measurements, and certain types of interactions (protein modifications, chromatin occupancy, cellular localization), as well as alternative splicing, are not modeled in the simple interaction graph. Nevertheless, PMN's success in several realistic cases, in yeast and human, suggest that it provides an important advance toward reconstructing models of regulatory circuits in eukaryotic cells.
