Motivation: There have been several studies on the micro inversions between human and chimpanzee, but there are large discrepancies among their results. Furthermore, all of them rely on alignment procedures or existing alignment results to identify inversions. However, the core alignment procedures do not take very small inversions into consideration. Therefore, their analyses can not find inversions that are too small to be detected by a classic aligner. We call such inversions pico inversions. Results: We re-analyzed human chimpanzee alignment from the UCSC Genome Browser for micro in place in versions and screened for pico in place in versions using a likelihood ratio test. We report that the quantity of in place in versions between human and chimpanzee is substantially greater than what had previously been discovered. We also present the software tool pico inversion miner to detect pico in place in versions between closely related species. Availability: Software tools, scripts and result data are available at

introduction an inversion is a genomic rearrangement where a piece of DNA is replaced by its reverse complement and re-inserted into the genome. When the reversed DNA piece is re-inserted at its original site, it is called an in place in version. Very large inversions can be observed under a microscope reported nine such large scale inversions between human and chimpanzee. Submicroscopic inversions are discovered by sequence analyses and are called micro inversions their sizes range from dozens to millions of bases. Most studies focusing on micro inversions rely on genomic alignments; therefore, the shortest detectable micro inversion is limited by the shortest significant alignment. We call the inversions that are too small to be detected by a genomic aligner pico inversions. There has not been any explicit study on pico inversions their existence and prevalence have been unknown. Characterization of inversions has been useful in any aspects of biomedical research suggested that very large inversions might have been responsible for a speed up of the speciation of human and chimpanzee. There is also evidence that inversions are related to some diseases () and may suppress recombination (). There have been reports of inversion polymorphism in human genomes (), indicating that inversion is an important feature of intraspecies genomic structure. Breakpoints defined by inversions have been used extensively in genome comparison and ancestral genome reconstruction ().used inversions to reconstruct a phylogenetic species tree as a new approach to supplement the traditional phylogenetic analysis based on substitutions alone. We observed that some spurious alignments in multispecies alignments are caused by undetected inversions. Discovering such inversions and correcting their alignments can improve alignment quality, which in turn can improve the accuracy of downstream data analysis based on alignments. Although human and chimpanzee are the most closely related species, the studies on micro inversions between them () showed large discrepancies. The earliest result reported 1576 putative inversions (), and later, it was found that the majority of these were artifacts ().reported 426 inversions, and the refined method of identified a similar number of inversions; however, only 59% of inversions were consistent in these studies (reported 323 inversions among which 252 could be clearly characterized. These discrepancies indicate that identifying inversions is difficult, even for closely related species. The problem is even more difficult for more distantly related species because of greater sequence divergence, higher frequency of inversions and higher likelihood that the inversions are nested. All these studies rely on alignments produced by blast z () [now updated to last z (), though the methodology remains largely the same], which is used by major comparative genomic resources such as the UCSC Genome Browser () (hereafter referred to as the browser). Below we illustrate some limitations of blast z in aligning inversions, as these observations will guide us in looking for missing micro inversions in the whole genome alignment. By examining this typical genomic aligner, we argue that there exist pico inversions that are not detectable by the existing alignment tools. Briefly, blast z aligns two sequences that are soft masked where repetitive sequences are distinguished from non repetitive ones. blast z starts by collecting hits between two non repetitive sequences using a seed of a certain pattern, then extends them. Dot-plot illustration of a missing inversion in a repeat region. The black and grey colors indicate non repeat and repeat sequences, respectively. The black and grey diagonal lines are alignments from the browser. The gaps are insertion(s) in human and or deletion(s) in chimpanzee. gap lessly in both directions, and finally extends them further while allowing gaps to form alignment blocks. Once there is an alignment between non repetitive sequences, it behaves as an anchor and extends into the flanking regions where repetitive sequences can be aligned. However, some orthologous repeats can not be aligned due to large indels that block the alignment extension from the anchor. In, the alignments in non repeat regions extend into repeats, as indicated by the gray diagonal lines. But, there is no alignment on the browser between human positions hg19:chr1:35,358,810 (b 1 ) and 35,359,676 (e 1 ). The corresponding locations in chimpanzee are panTro3:chr1:35,081,773 (b 2 ) and 35,082,501 (e 2 ). The dotted diagonal line is a missing alignment due to the big gaps blocking the alignment extension. A long run of un sequenced positions (which is not rare in the chimpanzee assembly) has the same effect as a big gap. To obtain the alignments of inversions, one sequence is aligned to the reverse complement of the other. Since there are fewer orthologous non repetitive sequences on the reverse strand (assuming the majority of the sequence is not inverted), there are fewer alignment anchors to extend into repeat regions. Therefore, it is more difficult to align inversions in genomic regions with repeats. Again in, the dotted anti diagonal line shows a missing inversion discovered in our study. In this example, when aligning human sequence with the reverse complement of chimpanzee sequence, there is no hit (because hits are only collected between non repetitive sequences), and therefore, there is no alignment. Even after blast z correctly produces an inversion as an alignment block, it may be screened out in a post-processing step such as chain net () at the browser since chain net gives preference to a long alignment block. When an inversion is surrounded by strong alignments, its flanking alignments may be so strong that they compensate for the low score produced by the misalignment in the middle, and the real inversion is discarded showed an example where an inversion of 290 bases was screened out in chain net and spurious alignment was presented where the inversion was supposed to be. Indels in alignments can be as small as just one base, since the gapped extension step in the alignment procedure is done via a dynamic programming model, which explicitly accounts for gaps as short as one base. However, inversions do not enjoy such special treatment in the computational model. It was pointed out that rearrangements may happen at all scales, but small rearrangements are not detected by the alignment, because the aligner is not designed to handle such small rearrangements (). The shortest inversion found in large scale alignments is determined by the alignment significance score threshold together with other alignment parameters. For example, an alignment match has a score of 91 or 100 by default in blast z and the default alignment significance score threshold is 3000. Assuming that there is no gap or mismatch in an alignment, the shortest significant alignment is around 3000/100  3000/91 (=30  33) bases. This tells us that the shortest inversion that is detectable by blast z (and thereafter chain net is also around this size. One can not just simply decrease the alignment significance score threshold to find the shorter inversions, because it will produce a large number of spurious alignments. Here we present an approach to detect pico in place in versions between human and chimpanzee. Since there are large discrepancies among previous studies on micro inversions we conduct our own analysis on micro inversions and apply several rules to ensure accuracy of our discoveries. Since our goal of identifying micro inversions is to help study pico in place in versions we restrict our analysis to micro in place in versions. After we obtain micro inversions we have an initial (under)estimate of the inversion rate between human and chimpanzee. We look for pico inversions starting from this initial rate and update it once we obtain convincing pico inversions. After several rounds of updating, this rate stabilizes and gives us a more accurate estimate on the number of in place in versions between two genomes. The pipeline of detecting pico in place in versions is implemented in pico inversion miner. We use out group information to preliminarily verify the pico inversions between human and chimpanzee detected by this tool and use simulations to systematically evaluate the tool.
