Protein interaction network based pathway analysis pin bpa for genome wide association studies g was has been developed as a Cytoscape app, to enable analysis of g was data in a network fashion. Users can easily import g was summary level data, draw Manhattan plots, define blocks, prioritize genes with random walk with restart, detect enriched subnetworks and test the significance of subnetworks via a user friendly interface.

introduction genome wide association studies g was continue to be a widely used approach to detect genetic associations with a phenotype of interest in well defined populations. As of publications have reported associations of 413 000 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with close to 200 phenotypes in the g was catalog (). The successful record of this genomic mapping strategy includes the identification of dozens or even hundreds of susceptibility alleles in common diseases, such as multiple sclerosis (MS), type 1 and type 2 diabetes, lymphomas, leukemias and metabolic disorders. Despite the unquestionable utility of this method, most of the data generated by g was are neglected because of the heavy emphasis devoted to eliminate false discoveries (type I error). Typically, a stringent threshold (P-value55  10 8 ) is applied to minimize type I error, thus inevitably increasing the proportion of false negative results (type II error). Although this is a necessary tactic to effectively evaluate studies testing up to millions of markers individually, a number of methods that analyze groups of markers simultaneously (thus potentially increasing statistical power) have recently emerged (). These approaches, collectively known as pathway analysis, aim at identifying functional relationships among associated signals. Given that susceptibility to complex human diseases is likely a result of genes operating as part of functional modules rather than individual effects (), pathway analysis methods hold promise in discovering additional associations from existing g was data. The most recent class of pathway analysis methods is network based, and they largely overcome the assumptions of independence and preselection of reference database that limited its predecessors. network based analyses commonly use a scaffold of protein interactions to build connections between gene products, where nodes represent proteins and edges represent physical or functional interactions between pairs of proteins. Rather than focusing on individual markers, network based analysis methods take into account multiple loci in the context of molecular pathways. Owing to this critical feature, these methods can afford to use sub genome wide statistical significance and yet increase the power to detect new associations and functional relationships between genes in complex traits. Several network based methods have been proposed to identify active modules (subnetworks) in a given network, such as DAPPLE (), dmg was () and n immi (). The original protein interaction network based pathway analysis pin bpa method was first developed in the context of MS research () and most recently used to successfully identify novel associations by the International MS Genetics Consortium (International Multiple Sclerosis Genetics). In this article, we introduce the pin bpa app for Cytoscape ().

discussion pin bpa is the first Cytoscape app designed for network analysis of g was data. Through a user friendly interface, the pin bpa app enables genomic researchers and biologists with no computational expertise to run a powerful and otherwise complex analytical pipeline. pin bpa is flexible in many ways. First, it enables the use of any network as scaffold for subsequent analysis. For example, a user may choose to run pin bpa using a smaller but high confidence PIN, or a larger network, including computationally predicted interactions. Additionally, other networks such as metabolic, gene co-expression or text mining can be used. Second, while direct import from VEGAS is available, any method can be used to convert snp level and gene level p values. Third, the user can select the significance threshold to define association blocks. Although some experimentation may be needed, this significance threshold is typically related to the power of the g was in question (the larger the g was the more relaxed the p value for block definition). Fourth, significant first order networks can be generated at any user selected statistical threshold. Fifth, an optional network smoothing step allows the user to weight the most significant associations differently. Finally, the size and the significance of enriched networks generated by the greedy algorithm can also be selected, thus providing maximal control over the final output. In summary, the Cytoscape pin bpa app offers a simple interface to perform a complex set of analyses and can be used under a wide variety of scenarios, thus empowering genomic scientists to conduct post g was analysis in a streamlined, rigorous and reproducible fashion.
