m nase seq and chips eq have evolved as popular techniques to study chromatin and histone modification. Although many tools have been developed to identify enriched regions, software tools for nucleosome positioning are still limited. We introduce a flexible and powerful open source R package, PING 2.0, for nucleosome positioning using m nase seq data or m nase or sonicated– chips eq data combined with either single end or paired end sequencing. PING uses a model based approach, which enables nucleosome predictions even in the presence of low read counts. We illustrate PING using two paired end datasets from Saccharomyces cerevisiae and compare its performance with nucl er and chips eqr. Availability: PING 2.0 is available from the Bioconductor website at http://bioconductor.org. It can run on Linux, Mac and Windows.

introduction the nucleosome is the basic structural unit of chromatin, which is composed of a nucleosomal core including 147 bp of DNA wrapped around a central histone octamer (H2A, H2B, H3 and H4) and 'linker' DNA connecting nucleosomal core to the next. Nucleosomes control cellular processes by affecting the accessibility of proteins to the DNA, which can act on gene expression and other dna dependent processes (). Projects like ENCODE (ENCODE Project) have generated large amounts of chips eq and m nase seq data that can be used to improve our understanding of nucleosome positioning and its impact on gene regulation. However, these data require efficient tools that can be used regardless of the experimental protocols employed. Several statistical approaches were recently developed for analyzing nucleosome based data introduced the Template Filter method that models forward and reverse reads based on predefined peak shapes developed the Nucleosome Positioning from Sequencing (NPS) method that uses read pile ups followed by wavelet de-noising for identifying positioned nucleosomes. More recent pile up based approaches include the chips eqr () and nucl er () R packages, available from Bioconductor. In a Bayesian context have developed NOrMAL, which uses mixture models to infer nucleosome positions. All the tools described above were originally developed for single end (SE) sequencing data, where data provide only one side of DNA fragments, and as such the length of the DNA fragments must be provided as input or estimated from the data. To resolve this ambiguity and give more information, paired end (PE) protocols have been developed and are gradually being highlighted in experiments (). Because PE data provide important information about DNA fragment length, they can potentially lead to more precise estimates of nucleosome positions (), though formal comparisons of nucleo me positioning obtained from SE and PE data are still lacking. Here we present a new software tool for nucleosome positioning, PING 2.0, which extends our probabilistic framework for SE chips eq and m nase seq data (). PING 2.0 is a major update of an early (unpublished) version of the software and includes a novel statistical framework for PE data, new functions for pre-processing and reading raw data, and better integration with other Bioconductor packages. The result is a complete framework for nucleosome positioning within Bioconductor that can handle sonicated and m nase protocols combined with either SE or PE sequencing. We compare PING 2.0 with two other Bioconductor packages, nucl er and chips eqr using two novel PE Saccharomyces cerevisiae datasets (available from GEO: GSE47073) generated specifically for this work.
