We present a practical computational pipeline to readily perform data analyses of protein protein interaction networks by using genetic and functional information mapped onto protein structures. We provide a 3D representation of the available protein structure and its regions (sur-face, interface, core and disordered) for the selected genetic variants and or SNPs, and a prediction of the mutants impact on the protein as measured by a range of methods. We have mapped in total 2587 genetic disorder related SNPs from OMIM, 587 873 cancer related variants from COSMIC, and 1 484 045 SNPs from dbSNP. All result data can be downloaded by the user together with an r script to compute the enrichment of snps variants in selected structural regions.

introduction high throughput experiments are routinely performed to decipher genetic, metabolic and protein protein interaction networks p pins and bioinformatic ians are compelled to develop efficient and accurate tools to assist decision making based on available data from multiple sources (). Bioinformatics applications, which merge available genomic, interaction and structural data, can be broadly classified into exploratory or predictive tools. The former comprises of tools which map and visualize the merged data (), while predictive tools are quantitative estimators of the potential impact of snps variants and offer an assessment in terms of scores or pseudo free energy metrics (In this application, we use 3D interactome networks and their homologs to highlight how human variants and disease causing mutations may affect protein function and complex stability. Recent studies have used the structural information of p pins to understand the molecular mechanisms of binding partner selection (). These reliable methods only consider the interactions that have a representative 3D structure or a close homolog with a 3D structure to add weight to the existence of the observed protein interactions (or network links) in a given pp in (). Multiple studies have pointed out that the interfaces of protein complexes harbours mutations associated with diseases (,b). The evaluation of the impact of genomic variation on coding regions can be enhanced by mapping SNPs to distinct regions of protein structure, i.e. surface, interface or core. To generate a comprehensive mapping of available V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
