Motivation: piwi interacting RNAs pirn as 23–36 nt small silencing RNAs, repress transposon expression in the metazoan germ line, thereby protecting the genome. Although high throughput sequencing has made it possible to examine the genome and transcriptome at unprecedented resolution, extracting useful information from giga-bytes of sequencing data still requires substantial computational skills. Additionally, researchers may analyze and interpret the same data differently, generating results that are difficult to reconcile. To address these issues, we developed a coordinated set of pipelines, pi pipes to analyze pirn a and transposon derived RNAs from a variety of high throughput sequencing libraries, including small RNA, RNA, deg radome or 7 methyl guanosine cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE), chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) and genomic dna seq. pi pipes can also produce figures and tables suitable for publication. By facilitating data analysis, pi pipes provides an opportunity to standardize computational methods in the pirn a field.

introduction pirn as a class of 2336 nt long small silencing RNAs, suppress transposon expression in the metazoan germ line and, in some animals, the adjacent gonadal somatic cells (). By preventing transposition, the pirn a pathway ensures that genetic information passes faithfully to the next generation. Disruption of the pirn a pathway typically leads to transposon mobilization, double stranded DNA breaks and sterility. high throughput sequencing technologies have been widely deployed in the study of pirn as. Small rnase q reveals the identity and abundance of pirn as (); rnase q detects and quantifies mRNA and transposon transcripts (); deg radome seq (also termed race seq detects the cleavage products of piwi proteins guided by pirn as (); chromatin immunoprecipitation chips eq detects chromatin modifications directed by pirn as or transcription factor binding events that regulate pirn a precursor or target transcription (); and genomic DNA sequencing detects new transposition events caused by transposons that escape pirn a repression or background differences between experimental strains and the assembled genome (). Correctly extracting biological knowledge from such voluminous data requires significant computational expertise and effort. The repetitive nature of transposon sequences lays another layer of complexity. Moreover, different laboratories use diverse methods to analyze and interpret data (e.g. the way of treating reads that map to multiple locations in a reference genome). To provide a standardized set of tools to analyze these diverse data types, we developed pi pipes a collection of integrated pipelines for small rnase q rnase q deg radome and cap analysis of gene expression seq cage seq chips eq and genome seq analyses.
