We present PIUS, a tool that identifies peptides from tandem mass spectrometry data by analyzing the six frame translation of a complete genome. It differs from earlier studies that have performed such a genomic search in two ways: (i) it considers a larger search space and (ii) it is designed for natural peptide identification rather than proteomics. Differently from other pept i do mics tools designed for genome wide searches, PIUS does not limit the analysis to a set of sequences that match a list of de novo reconstructions. Availability: Source code, executables and a detailed technical report are freely available at

introduction in pept i do mics tandem mass spectroscopy is commonly used to identify peptides: an unknown peptide undergoes fragmentation, its fragment masses are registered in a so called fragmentation spectrum and the peptide sequence is inferred from this spectrum. This latter step is usually performed by database search methods (): for each protein sequence in the database, potential fragments are predicted with their theoretical fragmentation spectrum; a scoring function then measures how well these spectra match the experimental one, returning the top scoring solutions. However, if the peptide is not derived from one of the database sequences, this strategy is bound to fail. In pept i do mics there are still many unidentified spectra of good quality, presumably partially because of this (). One strategy to deal with this limitation is to use de novo sequencing, which infers the amino acid sequence from the mass differences between neighboring peaks in the spectrum. However, from spectra of moderate quality, this strategy can not extract enough information to unambiguously infer the complete sequence. Another strategy, which we adopt in this note, is to compare the observed spectrum with the theoretical one of any peptide that could be translated from the genome (). The proposed method, called PIUS (peptide identification by unbiased search), identifies peptides from fragmentation spectra using the six frame translation of the complete genome. Even though a peptide search against the complete translation of a genome has been investigated in the context of proteo genomics (), these studies were limited to small genomes () and or used additional assumptions that hold in the context of proteomics, where protein digestion occurs in vitro at predictable cleavage sites, but not in pept i do mics where the proteolytic processing occurs in vivo at sites that are difficult to predict. Further, these studies aimed at protein gene discovery, whereas PIUS aims at peptide identification. The latter requires a much higher recall than the former: identifying a few of the peptides from a genomic region usually suffices to make a gene prediction. All in all, this means that pept i do mics presents a markedly different context from proteomics. Recently, three pept i do mics methods have been proposed for genome wide searches: ms dictionary (), ms gapped dictionary () and iggy pep (). The first two methods build a list of de novo reconstructions called a spectral dictionary and use it to reduce the number of candidates in the search. iggy pep queries the full genome translation using complete de novo reconstructions or partial peptide sequence tags (PST). PIUS differs from these methods because its search is exhaustive, not biased toward a subset of candidates, and it eliminates the need for good quality pst s
conclusion many spectra of candidate bioactive peptides remain unidentified to date. To tackle this problem we present PIUS, an open source tool for peptide identification from tandem mass spectrometry data. PIUS searches the entire genome without previous assumptions to reduce the search space and is, therefore, most suited as a tool of last resort. We have validated PIUS with maldi to ft of spectra. Even when searching an entire mammalian genome, PIUS obtains correct identifications in a large majority of cases and has a much higher recall rate than ms gapped dictionary
