Motivation: Plant phenom ics the collection of large scale plant phenotype data, is growing exponentially. The resources have become essential component of modern plant science. Such complex datasets are critical for understanding the mechanisms governing energy intake and storage in plants, and this is essential for improving crop productivity. However, a major issue facing these efforts is the determination of the quality of phenotypic data. Automated methods are needed to identify and characterize alterations caused by system errors, all of which are difficult to remove in the data collection step and distinguish them from more interesting cases of altered biological responses. Results: As a step towards solving this problem, we have developed a coarse to refined model called dynamic filter to identify abnormalities in plant photosynthesis phenotype data by comparing light responses of photosynthesis using a simplified kinetic model of photosynthesis. Dynamic filter employs an expectation maximization process to adjust the kinetic model in coarse and refined regions to identify both abnormalities and biological outliers. The experimental results show that our algorithm can effectively identify most of the abnormalities in both real and synthetic datasets.

introduction plants capture sunlight to fix CO 2 into energy rich molecules, thus supplying our ecosystem with O 2 and essentially all of its biological energy, including 100% of our food. Recent work has focused on improving the efficiency of photosynthesis to meet our growing needs for food and fuel (). To develop efficiency boosting mechanisms that reduce energy losses or enhance CO 2 delivery to cells during photosynthesis, advanced technologies in high throughput plant photosynthetic phenotyping and pheno informatics have been developed (). These technologies have allowed plant photosynthesis phenotypic variability to be characterized and to be related to putative biological functions, leading to a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms that control photosynthetic properties under various environmental conditions. Plant phenom ics is a first class asset for understanding the mechanisms regulating energy intake in plants (). Plant phenotyping systems monitor photosynthetic performance for many plants both continuously and simultaneously. phenom ics datasets are large and continue to grow as we increase duration of sampling and resolution. Yet despite the size and richness of the data, small clusters of erroneous values, which give the appearance of real differences in biological responses, can skew the analysis towards an invalid interpretation (). There are several ways in which a measurement can be in error: errors originating from instrumentation malfunctions, biased values from mis calibrated sensors and inevitable errors of precision. All these issues compromise the downstream data analysis tasks. Given the value of clean data for any operation, the ability to improve data quality is a key requirement for effective knowledge mining from large scale phenotype data. In this article, we focus on data abnormalities detection, which is a type of measurement error to demonstrate how clean phenotype data can be obtained. Similar to sensor data, abnormalities in plant phenotype data deviate significantly from expected patterns and are visible outliers in the whole dataset (). The majority of abnormalities in plant phenotyping originate from instrumentation malfunctions (e.g. loss of sensor synchronization during measurement) or non-biological statistical outliers caused by data collection limitations (e.g. deterioration of signal to noise ratio for a sample as it progresses through the experiment). Data abnormalities are often viewed as outliers in the whole dataset. Recent work has shown the effectiveness of applying data mining techniques, especially outlier detection, for the purpose of data cleaning (), making it possible to automate the cleansing process for a variety of domains (). In these methods, by detecting the minorities of values that do not conform to the general characteristics of a given data collection, outliers are identified and are considered violations of association rules or other patterns in the data. However, the existing models are not suitable for phenotype data cleaning. These methods, while applied to phenotype data, may remove outliers including both measurement errors and true biological discoveries, since true biological discoveries, to some extent, are outliers as well. Furthermore, detecting abnormalities from long time series phenotype data requires handling a high temporal dimension, which increases the model complexity. To identify and remove abnormalities in phenotype data and to minimize the deletion of biological discoveries, we have developed a coarse to refined residual analysis algorithm, called dynamic filter. Dynamic filter has three key steps: (i) identify abnormal candidates at the coarse level, (ii) refine abnormality identification in a projected feature space and (iii) iteratively identify abnormalities at the refined level. Dynamic filter can speed up the data preparation process and make it more effective. Such improvements will minimize time consuming and labour intensive data preparation and increase the significance and confidence in biological discoveries. In summary, our model has the following advantages: @BULLET To our knowledge, dynamic filter is the first work to integrate biological constraints with time series phenotype data for data cleaning. @BULLET Our model can identify both abnormalities and biological discoveries. @BULLET Dynamic filter outperforms the existing solutions by optimizing the fitness between phenotype data and biological constraints.

conclusion with an aim towards identifying targets for improving energy yield, advanced technologies in high throughput plant photosynthetic phenotyping have been developed (). These systems can be used to quantify photosynthetic behaviour in genetically diverse populations and to draw relationships among genotype, phenotype and biological function, leading to a better understanding of the underlying mechanisms that control the photosynthetic properties under various environmental conditions (). As a consequence of the long time high throughput plant phenotyping, the scale of plant phenom ics data grows exponentially. However, the quality of phenotype data may be skewed by sources of noise that are difficult to remove in the data collection step. The purpose of plant phenotyping is to discover phenotype values that are significantly different from a reference. But phenotype values leading to biological discoveries may be obscured by abnormal values caused by errors during detection. To ensure high data quality, effective data cleaning should be considered a primary task. However, since advanced data cleaning algorithms are primarily based on indiscriminate outlier detection, they may remove both abnormalities and biological discoveries not separable in the data distribution. We have developed a new coarse to refined model called dynamic filter to effectively identify both abnormalities and biological discoveries by adopting a widely used photosynthetic model. Specifically, dynamic filter is a residual analysis approach by dynamically tracing statistical distributions of all samples rather than individuals, and incorporating EM for performance optimization in refined checking regions. We note that certain events, such as transient changes in growth environment, could introduce signals similar to growth lighting malfunction, which could be wrongly labelled as abnormalities by dynamic filter. Therefore, instead of automatically deleting all the predicted abnormalities, we send all of them to domain experts for confirmation. Meanwhile, all raw data are kept for any rollback operation. Experimental results show that our model is significantly better than the existing data cleaning tools on both real phenom ics data and synthetic data. Dynamic filter may have a wide impact because of the rapid increase of large scale phenotyping technologies. It should be noted that although we used a photosynthesis specific plant photosynthesis phenom ics data quality control curve the model itself is independent of actual biological constraints. In principle, our approach can be used to clean data for any number of phenotypes as long as suitable theoretical curves can be derived for their behaviour. Implementation for new use cases would involve substituting the appropriate theoretical curve into the program, calculating the residuals of fits to the datasets and optimizing the fitting procedure as described in.
