Motivation: Biomedical ontologies have proved to be valuable tools for data analysis and data interoperability. protein ligand interactions are key players in drug discovery and development; however, existing public ontologies that describe the knowledge space of biomolecular interactions do not cover all aspects relevant to pharmaceutical modelling and simulation. Results: The protein ligand interaction ontology (PLIO) was developed around three main concepts, namely target, ligand and interaction, and was enriched by adding synonyms, useful annotations and references. The quality of the ontology was assessed based on structural, functional and usability features. Validation of the lexicalized ontology by means of natural language processing nlp based methods showed a satisfactory performance f score = 81%). Through integration into our information retrieval environment we can demonstrate that PLIO supports lexical search in PubMed abstracts. The usefulness of PLIO is demonstrated by two use case scenarios and it is shown that PLIO is able to capture both confirmatory and new knowledge from simulation and empirical studies. Availability: The PLIO ontology is made freely available to the public at

introduction biological and medical ontologies are formal representations of biomedical knowledge. They have been proved to be very useful for the communication of biomedical information through controlled vocabularies, definitions and proper metadata annotation (). Numerous examples have demonstrated their value for data mining and knowledge discovery approaches. Ontologies have been used for automated reasoning (), for large scale annotation of entire * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. genomes (), for data mining in microarray data (), for prediction of biomolecular interactions () and for semantic and ontological search in unstructured information sources such as scientific text (; http:// www nlm nih gov mesh mesh home html. The biological domain has developed a large portfolio of widely accepted and widely used ontologies (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ ontology lookup including gene ontology (), the sequence ontology () and the microarray gene expression database ontology (). In parallel, the medical sector has generated its own portfolio with, e.g. the foundational model of anatomy (), SNOMED (Systematized Nomenclature of Medicine;) and ICD (International Statistical Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems; http://www.who.int/classifications/icd/ en/). However, relevant knowledge in the pharmaceutical sector has not yet been addressed by the public scientific community. Some proprietary efforts to organize the knowledge relevant for pharma industry exist. To our state of knowledge, the bio wisdom pharma ontology (; http://www.biowisdom.com/2010/ 04/metawise/) is the only ontological resource representing a substantial part of the pharma world. This proprietary ontology comprises substantial evidence (extracted from literature) and incorporates a broad spectrum of public sources. In fact, a good part of the bio wisdom ontology underlying their ontology framework is taken from public ontologies. However, these public ontologies are organized in a way that new options for ontology alignment and reasoning are created. Motivated by the public private research project neuro allianz a nationally funded project on joint academic industrial drug discovery and development in the area of dementia (http://www .bmbf.de/en/10540.php), we have started to develop an ontology representing knowledge about protein ligand interactions. With this article, we present protein ligand interaction ontology' (PLIO). PLIO is representing knowledge about the interaction of proteins and ligands (including drugs) and has a different scope and conceptual resolution than the molecular interaction ontology (). An important feature of PLIO is that it links directly from an ontology framework describing protein ligand interactions to the mathematical formulas relevant for the computation of some of the entities represented in the ontology. To our knowledge, this is the first example for an ontology, which directly links from a

discussion currently the existing ontologies (e.g. SMO, MIO and DIO) describe molecular interactions at the complex macro-scale level as a biological event but they do not address the fundamental physics behind an interaction occurring between a ligand and its target. Besides differences in scope between PLIO and the ontologies mentioned above, the main difference lies in the characterization of interactions between target and ligand. PLIO is a focused ontology in terms of representing protein ligand interactions at the micro-scale level (e.g. electrostatic interaction, van der Waals interaction and covalent bonding), explicitly representing the major known features involved in protein ligand interactions from different points of view such as biophysics, chemo informatics molecular modelling, and experimental methodology. For example, the interaction concept in DIO is represented as the event when ligand (an effect er interacts with its biological target (objects) and triggers certain output (biological event). This biological event representation of interaction, which is present in both DIO and SMO, is another way to look at the physical interactions between molecules; however, this kind of representation ignores intra and inter-molecular forces that govern the interactions. In the design of PLIO, special attention has been paid to the usability profile of the ontology which addresses to what extent the set of annotations and metadata of the ontology contributes to its usability and application by end users. For this reason, PLIO is distinct from other ontologies in providing extra mathematical and web hyperlink annotations so that quantitative concepts and parameters can be directly calculated online. When integrated into our information retrieval system, PLIO leveraged the efficiency of semantic information retrieval and knowledge representation by providing the possibility to perform ontological search in two directions: in depth using concepts hierarchy and in breadth utilizing synonyms associated with each concept. It not only detected the established knowledge but also allowed for gain of information which otherwise could not be explicitly detected. This approach enables users to exploit the added value of gained information for generation of novel hypotheses.
