Plant long non-coding RNA database pln cdb attempts to provide the following functions related to long non-coding RNAs ln crnas (i) Genomic information for a large number of ln crnas collected from various resources; (ii) an online genome browser for plant ln crnas based on a platform similar to that of the UCSC Genome Browser; (iii) Integration of transcriptome datasets derived from various samples including different tissues, developmental stages, mutants and stress treatments; and (iv) A list of epigenetic modification datasets and small RNA datasets. Currently, our pln cdb provides a comprehensive genomic view of Arabidopsis ln crnas for the plant research community. This database will be regularly updated with new plant genome when available so as to greatly facilitate future investigations on plant ln crnas. Availability: pln cdb is freely accessible at http://chualab.rockefeller. edugbrowse2 homepage html and all results can be downloaded for free at the website.

introduction noncoding RNAs nc rnas are a family of RNAs that do not encode proteins. On the basis of their length and genomic locations, nc rnas can be further classified as (i) small nc rnas including miRNAs and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs); (ii) natural antisense transcripts (NATs) (); (iii) long intronic non-coding RNAs in crnas and (iv) long intergenic non-coding RNAs linc rnas (). RNAs in the last three categories are at least 200 nt or longer and they are referred to as long non-coding RNAs ln crnas. Genomes of human (), mouse () and fly () have been shown to encode ln crnas that play important roles in cell differentiation, immune response, imprinting, tumor genesis and other important biological processes (). Besides, genetic mutations of human ln crnas have been shown to be associated with diseases and pathophysiological conditions (). For plants, genome wide search for nc rnas has been previously conducted in Arabidopsis thaliana (), Medicago truncatula (), Zea mays () and tri tu cum aestivum (). The recent genome wide study based on around 200 Arabidopsis tilling array datasets and RNA sequencing rnase q has identified thousands of ln crnas in Arabidopsis (). These ln crnas show tissue specific expression, and a large number of them are responsive to abiotic stresses (). However, the function of these ln crnas remains largely unexplored. Genomic loci of many ln crnas are associated with histone modifications and DNA methylation s suggesting an epigenetic regulation of these loci (). In addition, biogenesis of a subgroup of ln crnas is co regulated by CBP20, CBP80 and SERRATE (). Some sense and antisense double stranded RNAs involving l ncrna partners are processed by the RNA interference machinery into siRNAs (). Although thousands of ln crnas have been identified in Arabidopsis and other plants and their expression has been profiled on a genome wide basis, these RNAs have not been fully recorded and annotated in public databases. As far as we know, there are only seven databases and one server related to currently available ln crnas TAIR (), plant nats db (), l ncrna db (), n red (), ncrna imprint (), non code () and nc fans (). Among them, only plant nats db () is designed to query about NATs pairs; however, this database just lists all NATs pair and does not provide a genome view. The other six databases are not specifically designed for plant ln crnas (). Therefore, a database that contains comprehensive information related to ln crnas such as genomic information, expression profiles, siRNA information and associated epigenetic markers is warranted. Here, we attempt to develop an online database for plant ln crnas named pln cdb (Plant long non-coding RNA database), with the aim to provide comprehensive information for plant ln crnas compares information content between our database and those of others.
