DNA copy number and mRNA expression are commonly used data types in cancer studies. Available software for integrative analysis arbitrarily fixes the parametric form of the association between the two molecular levels and hence offers no opportunities for modelling it. We present a new tool for flexible modelling of this association. pl rs uses a wide class of interpretable models including popular ones and incorporates prior biological knowledge. It is capable to identify the gene specific type of relationship between gene copy number and mRNA expression. Moreover, it tests the strength of the association and provides confidence intervals. We illustrate pl rs using glioblastoma data from The Cancer Genome Atlas. Availability and implementation: pl rs is implemented as an R package and available from Bioconductor (as of version 2.12; http:// bioconductor org. Additional code for parallel computations is available as Supplementary Material.

introduction dna copy number aberrations are characteristics of the cancer cell. These aberrations are gains and losses of chromosomal DNA, which may alter expression levels of mRNA transcripts. The identification of genes for which an abnormal copy number affects gene expression is important in cancer studies, as these genes are likely to be relevant for tumour i genesis. Here, we present a new tool for exploratory and confirmatory analysis of such effects. For a given gene, copy number and mRNA expression are generally believed to be concordant. The exact form of the association is usually not established. In fact, the shape is likely to differ between genes because of the presence of different (post-) transcriptional regulatory mechanisms. Tools that investigate the interaction between the two molecular levels assist in better understanding of regulatory mechanisms. Numerous software packages have been proposed for joint analysis of copy number and gene expression data (). However, most of these fix the association between DNA and RNA a priori, typically a linear or piecewise constant line. Hence, these approaches do not permit investigation or identification of the shape of the association. Recently, the need for more subtle models has been highlighted () to reflect the biological mechanisms between the two molecular levels. Here, we describe the R package pl rs that implements the framework recently proposed by le day et al. (2013). pl rs uses piecewise linear regression splines, which allow multiple linear lines, and are a wide class of interpretable models including the linear and piecewise constant ones. It enforces concordance by restricting relevant model parameters. In addition, pl rs tests the strength of the overall association, identifies its functional shape and provides confidence intervals for the estimated curve. We illustrate pl rs using a dataset from 160 glioblastoma samples obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA).

conclusion pl rs is a tool for flexible modelling of the association between DNA copy number and mRNA expression. We demonstrated its potential to reveal interesting relationships. It is particularly useful for (i) a detailed understanding of the relationship between DNA copy number and mRNA expression and (ii) powerful detection of copy number induced sample subgroup specific effects, thereby acknowledging heterogeneity of many cancers. The software can also be used for studying the effect of DNA copy number on microRNA expression.
