Motivation: next generation (NextGen) sequencing is becoming increasingly popular as an alternative for transcriptional profiling, as is the case for micro RNAs (miRNA) profiling and classification. miRNAs are a new class of molecules that are regulated in response to differentiation , tumorigenesis or infection. Our primary motivating application is to identify different viral infections based on the induced change in the host miRNA profile. Statistical challenges are encountered because of special features of NextGen sequencing data: the data are read counts that are extremely skewed and non-negative; the total number of reads varies dramatically across samples that require appropriate normalization. Statistical tools developed for microarray expression data, such as principal component analysis, are sub-optimal for analyzing NextGen sequencing data. Results: We propose a family of Poisson factor models that explicitly takes into account the count nature of sequencing data and automatically incorporates sample normalization through the use of offsets. We develop an efficient algorithm for estimating the Poisson factor model, entitled Poisson Singular Value Decomposition with Offset psv dos. The method is shown to outperform several other normal-ization and dimension reduction methods in a simulation study. Through analysis of an miRNA profiling experiment, we further illustrate that our model achieves insightful dimension reduction of the miRNA profiles of 18 samples: the extracted factors lead to more accurate and meaningful clustering of the cell lines.

introduction gene expression profiling is at the center of targeted therapy and rapid disease diagnosis. high throughput or NextGen sequencing has recently emerged as an alternative platform to hybridization based microarrays for the purpose of gene transcription profiling. For example, Witten (2011) claims that NextGen sequencing is 'on track to replace microarray as the technology of choice' for characterizing gene expression. NextGen sequencing data have several features that create statistical challenges. First of all, sequencing data record the number of reads between a sample and a particular region of interest, which are naturally skewed non-negative counts with a large number of zeros. Second, the nature of the sequencing experiment, such as technical sequence lane capacity, can result in different samples with dramatically different total number of sequence reads, which suggest that the samples need to be normalized in a certain way. It is well established that for high throughput sequencing data applications, Poisson distribution represents an appropriate choice (). However, the predominant form of sequencing data analysis is to forcefully transform the data and then use statistical tools that were initially developed for microarray data, which are continuous and reasonably modeled using normal distributions (with or without transformation). This leads to sub-optimal results and prompted the development of poisson based methods (). Different from existing poisson based methods for analyzing sequencing data, we focus on dimension reduction, i.e. identifying low dimensional features or factors in the data. Genetic studies usually involve a large number of genetic markers (e.g. thousands of genes) for a small group of samples (e.g. individuals, tumor samples or virus infected cells), which face the curse of dimensionality. Dimension reduction is thus a desirable (and sometimes necessary) pre-processing step, and the identified features can then be used as inputs for unsupervised clustering. In this article, we specifically take into account the Poisson nature of NextGen expression profiling count data and develop a new family of Poisson factor models for efficient dimension reduction on a collection of sequencing samples. Our approach extends the earlier work of to automatically address the issue of sample normalization through the use of unknown offset parameters, which are simultaneously estimated along with the underlying factors. Model identification constraints are derived and incorporated in an efficient alternating estimation algorithm. We also introduce Poisson factor models to sequencing analysis and consider follow-up clustering analysis. The rest of the article is organized as follows. We present our model in Section 2 and develop a computationally efficient estimation algorithm. A simulation study is reported in Section 3.1 to demonstrate the performance of our algorithm, as well as *To whom correspondence should be addressed. several methodological details. In Section 3.2, we then illustrate its performance through our primary motivating application micro RNA (miRNA) profiling. miRNAs are a class of 2125 nt non-coding RNAs that are able to post transcriptionally regulate gene expression (O', b). In addition to being heavily skewed, miRNA NextGen sequencing data are also sparse because in a typical cell, 51% of all known miRNAs are expressed, and 99% are not. The numerical illustrations suggest that our method results in accurate extraction of key features from the sequencing data, which then leads to more meaningful clustering of various experimental cell lines. We conclude the article with some discussion of future work in Section 4.

discussion nextgen sequencing based mRNA and miRNA expression profiling is rapidly gaining popularity and may eventually replace other methods; however, it yields a completely different data structure, compared with hybridization based microarray experiments. microarray based expression profiling data can, with some difficulty, be transformed into a dataset that has a normal distribution and is amenable to statistical tools for pattern discovery and classification; NextGen sequencing based expression data can not. Expression patterns of miRNAs represent examples of the most skewed expression data that are encountered in the for this extreme distortion are both technical and biological, as only a handful of miRNAs tend to dominate the miRNA population within cells. It offers a practical justification to develop statistical methods for extreme data. Profiling miRNAs is a novel approach to query cell status and to classify samples, in our case, different viral infections. Hence, there exists an urgent need to develop appropriate clustering and classification approaches that take into account the particulars of these data structures. psv d is a factorization method to perform dimension reduction, specifically for Poisson count data. It has been applied for data dimension reduction in non-biological applications, such as call center data (). In this article, we proposed an extended approach psv dos to improve unsupervised clustering of rnase q data by incorporating offset parameters, so that necessary normalization of miRNA sequencing data can be automatically accounted for. Using simulated data, as well as an even sparser experimental example set, that highlights variation and limitations of real world NextGen sequencing data, we show that psv dos was superior to other approaches that separate normalization from dimension reduction, such as SVD on cube rooted or relative frequency or the raw counts. Those normalization methods are commonly used to eliminate variation because of technical imperfection. psv dos correctly clustered samples on the basis of nextgen derived miRNA expression profiles. This new approach should help the analysis of nextgen based rnase q data in general and mirna based classification of experimental and clinical samples in particular. There are several future research directions worth pursuing. The current Poisson factor Model (3) uses row specific (or cell line specific offset parameters T i to normalize the cell lines. More generally, the offset parameters can be allowed to depend on both the cell line and the miRNA, e.g. denoted as T ij for the ith cell line and the jth miRNA. One can then impose some two way analysis of variance model on the offsets to model effects of cell lines and miRNAs, such as log t ij    i  j , subject to some identifiability constraints, such as P i i  P j j  0. Interaction terms can also be included if necessary. Our framework makes use of the Poisson distributional nature of the sequencing data through the Poisson likelihood function. The likelihood approach is general and flexible enough that it can be extended to model other distributions. For example, researchers have noticed that some sequencing count data exhibit over dispersion with respect to Poisson distribution and propose to use negative binomial distribution instead. See, among others, Anders and Huber (2010) and in the context of supervised clustering. An interesting direction for future research is to develop an appropriate factor model to address the over dispersion
