Motivation: Statistical methods development for differential expression analysis of RNA sequenc-ing rnase q requires software tools to assess accuracy and error rate control. Since true differential expression status is often unknown in experimental datasets, artificially constructed datasets must be utilized, either by generating costly spike in experiments or by simulating rnase q data. Results: Polyester is an R package designed to simulate rnase q data, beginning with an experimental design and ending with collections of rnase q reads. Its main advantage is the ability to simulate reads indicating isoform level differential expression across biological replicates for a variety of experimental designs. Data generated by Polyester is a reasonable approximation to real rnase q data and standard differential expression workflows can recover differential expression set in the simulation by the user. Availability and implementation: Polyester is freely available from Bioconductor (http:// bioconductor org
introduction rna sequencing rnase q experiments have become increasingly popular as a means to study gene expression. There are a range of statistical methods for differential expression analysis of rnase q data (). The developers of statistical methodology for rnase q need to test whether their tools are performing correctly. Often, accuracy tests can not be performed on real datasets because true gene expression levels and expression differences between populations are usually unknown, and spike in experiments are costly in terms of both time and money. Instead, researchers often use computational simulations to create datasets with a known signal and noise structure. Typically, simulated expression measurements used to evaluate differential expression tools are generated as gene counts from a statistical model like those used in common differential expression tools (). But these simulated scenarios do not account for variability in expression measurements that arises during upstream steps in rnase q data analysis, such as read alignment or read counting. Polyester is a new R package for simulating rnase q reads. Polyester 's main advantage is that users can simulate sequencing reads with specified differential expression signal for either genes or isoforms. This allows users to investigate sources of variability at multiple points in rnase q pipelines. Existing rnase q simulators that generate sequencing reads are not designed for simulating experiments with biological replicates and specified differential expression signal. For example, the r sem simulate reads utility shipped with r sem () requires a time consuming first step of aligning real sequencing reads to develop a sequencing model before reads can be simulated, and differential expression simulation is not built in. neither flux simulator () nor Benchmarker for Evaluating the Effectiveness of rnase q (BEERS) () have a built in mechanism for inducing differential expression. These simulators also do not provide methods for defining a model for biological variability across replicates or specifying the exact expression level of specific transcripts. tux sim has been used to simulate rnase q datasets with differential expression (), but it is not publicly available. Polyester was created to fulfill the need for a tool to simulate rnase q reads for an experiment with replicates and well defined differential expression. Users can easily simulate small experiments from a few genes or a single chromosome. This can reduce computational time in simulation studies when computationally intensive steps such as read alignment must be performed as part of the simulation. Polyester is open source cross platform and freely available for download from Bioconductor at http://www.bioconductor.org/packages/release/ bioc html polyester html
