Motivation: An increasing number of discrete mathematical models are being published in Systems Biology, ranging from Boolean network models to logical models and Petri nets. They are used to model a variety of biochemical networks, such as metabolic networks, gene regulatory networks and signal transduction networks. There is increasing evidence that such models can capture key dynamic features of biological networks and can be used successfully for hypothesis generation. Results: This article provides a unified framework that can aid the mathematical analysis of Boolean network models, logical models and Petri nets. They can be represented as polynomial dynamical systems, which allows the use of a variety of mathematical tools from computer algebra for their analysis. Algorithms are presented for the translation into polynomial dynamical systems. Examples are given of how polynomial algebra can be used for the model analysis.

introduction finite dynamical systems, that is, discrete dynamical systems with a finite state space, have been used extensively in systems biology to model a variety of biochemical networks, such as metabolic networks, gene regulatory networks and signal transduction networks. For many such networks, the available data quantity and quality is not sufficient to build detailed quantitative models such as systems of ordinary differential equations, which require many parameters that are frequently unknown. In addition, discrete models tend to be more intuitive and easily accessible to life scientists. There is ample evidence that such models can capture key dynamic features of biological networks and can be used successfully for hypothesis generation g submitted for publication;). Boolean networks and their generalization, the so called multistate logical models (; Thomas and D'), are the main types of finite dynamical systems that have been used successfully in modeling biological networks (e.g.). Petri nets have also been shown to be a good modeling * To whom correspondence should be addressed. paradigm for this field (e.g.). Together, these model types represent a large class of discrete models in systems biology, which are capable of simulating deterministic as well as stochastic processes. Several tools and techniques have been developed to simulate and analyze discrete models. For logical models, the open source software gin sim (http://gin.univ-mrs.fr) is available, and for Petri nets, the user has access to a wide variety of software. The laboratory of M. Heiner provides software with a particular focus on applications to systems biology (http://www-dssz.informatik.tucottbus.de/). Analysis tools for logical models, including Boolean networks, are described in. In addition to a variety of simulation and visualization tools, other graph theoretic analysis tools are available for the identification of steady states and strongly connected components of the regulatory graph. There are algorithms to compute dead states (steady states), as well as t and p invariants which can be computed via linear algebra methods. A survey of the use of Petri nets in systems biology is given by. The purpose of this article is to describe a mathematical framework that encompasses both types of models and makes accessible a broad range of mathematical tools for model analysis, in order to complement existing tools in these domain areas. The fundamental observation underlying this framework is that logical models and k bounded Petri nets are particular instantiations of what we shall call 'algebraic models,' i.e. time discrete dynamical systems where each coordinate function f i is a function of the n variables x 1 ,...,x n , each of which takes on values in a finite set F with algebraic structure, and each f i is a polynomial. Aside from the mathematical simplicity of their definition, an important feature of polynomial dynamical systems is that one can employ a number of mathematical tools for their analysis. For our purposes, the principle tool is the capability to symbolically solve systems of nonlinear polynomial equations quite efficiently. This can be used, for instance, to compute the steady states and other features of an algebraic model. We give algorithms that translate both logical models and Petri nets into this framework. Our algorithms are compatible with the algorithm in, which translates logical models into Petri nets. We furthermore provide several examples, using models from the literature, of how this translation can be used to analyze their dynamic properties. The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we briefly describe polynomial dynamical systems pds s. We then show how to use the algebraic framework in the analysis of logical models and page 1638 16371643

discussion the problem of giving mathematical structure to logical models has been studied by several authors (e.g. egr i. For the purpose of computation and analysis, the structure proposed here provides a class of simple and easily defined mathematical objects that can model both logical models and bounded Petri nets. It has the advantage that it makes accessible the theoretical concepts, algorithms and software from polynomial algebra, such as grb ner Page: 1642 16371643
