The design of genetic markers is of particular relevance in crop breeding programs. Despite many economically important crops being polyploid organisms, the current primer design tools are tailored for diploid species. Bread wheat, for instance, is a hexaploid comprising of three related genomes and the performance of genetic markers is diminished if the primers are not gen-ome specific. poly marker is a pipeline that generates SNP markers by selecting candidate primers for a specified genome using local alignments and standard primer design tools to test the viability of the primers. A command line tool and a web interface are available to the community. Availability and implementation: poly marker is available as a ruby bio gem bio polyploid tools. Web interface: http://polymarker.tgac.ac.uk.

introduction breeding programs rely on dense genetic maps with markers (e.g. SNPs) that can be used to identify the presence or absence of specific alleles in homozygous or heterozygous state. Standard primer design tools are designed to work in diploids, where genome duplications are rare. Wheat is a polyploid composed of three genomes (A, B and D; referred to as homo eo logues that are related (between 96 and 98% sequence identity), yet distinct. This creates a problem for the design of PCR primers specific to an individual homo eo logue. A common approach to circumvent this issue is to manually design primers with a genome specific variant at the 3 0 of the primer to increase specificity. We introduce poly marker a tool to automate the design of genome specific primers, thereby reducing the time invested in this process. To make poly marker accessible to scientists and breeders, we developed a web server where custom SNPs can be submitted for the design of genome specific assays. genotyping (LGC), that comprises a common primer and two allele specific primers. Since the allele specific primers are restricted in position, the common primer is used to incorporate the chromosome specific variants when possible. To test if the primer candidates are viable primer 3 (Rozen and) is invoked using the genomic reference of the target chromosome. The starting positions of the primers to distinguish between alleles is selected with the sequence force left end option of primer 3. To design the common primer the option sequence force right end is used on two runs of primer 3 for the chromosome specific and semi specific primers. A final run of primer 3 is executed without the sequence force right end option to find viable primers. After the primers are tested with primer 3 poly marker selects a primer pair with the highest specificity. poly marker is a pipeline () written as a bio gem (), extending bioruby () to extract regions from fast a files and to support operations on nucleotide sequences with IUPAC ambiguity codes ().
