We present an automated web server for partial order optimum likelihood (POOL), a machine learning application that combines computed electrostatic and geometric information for high performance prediction of catalytic residues from 3D structures. Input features consist of THEMATICS electrostatics data and pocket information from ConCavity. THEMATICS measures deviation from typical, sigmoidal titration behavior to identify functionally important residues and ConCavity identifies binding pockets by analyzing the surface geometry of protein structures. Both THEMATICS and ConCavity (structure only) do not require the query protein to have any sequence or structure similarity to other proteins. Hence, POOL is applicable to proteins with novel folds and engineered proteins. As an additional option for cases where sequence homologues are available, users can include evolutionary information from INTREPID for enhanced accuracy in site prediction. Availability: The web site is free and open to all users with no login requirements at http://www.pool.

introduction over the past decade, Structural Genomics (SG) projects have accumulated structural data for over 11 000 proteins, but most of them are of unknown or uncertain function. Thus, there is high demand for computational methods to predict function from structure. Computational site predictors provide valuable information for function annotation and they are also useful to guide and accelerate mechanistic, ligand binding and protein engineering studies. A variety of sequence based methods exist but these often suffer from poor precision compared with structure based methods. Modern methods use both sequence and structural information to enhance the performance of active site prediction. Recently (), we have reported a new machine learning method, partial order optimum likelihood (POOL), which uses input features from THEMATICS and outperforms many of the best prior methods. THEMATICS, for Theoretical Microscopic Anomalous Titration Curve Shapes (), uses computed electrostatic properties and identifies functionally important ionizable residues based on their deviation from henderson hassel balch (HH) titration behavior. In addition, we have also shown that integration of other structure and sequence features along with THEMATICS data can further boost the performance of POOL (). With the combined input of electrostatic information from THEMATICS, evolutionary information from INTREPID () and pocket information from ConCavity (), POOL achieves 86.7, 92.5 and 93.8% recall of annotated functional residues at 5, 8 and 10% false positive rates, respectively, on a standard test set of 100 unique, well characterized enzymes (). Using the top 8% of pool ranked residues, the functionally important residues are predicted with 89.8% recall and 92.8% specificity. The top 10% of the pool ranked residues yields a prediction with 93.3% recall and 90.9% specificity. Furthermore, information about the verification and performance of the POOL method is provided in the Supplementary Material. Herein, we describe a web server for POOL. The user submits a protein structure and the server automatically performs THEMATICS and ConCavity calculations to obtain the input features for POOL calculations. INTREPID is a separate web server and hence can not be integrated automatically but users are provided with the option to obtain the results from INTREPID and include them in the submission to the POOL server. The POOL server returns a list of all residues, rank ordered according to their probability of functional importance. The top ranked residues constitute the functional site prediction.
