Protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility predictions are a fundamental intermediate step towards protein structure and function prediction. We present new systems for the ab initio prediction of protein secondary structure and solvent accessibility, Porter 4.0 and pale ale 4.0. Porter 4.0 predicts secondary structure correctly for 82.2% of residues. pale ale 4.0s accuracy is 80.0% for prediction in two classes with a 25% accessibility threshold. We show that the increasing training set sizes that come with the continuing growth of the Protein Data Bank keep yielding prediction quality improvements and examine the impact of protein resolution on prediction performances. Availability: Porter 4.0 and pale ale 4.0 are freely available for academic users at http://distillf.ucd.ie/porterpaleale/. Up to 64 kb of input in fast a format can be processed in a single submission, with predictions now being returned to the user within a single web page and, optionally, a single

introduction as the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction enters its third decade of life after CASP10, one dimensional protein structural features such as secondary structure (SS) and relative solvent accessibility (RSA) still remain a fundamental stage towards structure prediction, as they are indispensable for remote homology detection (), contribute to contact map predictions (), help the selection of local structural fragments for model reconstruction () and, ultimately, when known, considerably reduce the degrees of freedom available to a protein. SS and SA, alongside other structural features, have also proven useful in many other tasks, e.g. the prediction of protein subcellular localization (), intrinsic disorder (), bioactive peptides within proteins () and protein protein interactions (). Reflecting the usefulness of SS and RSA, our public predictors of these features, Porter and pale ale have served a combined 275 000 queries to date from 40 000 distinct users, and Porter's SS predictions are used for fragment selection within the protein structure prediction package Rosetta (). We have trained larger, more expressive ensembles of cascaded bidirectional recurrent neural networks br nn on recent redundancy reduced subsets of the Protein Data Bank to predict SS and RSA. The new systems, Porter 4.0 and pale ale 4.0, outperform our older public web servers Porter and pale ale with SS now at 482% correct prediction and 2 class (25% threshold) RSA predictions 80% correct. The new systems, Porter 4.0 and pale ale 4.0, are freely available for academic users through a new public web server.
