Motivation: A number of studies of individual proteins have shown that post-translational modifications (PTMs) are associated with structural rearrangements of their target proteins. Although such studies provide critical insights into the mechanics behind the dynamic regulation of protein function, they usually feature examples with relatively large conformational changes. However, with the steady growth of Protein Data Bank (PDB) and available PTM sites, it is now possible to more systematically characterize the role of PTMs as conform-ational switches. In this study, we ask (1) what is the expected extent of structural change upon PTM, (2) how often are those changes in fact substantial, (3) whether the structural impact is spatially localized or global and (4) whether different PTMs have different signatures. Results: We exploit redundancy in PDB and, using root mean square deviation, study the conformational heterogeneity of groups of protein structures corresponding to identical sequences in their unmodified and modified forms. We primarily focus on the two most abundant PTMs in PDB, glycosylation and phosphorylation, but show that acetylation and methylation have similar tendencies. Our results provide evidence that PTMs induce conformational changes at both local and global level. However, the proportion of large changes is unexpectedly small; only 7% of glycosylated and 13% of phosphorylated proteins undergo global changes 42 A ˚. Further analysis suggests that phosphorylation stabilizes protein structure by reducing global con-formational heterogeneity by 25%. Overall, these results suggest a subtle but common role of all oster y in the mechanisms through which PTMs affect regulatory and signaling pathways.

introduction posttranslational modifications (PTMs) refer to in vivo biochemical processing events of a protein after its synthesis (). It is speculated that nearly every protein undergoes some form of PTM () and 4400 types of PTMs have been reported so far, spanning all domains of life. Different PTMs display different physicochemical properties (); thus, the same protein may exhibit different functions upon different modifications (). As a result, the high diversity of PTMs, combined with their reversibility and enzymatic control, makes them a vital component of molecular recognition, signal transduction and protein degradation (). Dysregulation of PTMs and mutation of PTM sites are implicated in a number of diseases (), from various monogenic disorders () to complex diseases such as cancer (;), heart disease () and neurodegenerative disorders (). The mechanisms through which PTMs regulate protein function are of great interest to biologists. Most PTM events introduce additional chemical groups to residue side chains with the potential to alter the energy landscape of a protein and subsequently lead to conformational changes observed in crystal structures. Various examples have shown that this structural change is essential for the modified protein to display new functionalities as in the case of phosphorylation (;), glycosylation (), acetylation () and sumo y lation (Geiss). Additional mechanisms include change of binding affinity or creation of binding sites (). The most extensively studied PTM is phosphorylation that, with some exceptions, adds a phosphoryl group to serine, threonine or tyrosine residues in eukaryotes and to histidine or aspartic acid residues in prokaryotes. The phosphoryl group has a double negative charge under physiological conditions and is anticipated to affect the energy landscape of the modified protein (). In their review, Johnson and Lewis (2001) analyzed 17 pairs of phosphorylated and non phosphorylated structures to characterize the structural consequences of phosphorylation. They showed that the dominant structural response was an adjustment of protein conformation to accommodate for the electrostatic effects between the phosphate and surrounding charged atoms. However, the types and extent of structural changes were highly diverse: they observed both local and long range changes; both association and disassociation of protein complexes and both order to disorder and disorder to order transitions. In one extreme case, phosphorylation of Ser14 in glycogen phosphorylase results in a 50 shift of Ser14 itself. In addition, this phosphorylation event alters the tertiary structure of enzyme's catalytic site that is around 50 A  away from Ser14. However, there are also situations in which *To whom correspondence should be addressed. phosphorylation and other PTMs introduce no detectable conformational change. We found multiple such cases in this study; for example, Pseudomonas putida benzoyl formate decarboxylase (1bfdA is phosphorylated; 3fsjX is not); Zea mays polyamine oxidase (1b37C is glycosylated; 1h83C is not) or human lysine methyltransferase SET7 (2f69B is methylated; 3m59B is not). In each of these cases, the global root mean square deviation (RMSD) between two structures was 0.13 A  and the local RMSD, within 6 A  of the modification site, was 0.05 A . In addition to the analysis of experimentally determined structures, computational approaches have also been explored (). Common strategies include molecular dynamics and conformational sampling. However, both of these strategies are limited by several factors, including computational requirements necessary for modeling micro to millisecond events on large molecules, assumptions on the scale of conformational change or influence of a particular force field (;). Recent studies have tested the accuracy of computational models by predicting the structure of the phosphorylated molecule based on the structure of the unmodified molecule and then comparing the predicted with the actual phosphorylated structure (). The results of these and other studies () suggest that such methods may be accurate enough to provide valuable insights into the structure function relationship. Despite the recent progress in understanding the structural impact of PTMs, much of the focus has been on individual proteins. However, with the rapid growth of protein structure data as well as the presence of multiple structures corresponding to the same amino acid sequence, larger scale studies focused on characterizing the overall trends of the structural impact are becoming realistic. This is further facilitated by the results of recent work in which multiple X-ray structures of the same protein in Protein Data Bank (PDB) () were reported to be similar to those observed in solution using nuclear magnetic resonance (), suggesting that different X-ray structures of the same protein can in principle be used to study and understand protein conformational flexibility. In this study, we systematically analyze groups of protein structures (corresponding to the same sequence) in their modified and unmodified forms to address questions regarding the universality, extent and signatures of structural changes upon PTM. Our work provides evidence that PTMs, similar to ligand binding, induce generally small but statistically significant conformational changes.

discussion although the importance of PTMs as functional modulators has been established, the mechanisms through which most of the regulation is carried out are still not well understood (). In this study, we investigated the potential for allosteric regulation in ptm mediated functional changes by quantifying structural impact upon PTM (allosteric effect is usually seen as a specific form of structural change in which binding of an effector molecule at one site in a protein alters the local structure around a functional site elsewhere in the protein, thus the target variable was log RMSD m  log RMSD u. affecting overall protein activity;). Our results provide quantitative evidence that PTMs induce significant conformational changes to protein structure and suggest that PTMs act in similar ways as small molecule allosteric effectors. We investigated four PTMs, glycosylation, phosphorylation, methylation and acetylation, and showed that all exhibit similar effects in local (4) and global (8) conformational changes. In addition, phosphorylation has showed an effect of stabilizing protein structure by introducing new hydrogen bonds and salt bridges in the local neighborhood of the modified residue. Putting these results together, we speculate that the predominant mechanism of PTM action is alteration of the energy landscape, as shown in. Specifically, we believe that glycosylation and phosphorylation frequently lead to a conformational shift of the lowest valley in the energy landscape; however, while glycosylation likely retains the approximate abundance of the conformation with the lowest energy, phosphorylation results in an enriched abundance in the lowest energy form thus restricting conformational flexibility. Similar conclusion has been speculated for intrinsically disordered proteins (). For phosphorylation, the stabilizing effects might be a driving force to populate protein conformations to a new state, which has been suggested for ligand binding (). Conformational changes were also found in methylation and acetylation; however, due to the problems of dataset size, only glycosylation and phosphorylation showed statistically significant differences in most experiments. Although these results suggest preferences among PTMs for conformational shifts, only a small fraction of structures go through extreme changes. At a global level, glycosylation and phosphorylation introduce structural changes 42 A  in only 713% of cases. These results are similar to those observed for ligand binding where 9% of enzymes showed 42 A  structural changes (). These results strongly suggest that despite the importance of structural change for the modified protein to modulate its function, small to moderate structural changes are usually sufficient. Experiments in this study were carried out with strict controls. We only compared conformational heterogeneity between (groups of) protein structures corresponding to identical amino acid sequences. Although such a requirement greatly reduced the number of data points that can be used for statistical analyses (one data point per sequence cluster or PTM site), the approach was necessary since absolute RMSD values are not directly comparable when calculated on very different numbers of atoms. In addition, since r msds were calculated using C atoms only, side chain alterations that may also be critical for protein function () could not be observed. We believe this resulted in more conservative estimation of the prevalence of structural change (note that all oster y may occur without any observable backbone changes;). Another reason that the estimates of conformational changes may be conservative is the influence of the expression system when studying PTMs. In particular, non observed n linked glycosylation sites expressed in eukaryotic systems may still be glycosylated in the protein, but with the polysaccharide molecule missing from the structural model due to static disorder (). On the other hand, proteins expressed in bacterial systems would be less likely to include such problems. A potential limitation of this study stems from the suitability of crystallographic data for the study of conformational changes as well as the assumptions used in our statistical analysis. Although crystallographic data are generally reliable, its limitations are related to the inherent biases in PDB () and its ability to provide high resolution insight into conformational flexibility of macromolecules. For example, PTMs that increase flexibility of protein regions leading to order to disorder transition could not be analyzed in this study. Statistically, one limitation stems from GLM fitting where we included seven variables that are believed to be the most important factors leading to observed structural differences. However, other factors may also exist as well as an interplay between them. For example, a PTM can lead to protein complex formation (), while in the GLM fitting they would be considered as independent events. Another limitation comes from the fact that a large enough dataset could not be collected to investigate the influence of modifications of different amino acid residue types. As the size of PDB increases, it will become possible to further refine the analysis. It is important to mention that PTMs have also been linked to intrinsically disordered protein regions, i.e. regions without a single dominant conformational macro state under physiological conditions (). For example, phosphorylation, ubiquitination, methylation and others have been associated to disordered regions either statistically (Daily et al.,) or experimentally (). Although such associations are certainly useful for our understanding of the mechanisms underlying PTM regulation and signaling, a large number of proteins do contain PTM sites in their structured regions. Therefore, the results obtained through our experiments are of broad importance. Finally, in this work we provide evidence that the observed differences between modified and unmodified structures are significant and can be attributed to PTM. However, the available data do not contain intermediate structures that lead from one observed conformation to another. Thus, the structural differences between modified and unmodified structures could be explained equally well by two alternative mechanisms: structural change upon modification and conformational selection from a pre-existing structural ensemble (our preliminary analyses suggest that both may be at play). Regardless of the underlying mechanism, PTMs are associated with small but common conformational changes of their target proteins.
