pp dms is a resource that maps small molecule bio activities to protein domains from the pfam a collection of protein families. Small molecule bio activities mapped to protein domains add important precision to approaches that use protein sequence searches alignments to assist applications in computational drug discovery and systems and chemical biology. We have previously proposed a mapping heuristic for a subset of bio activities stored in ch embl with the pfam a domain most likely to mediate small molecule binding. We have since refined this mapping using a manual procedure. Here, we present a resource that provides up-to-date mappings and the possibility to review assigned mappings as well as to participate in their assignment and curation. We also describe how mappings provided through the pp dms resource are made accessible through the main schema of the ch embl database. Availability and implementation: The pp dms resource and curation interface is available at https://

introduction systematic analyses of bioactive small molecules and their molecular targets and homologues form the basis of a number of novel applications in computational drug discovery and systems and chemical biology, including methods of target prediction (), and for the establishment of functional relationships between proteins (). To add precision to these methods, we have previously proposed a simple mapping heuristic of small molecule bio activities to protein domains (). Here, we present a full implementation of the mapping to a relevant subset of biological assays stored in the current version of the ch embl database (). This implementation also accommodates edge cases that were unaddressed in the original implementation specifically cases where more than one pfam a domain could mediate small molecule binding. In the refined implementation, such cases were resolved manually. The pp dms server provides a platform to review and contribute manual assignments. Previous computational approaches exist that link small molecule binding to specific protein domains, but these approaches use information extracted from crystal structures of protein ligand complexes to transfer binding annotations between homologous proteins V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.
