protein protein interaction networks are an important component of modern systems biology. Yet, comparatively few efforts have been made to tailor their topology to the actual cellular condition being studied. Here, we present a network construction method that exploits expression data at the transcript level and thus reveals alterations in protein connectivity not only caused by differential gene expression but also by alternative splicing. We achieved this by establishing a direct correspondence between individual protein interactions and underlying domain interactions in a complete but condition unspecific protein interaction network. This knowledge was then used to infer the condition specific presence of interactions from the dominant protein isoforms. When we compared contextualized interaction networks of matched normal and tumor samples in breast cancer, our transcript based construction identified more significant alterations that affected proteins associated with cancer o genesis than a method that only uses gene expression data. The approach is provided as the user friendly tool ppi xpress. Availability and implementation: ppi xpress is available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/ ppi xpress
introduction protein protein interaction networks pp in are an important pillar of data integration in computational biology and have been used in a large number of studies and approaches. Generally, such networks are collections of physical interactions between pairs of proteins compiled from different experiments (). Full p pins provide a convenient overview of the interactome of an organism. Yet, they do not reflect the true wiring exhibited by the cell in a specific state, because an interaction can only be realized if both partners are available. Pruning the full network to the set of proteins whose genes are expressed in the same condition has proven to be a straightforward solution for this. This allowed investigating the interaction landscape across tissues () as well as the origin of tissue specific diseases (). Furthermore, it improved the prediction of disease genes (). An estimated 95% of human multi exon genes undergo alternative splicing (AS) () and the specific isoform of a protein was shown to have a considerable impact on its ability to bind interaction partners (). Thanks to the ability of quantifying individual transcripts nowadays, it thus appears worthwhile to also increase the granularity of condition specific networks to this resolution. domain domain interaction networks dd in depict interactions between individual protein domains and provide a convenient framework to relate interaction sites with sequence information. In contrast to models based on atomistic structural data, dd ins allow for universal applicability (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 2012;). So far, the only methodical effort regarding the effect of AS on interaction networks is found in the Cytoscape 2.x plugin domain graph. When linked to the AS analysis tool alt analyze domain graph can highlight protein domains in dd ins that are affected by differential exon usage (). However, this tool is intended for visual exploration. While the user can manually estimate the implications of respective changes as pp in and dd in are visualized together, the tool does not allow to automatically infer conclusions for the pp in on a whole proteome scale. With ppi xpress we aim here at providing a simple standalone solution for the automatic construction of condition specific protein interaction networks based on domain information and transcript expression. In addition to this core functionality, the tool is able to retrieve current protein interaction data, to add functional association scores from the STRING database () to unweighted networks, and it can output the underlying condition specific dd in for each sample. It allows the usage of compressed input files in the gzip format and is well suited for batch processing
conclusion ppi xpress exploits domain interaction data to adapt protein interaction networks to specific cellular conditions at transcript level detail. For the example of protein interactions in breast cancer we showed how this increase in granularity positively affected the performance of the network construction compared to a method that only makes use of gene expression data. A platform independent and dependency as well as installation free implementation is provided that only requires little manual effort by the user.
