Motivation: Prokaryotic genome annotation has been focused mainly on identifying all genes and their protein functions. however 530 of the prokaryotic genomes submitted to GenBank contain partial repeat features of specific types and none of the genomes contain complete repeat annotations. Deciphering all repeats in DNA sequences is an important and open task in genome annotation and bioinformatics. Hence, there is an immediate need of a tool capable of identifying full spectrum repeats in the whole genome. Results: We report the p rap (Prokaryotic Repeats Annotation Program software package to automate the analysis of repeats in both finished and draft genomes. It is aimed at identifying full spectrum repeats at the scale of the prokaryotic genome. Compared with the major existing repeat finding tools, p rap exhibits competitive or better results. The results are consistent with manually curated and experimental data. Repeats can be identified and grouped into families to define their relevant types. The final output is parsed into the European Molecular Biology Laboratory embl genbank feature table format for reading and displaying in Artemis, where it can be combined or compared with other genome data. It is currently the most complete repeat finder for prokaryotes and is a valuable tool for genome annotation.

introduction advancements in sequencing technology have led to a rapid increase in genomes sequenced and a raised demand for accurate and complete genome annotation. It is highly desirable to have an adequate genome annotation software capable of performing essential tasks such as predicting correct genes and repetitive sequences. All organisms have, in the total DNA of a cell, multi copies of similar sequences; i.e. the repeats. Hence, repeat identification and masking have been considered as an essential phase of the sequence assembly and annotation for the eukaryotic genomes, but not in prokaryotes (). For many years, repetitive sequences in prokaryotic genomes have been studied in individual cases. Research now indicates that prokaryotic repeats have an important role as is currently understood for eukaryotes (). Repeats in prokaryotes include (i) local repeats, such as low complexity repeats, simple repeats and tandem repeats, (ii) repeats in genes that are duplicated or functionally related, such as duplicated genes, protein domains and rRNA operons, (iii) mobile repeats that play an important role in genome plasticity and evolution, such as insertion sequences (IS) and transposons and (iv) interspersed or intergenic repeats that may provide the regulatory or structural variations of chromosomes to adapt to environmental challenges, such as clustered regularly inter spaced short palindromic repeats crisp rs. However, in many completed prokaryotic genome annotations reported to GenBank, repeat features have been completely absent. Merely $30% [search NCBI nucleotide database with command: bacteria archaea (organism) and 'complete genome title and not plasmid title not 'vector' (title) w/o and repeat region of the organisms contain partial repeat features and none contains complete repeat annotations. This is likely due to the following reasons: (i) the repeat functions have been underestimated; (ii) there are no repeat libraries available for the prokaryotic genomes in the RepeatMasker database, which is currently the most widely used repeat finder software; (iii) based on the assumption that all open reading frames are candidates of prokaryotic genes, gene prediction and analyses have been performed on prokaryotic genomes without obtaining repetitive DNA information, which is indispensable to eukaryotic genome annotation; and (iv) the last and most important reason is that currently there is no suitable tool for the automated annotation of full spectrum repeats in the whole prokaryote genome. A number of computing algorithms have been developed either for finding all repeat classes, such as RECON (), Parsimonious Inference of a Library of Elementary Repeats (PILER) (), window masker (), repeat scout () and repeat finder with re puter (); or only for a specific pattern, such as crisp r Recognition Tool (CRT) (), crisp r finder () and Tandem Repeats Analysis Program (TRAP) () in the genome. These tools were designed to find either repeats directly or repeat families that led to the building of the repeat library used by RepeatMasker, whose purpose is to manage masking and identifying repeats. *To whom correspondence should be addressed. Each algorithm has its specific advantages and disadvantages in finding repeats. Among them, RECON used a self aligned sequence read as a starting seed to find the groups of elements, which were then clustered into families. It has worked well for shotgun sequences or a relatively short assembled sequence in the order of Mb. RECON is capable of identifying more potentially novel repeats than the peer tools (). Thus, it was adopted in our study as the repeat library builder to develop the p rap. mega blast uses the greedy algorithm to search similar sequences, and was thus chosen to perform the self search all against all in the first step of repeat identification. In this article, we report this fast and accurate automated method that is aimed to identify all families of repeats at a genomic scale. We believe that this is currently the most complete repeat identification tool designed for prokaryotic genomes.

discussion we described an ab initio system for rapid identification of all spectrum repeats in prokaryotic genome sequences and the assignment of these repeats to families. Prokaryotic genome, at the scale of Mb, allows BLAST to use a smaller size of search word to identify both short and long repeat segments accurately. The nature of the repeats within the prokaryotic genomes facilitates the algorithm to minimize errors generated from grouping the repeat family, thus achieving better performance. To run p rap it is required to download and install BLAST, RECON, VisCoSe, RepeatMasker and Artemis from different external sources. Downloading, installing and granting the licensee permission are users' responsibility. Although these prerequisites do not update frequently, adjustment of the executing commands of the software might be required when using a different version for initiating installation or updating. false positive rate is a common index of specificity to assess the performance of discovery algorithms. However, by definition, a DNA repeat is two similar sequences, and the precise definition of a false positive is debatable. Moreover, unlike eukaryotes, which have extensive curated known RepeatMasker libraries rep base to aid in identifying true positive repeats (), prokaryotes have difficulty in evaluating the tools in terms of sensitivity and specificity. Therefore, we used the direct comparison of repeat numbers/ boundary approach instead of the sensitivity and specificity of repeat as benchmarks for comparing the code performance. p rap currently categorizes the repeats as transposon, protein motif repeat, RNA, crisp rs and unknown. However, it is challenging to clearly distinguish repeat families, especially when overlap and mosaic sub repeat structure occur. As stated in Section 3.4, repeat elements may be categorized into different families owing to embedding in a longer repeat belonging to the different family. Furthermore, p rap tends to distinguish the less conserved repeats from a conserved group into different families, and it may require some adjustment using the similarity cut off setting. Mobile repeats are often nested in one another in the form of fragments, which become a major source of fragmented transposons. Hence, fragmented transposons, as opposed to intact note All hits580% similarity were removed. The value in 'Difference' columns indicates the number of difference in blast hits and RECON repeat families between the single and the merged runs. The number in parentheses is the percentage.
