Motivation: protein rna interactions play a key role in a number of biological processes, such as protein synthesis, mRNA processing, mRNA assembly, ribosome function and eukaryotic spliceosome s. As a result, a reliable identification of RNA binding site of a protein is important for functional annotation and site directed mutagenesis. Accumulated data of experimental protein rna interactions reveal that a RNA binding residue with different neighbor amino acids often exhibits different preferences for its RNA partners, which in turn can be assessed by the interacting interdependence of the amino acid fragment and RNA nucleotide. Results: In this work, we propose a novel classification method to identify the RNA binding sites in proteins by combining a new interacting feature (interaction propensity) with other sequence and structure based features. Specifically, the interaction propensity represents a binding specificity of a protein residue to the interacting RNA nucleotide by considering its two side neighborhood in a protein residue triplet. The sequence as well as the structure based features of the residues are combined together to discriminate the interaction propensity of amino acids with RNA. We predict RNA interacting residues in proteins by implementing a well built random forest classifier. The experiments show that our method is able to detect the annotated protein rna interaction sites in a high accuracy. Our method achieves an accuracy of 84.5%, f measure of 0.85 and AUC of 0.92 prediction of the RNA binding residues for a dataset containing 205 non-homologous RNA binding proteins, and also outperforms several existing RNA binding residue predictors, such as rna bin dr bind n rna prob and p print and some alternative machine learning methods, such as support vector machine, naive Bayes and neural network in the comparison study. Furthermore, we provide some biological insights into the roles of sequences and structures in protein rna interactions by both evaluating the importance of features for their contributions in predictive accuracy and analyzing the binding patterns of interacting residues. Availability: All the source data and code are available at

introduction rna undergoes diverse post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression, including regulation of its transportation, localization and decay (). In many cases, such a process occurs through elements on the RNA molecule that interact with hundreds of RNA binding proteins existing in the cell (). Interactions among proteins and RNA molecules play an essential role in a variety of biological activities within a cell, such as the post-transcriptional gene regulation, alternative splicing, translation and infections by RNA viruses (). Therefore, it is important to understand the principle of protein RNA interactions and identify their interaction sites when selecting activators and inhibitors in rational drug design. It is commonly believed that RNA recognition by proteins is primarily mediated by certain classes of RNA binding domains and motifs (). Specifically, the correlated pattern of sequence and structure in a RNA binding protein can be recognized and bound by a specific RNA sequence, and then the resulting protein rna complex performs important functions somewhere. In recognition of RNA functional importance in living molecules and close association with protein in its activities, experimental and computational studies of protein rna complexes have been substantially increased (). Recently, a variety of approaches have been proposed to study protein rna interactions (). Though some improvement has been obtained, the precise mechanisms of the protein rna interaction are far from being fully understood. In particular, there is no efficient way to experimentally identify protein rna binding sites that play a central role in forming protein rna interactions (). Hence, it is strongly demanded to develop a reliable computational method to accurately predict protein rna interacting sites by exploring the accumulated data of protein rna complexes. Many studies indicate that there is a strong relationship between interaction residues and their compositions in protein RNA complexes (). A number of machine learning techniques have been applied to detect RNA binding residues in protein sequences. For instance, bind n () uses an svm based classifier to predict potential RNA or DNA binding residues in proteins by sequence features. rna prob ()Page: 1617 16161622

conclusion knowledge regarding how proteins interact with each other and with other molecules is essential in the understanding of cellular processes (). Here, we proposed a novel method to predict RNA binding residues in proteins using a rf based method by the integrated features. We encoded the residue features into a vector so as to represent the SP of binding features of residues in proteins. Our method is mainly based on the mutual interaction propensity defined between the interacting residues of protein and RNA. In addition, we also combined various sequence and structure derived features together to represent the interaction propensity of the amino acid and its partner nucleotides. The learning and validation processes in the protein rna complexes confirm the effectiveness of our method. The comparison with existing methods and other classifiers further show the advantages of the proposed method. The importance and contribution of these features were also evaluated. The identified binding features underlying the protein will have implications of protein rna binding. In the same manner, our method can be extended to identify the structure motifs in the RNA binding proteins as well as the RNA binding SP in protein structures in future.
