Motivation: Granzyme B (GrB) and caspases cleave specific protein substrates to induce apoptosis in virally infected and neoplastic cells. While substrates for both types of proteases have been determined experimentally, there are many more yet to be discovered in humans and other metazoans. Here, we present a bioinformatics method based on support vector machine (SVM) learning that identifies sequence and structural features important for protease recognition of substrate peptides and then uses these features to predict novel substrates. Our approach can act as a convenient hypothesis generator, guiding future experiments by high confidence identification of peptide protein partners. Results: The method is benchmarked on the known substrates of both protease types, including our literature curated GrB substrate set gr bah. On these benchmark sets, the method outperforms a number of other methods that consider sequence only, predicting at a 0.87 true positive rate (TPR) and a 0.13 false positive rate (FPR) for caspase substrates, and a 0.79 TPR and a 0.21 FPR for GrB substrates. The method is then applied to ∼25 000 proteins in the human proteome to generate a ranked list of predicted substrates of each protease type. Two of these predictions, AIF-1 and SMN1, were selected for further experimental analysis, and each was validated as a GrB substrate. Availability: All predictions for both protease types are publically available at http://salilab.org/peptide. A web server is at the same site that allows a user to train new SVM models to make predictions for any protein that recognizes specific oligopeptide ligands. Contact:

introduction protein peptide specificity is an important biological phenomenon. There are many systems in which a protein recognizes a specific * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint first authors. amino acid sequence, often falling on a flexible, solvent exposed region of another protein. Such systems include the modular scaffolding PDZ domains, which recognize specific sequences on the c terminal tails of their substrates (); multifunctional SH3 domains, which recognize a linear motif of the form pro xaax aa pro (); and class I MHC proteins, which bind nine residue peptides with specificity varying across different MHC molecules (). Here, we focus on the protein peptide specificity of the proapoptotic proteases granzyme B (GrB) and caspases interacting with their respective protein substrates. GrB is a serine protease delivered by natural killer cells into virally infected and tumor cells (). The caspases are a family of endogenous cysteine proteases activated by extracellular death ligands and environmental stresses (). Both protease types recognize and cleave specific peptide sequences containing an aspartic acid residue on their target substrates, activating different pathways that lead to cell death. Identifying these substrates has led to a wealth of knowledge about how the proteases contribute to apoptosis, how the cleavage events lead to cell death, and which substrates to target for therapeutic purposes. Substrates of the two protease types have been discovered with a variety of experimental techniques, ranging from low throughput gel based methods to proteomic efforts that can identify hundreds of cleaved proteins (). However, different datasets overlap only partially, indicating that many substrates remain to be identified. For example, two proteomics studies, respectively, reported 261 and 292 caspase cleavage sequences, although the high confidence overlap between the two sets was only 64 [in. To reduce this gap, accurate computational techniques could be used to predict protein peptide interactions for guiding further focused experiments. A number of approaches have been taken in the systems described. For PDZ interactions, examples of such methods include position specific scoring matrices () and Bayesian inference (). SH3 binding partners have been predicted with neural networks () and MHC class I interactions have been predicted with support vector machines (SVMs;). Finally, molecular docking methods have been developed to analyze both systems ().Computational methods have also been applied to predict substrates recognized by GrB and caspases. These methods take advantage of both protease types having a near absolute requirement for Asp at the P1 position, while allowing degenerate preference for different residue types in the positions immediately surrounding P1. These studies rely on fixed sequence searches. (), ps sms based on frequencies of residue types in known cleavage sites () and positional scanning combinatorial substrate libraries pss cls SVMs using residue composition around the cleavage site (), and Bayesian neural networks (). Cleavage sequences for both GrB and caspases are generally thought to occur on flexible, disordered regions of substrates (). However, it was previously shown in an analysis of caspase substrate structures that many of these known cleavage sites are in -helices and even occasionally on -strands (). This observation motivates the choice of a machine learning algorithm that relies on the structure as well as sequence information. Here, we describe such a protocol incorporating SVM learning. The method is trained and benchmarked on separate pools consisting of known GrB and caspase cleavage sequences. It is then applied to the human proteome to generate a list of high confidence predictions for experimental validation. Two such candidates are the proteins AIF-1 and SMN1, which are experimentally validated as being cleaved by GrB. The approach has the potential to provide greater coverage of substrates for both GrB and caspases, and can be easily adapted to other protein peptide systems through our web server that can learn from any user supplied protein peptide training set.

DISCUSSION
