Motivation: The identification of non-coding functional regions of the human genome remains one of the main challenges of genomics. By observing how a given region evolved over time, one can detect signs of negative or positive selection hinting that the region may be functional. With the quickly increasing number of vertebrate genomes to compare with our own, this type of approach is set to become extremely powerful, provided the right analytical tools are available. Results: A large number of approaches have been proposed to measure signs of past selective pressure, usually in the form of reduced mutation rate. Here, we propose a radically different approach to the detection of non-coding functional region: instead of measuring past evolutionary rates, we build a machine learning classifier to predict current substitution rates in human based on the inferred evolutionary events that affected the region during vertebrate evolution. We show that different types of evolutionary events, occurring along different branches of the phylogenetic tree, bring very different amounts of information. We propose a number of simple machine learning classifiers and show that a support vector Machine (SVM) predictor clearly outperforms existing tools at predicting human non-coding functional sites. Comparison to external evidences of selection and regulatory function confirms that these SVM predictions are more accurate than those of other approaches. Availability: The predictor and predictions made are available at

introduction one of the central goals of comparative genomics is to use the comparison of genomes from different species to delineate functional regions in those genomes. Since most functional regions are under various degrees of negative selection, they tend to exhibit higher interspecies sequence conservation than their flanking neutral regions. Although mutations occur randomly in the genome (though at rates that may vary according to sequence context), the rate at which they become fixed in a population depends, among other things, on the fitness of the mutated individuals (). Whereas non-functional regions of the genome evolve mostly due to neutral drift (), functional regions are, for the most part, under negative selection, i.e. most mutations are deleterious. A consequence of this is that, over time, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. more mutations become fixed in non-functional regions than in functional regions. This principle is the foundation of phylogenetic footprinting, whereby one can hope to distinguish functional from non-functional regions of a given genome based on the observed number of mutations they have undergone during the evolution of a set of species. This approach has been used with success to identify all kinds of functional regions of the human and drosophila genomes (among others), including protein coding genes (), non-coding RNA genes () and transcription factor binding sites (). A number of generic approaches have been developed to identify sites that appear to be under negative selection based on comparative genomics. After identifying and aligning orthologous regions from two or more related species [e.g. using multi z () or m lagan (, one can scan the alignment to identify regions where the sequence conservation is higher than expected. Early approaches dealt with a small number of genomes and evaluated conservation based on a sliding window strategy (). More recent approaches such as the very popular phast cons approach () use a tree hidden markov model (HMM) to assign sites to one of several rate categories. A strength of this type of approach is that it can take advantage of the fact that most functional regions involve several consecutive sites, while avoiding the drawback of using a fixed size window. This family of approaches has been used to identify likely functional regions in all kinds of species, including vertebrates (), yeast () and drosophila (), among others, although most of these regions remain functionally uncharacterized to date. With the number of genomes being sequenced quickly increasing, the prospect of accurately measuring evolutionary rates and selective pressure at individual sites became an achievable goal. Several approaches were developed for this purpose, including SCONE () and g erp (), which both attempt to evaluate selective pressure on a site by site basis. What these approaches lose in specificity because of the fact that they do not combine signals from neighboring sites, they gain in sensitivity, since they are able to detect very small regions under selection. A significant drawback of all these approaches is their assumption that the mutation rate in a given region or at a given site has not changed during the evolution of the set of species considered. Although negative selection in species ancestral to human and in sister species is clearly informative about selection in human, it is only an indirect predictor of it. Past results do not guarantee
