Motivation: Identifying microRNAs associated with diseases (disease miRNAs) is helpful for exploring the pathogenesis of diseases. Because miRNAs fulfill function via the regulation of their target genes and because the current number of experimentally validated targets is insufficient, some existing methods have inferred potential disease miRNAs based on the predicted targets. It is difficult for these methods to achieve excellent performance due to the high false positive and false negative rates for the target prediction results. Alternatively, several methods have constructed a network composed of miRNAs based on their associated diseases and have exploited the information within the network to predict the disease miRNAs. However, these methods have failed to take into account the prior information regarding the network nodes and the respective local topological structures of the different categories of nodes. Therefore, it is essential to develop a method that exploits the more useful information to predict reliable disease miRNA candidates. Results: miRNAs with similar functions are normally associated with similar diseases and vice versa. Therefore, the functional similarity between a pair of miRNAs is calculated based on their associated diseases to construct a miRNA network. We present a new prediction method based on random walk on the network. For the diseases with some known related miRNAs, the network nodes are divided into labeled nodes and unlabeled nodes, and the transition matrices are established for the two categories of nodes. Furthermore, different categories of nodes have different transition weights. In this way, the prior information of nodes can be completely exploited. Simultaneously, the various ranges of topologies around the different categories of nodes are integrated. In addition, how far the walker can go away from the labeled nodes is controlled by restarting the walking. This is helpful for relieving the negative effect of noisy data. For the diseases without any known related miRNAs, we extend the walking on a mirna disease bilayer network. During the prediction process, the similarity between diseases, the similarity between miRNAs, the known mirna disease associations and the topology information of the bilayer network are exploited. Moreover, the importance of information from different layers of network is considered. Our method achieves superior performance for 18 human diseases with AUC values ranging from 0.786 to 0.945. Moreover, case studies on breast neoplasms, lung neoplasms, prostatic neo-plasms and 32 diseases further confirm the ability of our method to discover potential disease miRNAs.

introduction micrornas (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNAs that play important roles in gene regulation by targeting mRNAs for cleavage or translational repression (). Recently, accumulating evidence has indicated that miRNA dysregulation is closely related to the development, progression and prognosis of various human diseases (). Therefore, identifying the miRNAs associated with diseases (disease miRNAs) contributes to the exploration of the pathogenesis of diseases. Recently, computational prediction methods have been used to obtain reliable disease miRNA candidates for further experimental studies. Since miRNAs fulfill their functions via the regulation of target mRNAs (target genes) expression, several methods based on the targets have been presented estimated the similarity between miRNAs by measuring the similarity of their associated target genes. The miRNA network based on targets was combined with a disease phenotype network to infer the correlation scores between miRNAs and diseases. In addition, they improved the score calculation by further integrating the similarities of miRNAs with the phenotype similarities of diseases ().also collected miRNA targets, and measured the function consistence score (FCS) between the target genes and the disease related genes. However, when calculating the FCS, this method ignored the topological structure that is composed of the targets and disease genes. Moreover, as the current number of targets that have been verified by biological experiments is insufficient, both Jiang and Li obtained the target genes by using target prediction programs, such as targets can () and PITA (). Because these programs have high false positive and false negative rates (), it is difficult for the methods based on targets to achieve high prediction performance exploited the functional link between miRNA targets and disease genes in protein protein interaction network to identify mirna disease associations. This method was also affected by the low accuracy of target prediction. In addition, it ignored the functional similarity between genes. It is well known that miRNAs with similar functions are normally implicated in similar diseases and vice versa (). chen s method () focused on the phenotype similarity between diseases and the associations between miRNAs and diseases. For a specific miRNA m i , the novel diseases that are similar to the known m i related diseases were obtained as m i related candidates. Due to not considering the similarity between miRNAs, this method could not achieve excellent performance. As the functionally related miRNAs tend to be associated with similar diseases, the functional similarity of two miRNAs has been successfully estimated based on the semantic similarities of their associated diseases (). hd mp integrated the functional similarities with the characteristics of miRNAs to predict candidates associated with a given disease (). It only considered the k most similar neighbors of a candidate and ignored the topology formed by the neighbors. To construct a miRNA network derived from mirna associated diseases, the functional similarity between any two miRNAs was used as the weight of edge connecting them. By integrating known mirna disease associations, the similarity between diseases and the miRNA network, rls mda () developed the prediction method based on regularized least squares to uncover potential miRNA candidates for a specific disease. rls mda achieved excellent prediction performance not only for the diseases with some related miRNAs but also for the diseases without any known related miRNAs. Unfortunately, it ignored the topology information of the miRNA network. rwr mda () obtained the putative disease miRNAs that have similar functions to known disease miRNAs via random walk through the miRNA network. However, the network is composed of two categories of nodes. For a specific disease, some nodes are validated by biological experiments to be implicated in the disease, but the other nodes have no evidence to verify their association with the disease. Unfortunately, the prior information regarding the two categories of nodes and their respective local topological structures are not considered. Therefore, we propose a novel prediction method based on random walk, which exploits the characteristics of the nodes and the various ranges of topologies. In addition, we extend the walk on a mirna disease bilayer network to predict candidates specially for the diseases without any known related miRNAs.

conclusion a new method based on random walk (MIDP) was developed to predict potential miRNA candidates for the diseases with known prediction of potential disease associated micrornas related miRNAs. We constructed the miRNA network derived from mirna associated diseases to integrate the similarities between nodes, the prior information of nodes, and the local topological structure. Based on the characteristics of the labeled and unlabeled nodes, their transition matrices were established. The transition probability between the nodes was proportional to the similarity between them. The labeled nodes were assigned higher transition weight than the unlabeled nodes, which efficiently exploited the prior information of nodes and the various ranges of topologies. The degree to which the walker could deviate from the labeled nodes was controlled by restarting the walking. This effectively relieved the negative effect of noisy data. In addition, an extension method mid pe was proposed specially for the diseases without any known related miRNAs. The mirna disease bilayer network was constructed to integrate the information in miRNA network derived from mirna associated diseases (Mnet) and the information in disease network (Dnet). The transition matrix for the bilayer network was constructed according to the association degree between the miRNA node (or the disease node) and a given disease. At the same time, the information in Mnet and that in Dnet were assigned different weights to balance their relative importance. Similarly, the restart probability in the bilayer network controlled how far the walker can go away from the starting node. MIDP was compared with rwr mda hd mp rls mda and chen s method. mid pe was compared with rls mda which was the single method applied to the diseases without known related miRNAs before. The results demonstrated that MIDP and mid pe have superior prediction performance. The cross validation and the case studies indicated that MIDP and mid pe are powerful not only for capturing known disease miRNAs but also for discovering potential candidates. It will be useful for providing reliable candidates for future studies of miRNA involvement in the pathogenesis of diseases 1 'literature 1 ' means that there is a literature to support that a miRNA is upregulated or downregulated in human lung neoplasm, as compared with normal lung tissue. (2) 'literature 2 ' represents that a miRNA is related to some important factors affecting the development of lung neoplasms. (3) With analysis of the microarray data sets, a miRNA is considered to potentially have different express levels in lung cancer when compared with normal tissues. This kind of miRNAs is labeled by dbd emc. (4) mir2 disease means that a miRNA is included in the manually curated mirna disease association database, mir2 disease. (5) phenom ir means a miRNA has dysregulation expression in lung cancer. (6) GeneCards provides comprehensive information on all known human genes, including miRNAs. 'GeneCards' means the database recorded that a miRNA was associated with lung cancer. (7) 'cluster' represents a miRNA and another miRNA are clustered, and the latter was associated with lung neoplasms.
