Motivation: Ribosome profiling is a useful technique for studying translational dynamics and quantifying protein synthesis. Applications of this technique have shown that ribosomes are not uniformly distributed along mRNA transcripts. Understanding how each transcript specific distribution arises is important for unraveling the translation mechanism. Results: Here, we apply kernel smoothing to construct predictive features and build a sparse model to predict the shape of ribosome footprint profiles from transcript sequences alone. Our results on Saccharomyces cerevisiae data show that the marginal ribosome densities can be predicted with high accuracy. The proposed novel method has a wide range of applications, including inferring isoform specific ribosome footprints, designing transcripts with fast translation speeds and discovering unknown modulation during translation. Availability and implementation: A software package called ribo shape is freely available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/riboshape

introduction gene expression is a fundamental biological process consisting of two parts: transcription of mRNAs from DNAs and translation of proteins from mRNAs. Studying the genome wide dynamics of both processes is crucial for understanding how cells function and respond to various environmental conditions, thereby giving rise to the impressive complexity of living organisms. Due to technological challenges, translation has not been studied as extensively as transcription, but recent advances in experimental protocol and sequencing technology are providing an unprecedented opportunity to examine the translation process at base pair resolution. Ribosome profiling () applies either translation inhibitors or a flash freeze protocol to immobilize the ribosomes 'walking' along the transcript, and the ribosome occupied regions (each of length 2830 nucleotides) can then be extracted and sequenced, providing detailed positional information about ribosomes. Such snapshots of ribosome footprints enable quantitative monitoring and analysis of translational dynamics, making ribosome profiling an important technique for studying protein synthesis. In particular, it has been shown that protein abundance correlates better with ribosome densities than with mRNA abundance (). Various factors may influence the translation mechanism. It has been proposed that the differential usage of synonymous codons, also known as the codon usage bias, is driven by evolutionary forces to facilitate translation speed (). This hypothesis is supported by the finding that transcripts with wobble base pairing encounter slower elongation (), and also by the analysis of trna adaptation index (tAI) (). Another hypothesis associates the mRNA secondary structure with translation efficiency, in particular near initiation sites (). Studies have found that initiation is the rate limiting factor of translation and that ribosome densities tend to be higher near initiation sites in Saccharomyces cerevisiae (). Also, positively charged residues on nascent peptides have been found to influence the footprint abundance (). We refer the reader to for a review of the major findings from utilizing ribosome profiling. Although the debate surrounding the main determinant of translational dynamics remains open, the above mentioned hypotheses have one thing in common; that is, the transcript sequence context plays an important role in governing the efficiency of translation. Hence, investigating how transcript specific distributions arise and to what extent they depend on the transcript sequence is essential to

discussion our results on S. cerevisiae data, especially the chx treated footprints, show that the global shape of transcript specific ribosome in particular, they show that codons CGA, CCG and CGG strongly influence the global shape of ribosome occupancy in flash freeze data, while CGA and CGG seem to have the dominant effect in chx treated data i188 ty liu et al. density can be predicted with high accuracy. This suggests that the ribosome distribution along a transcript indeed depends on the sequence context. In particular, we find a few codons that dominate the global shape; these codons influence the ribosome density not only at the site where they appear, but also their neighboring positions. There are several possible reasons why applying kernel smoothing to codon sequences helps in predicting the shape of transcript specific ribosome occupancy profile. One possible reason is the interference among ribosomes. Another possible explanation is that the physical footprint of each ribosome spans multiple codons (910 codons). Lastly, it has been shown () that positively charged amino acids on nascent peptides significantly slow down ribosomes downstream from where the residues are encoded. Among all the methods compared, the asymmetric kernel smoothing performed the best. This could be due to the directional movement of ribosomes and the aforementioned effect of positively charged amino acids on downstream elongation speeds. Also, 5 0 ramps can be better predicted using asymmetric kernels, which partly explains why the prediction accuracy for chx treated ribosome profiles was slightly better than that for flash freeze profiles. There are other factors not incorporated into our current model that could also help to explain ribosome distributions, e.g. mRNA secondary structure. Notice that in the results for chx treated ribosome footprints, we achieved better performance in shorter genes. When applying a sliding window to genes with a prediction correlation coefficient below 0.3 and of length 10011500 codons, we observed that the correlation was lower near the 5 0 end. Furthermore, when computing differences between the observed ribosome densities and the predicted densities from these poorly predicted genes, we noticed a weak positive correlation (r  0.0446) between the differences and the likelihood of double stranded conformations, i.e., the PARS (parallel analysis of RNA structure) scores of secondary structure defined by in a genome wide measurement. Although many potential factors including mRNA secondary structure, codon usage bias, trna adaption index, etc are not explicitly incorporated into our model, most of these factors depend on the sequence context. This may be one of the reasons why considering transcript sequences alone enables reasonably accurate prediction of ribosome footprint profile shapes. It is possible that some of the features learned by our predictive model are due to technical biases in the data. Library construction is a possible source of bias due to technical artifacts. art ieri and Fraser (2014) found three types of nucleotide biases by comparing mRNA fragments (unprotected by ribosomes) with ribosome footprints to identify shared biases. These include an enrichment of adenine at the 5 0 and 3 0 ends, and a depletion of cytosine at the fourth nucleotide position in both the mRNA and ribosome footprint reads. However, we note that the flash freeze ribosome footprint data () we analyzed were generated using a comprehensive set of adapter sequences to avoid the biases discussed in art ieri and Fraser (2014). Furthermore, the flash freeze protocol avoids the ribosome run-off phenomenon that can occur in CHX pre-treatment. Different models have been proposed in the literature to estimate elongation rates developed a continuous time discrete state Markov model to simulate translational dynamics, in which initiation and elongation rates were inferred using the cell volume, ribosome abundance and tRNA abundance. These elongation rates were codon dependent but not position dependent. The model proposed by was based on flow conservation, and it assumed that the occurrences of the same codon within an mRNA transcript have the same dwell time, and hence the same elongation rate. Our results suggest that these models should take the codon position into account. In other words, the elongation rate at a particular position along a transcript not only depends on the codon at that position but also the neighboring codons and how the neighboring codons are ordered part of the results presented in this paper is based on combining four publicly available datasets. This overcomes the difficulty of sparse sampling that other work may encounter, e.g.. Although our study is limited to the steady state distribution of ribosomes, it examines the extent to which the sequence context influences ribosome distributions under normal conditions. One of the important applications of our method is to examine the positions where the steady state prediction is significantly different from the actual measurements. These positions may lead to important findings of unknown factors that regulate translation. For example, our proposed method can be applied to cells grown under various environmental conditions, or to ribosome profiles obtained by different inhibitors, e.g. harrington in e (), an iso mycin (). Another application is the inference of isoform specific ribosome footprints. It is known that many human genes have more than one isoform, and these isoforms contribute to the complexity of phenotypes (). Studying the translation of specific isoforms requires correctly assigning ribosome footprints to them. However, since the footprints of ribosomes are short (2830 nucleotides), identifying the correct isoform becomes challenging. Our method provides a likelihood function for ribosome location, and can facilitate sequence alignment when more than one alignment exists. Synthetic biology is another active research area () that can benefit from our work: the ability to predict and compare the ribosome densities along different transcripts under various environmental conditions can facilitate the search for sequences with optimal translational properties and reduce the number of experimental trials necessary to build and test the sequences.
