Motivation: Protein kinases represent critical links in cell signaling. A central problem in computational biology is to systematically identify their substrates. Results: This study introduces a new method to predict kinase substrates by extracting evolutionary information from multiple sequence alignments in a manner that is tolerant to degenerate motif positioning. Given a known consensus, the new method (ConDens) compares the observed density of matches to a null model of evolution and does not require labeled training data. We confirmed that ConDens has improved performance compared with several existing methods in the field. Further, we show that it is generalizable and can predict interesting substrates for several important eukaryotic kinases where training data is not available. Availability and implementation: ConDens can be found at

introduction protein phosphorylation is a well studied class of post-translational modification that has powerful influence over the dynamics of biological systems. It is characterized by the addition of a phosphate group (PO 4 ) to an amino acid residue by a kinase enzyme (). Proteins that are subjected to these events often undergo a biochemical change that can, in turn, affect biological pathways associated with them (). Kinases often choose phosphorylation targets selectively and different kinases may favor residues with different local arrangements of amino acids (which are referred to as 'consensus sequences' or 'motifs') (). However, consensus sequences alone are often insufficient for kinase substrate prediction because they tend to be short and degenerate and matches are expected to occur frequently by chance in random sequences. Computational kinase substrate predictors take advantage of a myriad of local biological information in generating their predictions. This includes amino acid arrangement (), biochemical structural property () and quantity density * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of consensus matches (). There are also some that incorporate interactome information to further enhance their predictions (). The focus of our work is to develop a kinase substrate prediction method based on motif conservation over evolution. This idea is based on the work in a previous study () which illustrated that consensus sites for protein kinase A (or PKA) are more likely to be phosphorylated if preserved over longer evolutionary distances. A challenge in using this approach is that patterns of molecular evolution in protein sequences are highly heterogeneous. In many cases, a match to a consensus sequence (which we will also refer to as 'match', 'motif match' or 'consensus match') can be considered as functionally conserved if it is well aligned in a multiple sequence alignment (or MSA) (). However, in situations where the entire local sequence neighborhood is also conserved, it will be difficult to tell whether the matches are 'specifically' conserved due to a kinase substrate interaction or non specifically conserved as part of a larger domain with a different function () (). At the same time, functional phosphorylation motif matches do not necessarily align in a MSA. Previous studies have shown that phosphorylation sites are often not positionally conserved despite being located in the same local region in orthologous proteins (). For such examples (), one can observe that the quantity of matches in the local sequence neighborhood is consistent among orthologous sequences (). Nevertheless, all of these cases contrast with the patterns observed for randomly occurring matches to the consensus site () that typically show no consistent conservation patterns and disappear quickly. Current conservation based prediction methodologies are largely focused on the residue conservation of motif matches (). Since these strategies are dependent on the positional conservation of the matches of interest, they may be insensitive towards situations where matches are not positionally conserved (). Furthermore, the lack of consideration for the local region's conservation can lead to false detection of matches located in highly conserved neighborhoods (). To address these issues, we designed a new kinase substrate prediction method (ConDens) that (i) considers the conservation of the number of motif matches in a local region of the protein, rather than the alignment of individual phosphorylation sites and (ii) uses an evolutionary model to account for the local sequence

conclusion in all, we offer a new method to predict kinase substrates based on evolutionary conservation of phosphorylation site recognition motifs. The requirement for accurate phosphorylation site alignment was circumvented by using the local retention of motif density as the measure of conservation. Since the new method is based on a statistical model of molecular evolution, a labeled training set is not required. Furthermore, we demonstrated the method's utility in mining substrates for kinases with some information on substrate specificity but few characterized in vivo substrates. ConDens should be applicable to a wide variety of model organisms due to available databases such as Ensembl () and in paranoid () that provide homologous sets of proteins.
