Motivation: Determination of drug absorption is an important component of the drug discovery and development process in that it plays a key role in the decision to promote drug candidates to clinical trials. We have developed a method that, on the basis of an analysis of the dynamic distribution of water molecules around a compound obtained by molecular dynamics simulations, can compute a parameter free value that correlates very well with the compound permeability measured using the human colon adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cell line assay. Results: The method has been tested on twenty three neutral drugs for which a consistent set of experimental data is available. We show here that our method reproduces the experimental data better than other existing tools. Furthermore it provides a detailed view of the relationship between the hydration and the permeability properties of molecules.

introduction the study of drug absorption is of critical importance in the development of effective drugs. The path of a drug from the site of administration to its target cells or compartments implies the crossing of several semipermeable cell membranes, therefore it is relevant to be able to predict whether and to which extent a molecule can pass through the cell membranes. Passive permeation of drugs through the biological cell membranes is obviously strongly dependent on the molecule physicochemical properties (). It has been established that the acid base character of the molecule (which influences the charge of the molecule at the specific pH), its lipophilicity (which affects its partition between aqueous and lipid environments) and solubility are the most relevant parameters to take into account. These parameters are well described by the molecule hydropathy profile (). A more lipophilic drug is more likely to effectively cross the hydrophobic phospholipid bilayer. On the other hand, extremely hydrophobic molecules, insoluble in aqueous body fluids, might be poorly absorbed (). In summary, there should be an appropriate balance between the hydrophobicity and hydrophilicity of a molecule (). From an experimental point of view, data on permeability can be obtained by in situ and or in vivo animal studies, but these are time consuming and expensive experiments and therefore only performed towards the end of the drug development process. Efforts have therefore focused on the development of in vitro permeability assays that can mimic the relevant characteristics of in vivo absorption. Among these, there are the Parallel Artificial Membrane Permeability Assay (PAMPA) (), the human colon adenocarcinoma (Caco-2) cell line assay (), the mad in darby Canine Kidney (MDCK) cell assay (), the rat duodenal immortalized cell line assay (2/4A1 cell) (), and the rat everted gut sac assay (). All of them are routinely used for the preliminary assessment of drug permeability. In particular, the Caco-2 cell is V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
