Motivation: The phenotypes of knockout mice provide crucial information for understanding the biological functions of mammalian genes. Among various knockout phenotypes, lethality is of great interest because those involved genes play essential roles. With the availability of large scale genomic data, we aimed to assess how well the integration of various genomic features can predict the lethal phenotype of single gene knockout mice. Results: We first assembled a comprehensive list of 491 candidate genomic features derived from diverse data sources. Using mouse genes with a known phenotype as the training set, we integrated the informative genomic features to predict the knockout lethality through three machine learning methods. Based on cross validation our models could achieve a good performance (accuracy = 73% and recall = 63%). Our results serve as a valuable practical resource in the mouse genetics research community, and also accelerate the translation of the knowledge of mouse genes into better strategies for studying human disease.

introduction the mouse is the premier model organism for interpreting the human genome and plays a key role in studying human diseases (). Importantly, the mouse is the only vertebrate species in which pre-selected genes can be deliberately mutated (knocked out) such that the phenotypic effect associated with a gene can be defined in a precise manner. Among various phenotypic effects of disrupting a mouse gene, the lethal phenotype is of particular interest for several reasons. First, the lethal phenotype represents the most severe defects for an organism; the disrupted genes that result in the lethality play essential roles. From an evolutionary point of view, the loss of such a gene reduces the fitness of the organism to zero (). Second, computational analyses on the lethal phenotype of gene deletion reveal some key findings in systems biology, such as the centrality lethality rule () * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and functional compensation among duplicated genes (). Third, at the practical level, predicting the knockout lethality of mouse genes is highly valuable for the mouse genetics community since mouse knockout experiments are notoriously time consuming. Previous analyses on the knockout lethality of mouse genes have focused on one or a few gene features. For example, Liang and showed a weak correlation between the knockout lethality and protein connectivity. Furthermore, whether a gene is a singleton has little effect on the predictive power of knockout lethality (), implying a complex relationship between gene duplic ability and gene essentiality (). More recently, with the availability of various large scale mouse genomic datasets, there has been wide interest in employing sophisticated computational approaches to predicting gene function by considering many gene features simultaneously. One pioneering attempt was the mouse func Prediction' project () in which different bioinformatics teams integrated diverse datasets to predict the biological functions of mouse genes [represented as gene ontology (GO) terms] using advanced machine learning approaches such as ridge regression (), support vector machine (SVM) () and random forest (). These studies made reliable predictions for many GO categories and greatly expanded our ability to discover novel biology (). The primary biological questions we aim to address are as follows i which genomic features are most correlated with the lethal phenotype of mouse single gene knockouts; and (ii) through reasonable computational approaches, to what extent can the knockout lethality be predicted from a wide range of genomic features outlines the overall scheme of our study. We first assembled a comprehensive list of genomic features derived from diverse data sources for each mouse gene, and identified subsets of informative features for predicting the lethality of single gene knockouts. Then we integrated the selected genomic features to predict the knockout lethality using three machine learning methods and evaluated their predictive power based on cross validation. Finally, we examined the bias of genes with a known knockout phenotype (the training set) and estimated the bias corrected predictive power. Our predictive models achieved a reasonably good performance, demonstrating the feasibility of an integrative approach to predicting knockout lethality in complex organisms.

discussion in this study, we predicted the lethal phenotype for single gene knockout mice by integrating gene features inferred from various genomic data sources and achieved a relatively good performance. Since mouse knockout experiments are notoriously time consuming and technically challenging, we expect our results to serve as a valuable resource for the mouse genetics research community, greatly helping to optimize experimental designs and improve biological interpretations. Because of the close genetic and physiological similarities between mice and humans, our results would accelerate the translation of the knowledge of mouse genes into better strategies for studying human disease. Compared with previous similar studies, our study has some advantages. First, we systematically investigated a wide range of candidate genomic features, most of which have not been examined for their ability to predict the lethal phenotype. Importantly, all the surveyed features were derived from large scale independent experimental data. To avoid circular reasoning, we did not use GO annotations or phenotype information (e.g. disease association) from other species by orthology. Second, we explored and compared different classifiers before making final predictions, thereby likely maximizing the predictive power. Third, we explicitly considered the bias in the training set when assessing the predictive power for genes without an annotated phenotype. Our work provides key insights into the genotype to phenotype relationship. First, the top selected features for mouse knockout lethality are quite different from those for unicellular eukaryotes (i.e. yeasts). Some dominant predictors for yeast essential genes, such as GC content () were not selected in our models, suggesting that the genotype to phenotype relationship strongly depends on the organismal complexity. Second, many of the features that were highly ranked in our study are compatible with those of previous studies. Among these selected features, gene evolutionary age was the top feature; it was consistently selected across different gene sets, and also showed the highest individual correlation with the knockout phenotype. This result suggests that disrupting an evolutionarily ancient gene tends to result in a more severe functional consequence. Paralog sequence identity is the selected feature with the highest negative coefficient, indicating that removing a gene with a closely related gene copy tends to be non-lethal, which is consistent with the notion of 'functional compensation' among paralogs. Interestingly, this feature alone shows little correlation with the knockout phenotype individually, which is due to the confounding effects of other features, as discussed previously (). Protein connectivity was another highly ranked feature with a positive contribution to the knockout lethality. Consistent with previous studies (), this result highlights the critical role of hub nodes in a biological system (). In addition to those previously studied features, we also identified some important novel features, most of which are related to gene expression, such as the expression level in utero and in TS15. The approach we took also has some limitations. First, like other similar studies, our models were unable to distinguish correlations from causation s. Second, some parameters in our machine learning algorithms may not be fully explored. Third, we may still miss some important genomic features, and the feature dataset we compiled may contain some noise, especially for interaction features. Indeed, comparing among the three types of features, the sequence features and expression features show much higher predictive power than the interaction features. Although we did not explicitly model the noise within the feature data, the effect of noise was minimized by considering a comprehensive list of features and employing feature selection. We expect to revisit this topic and to achieve a better performance when more high quality genomic datasets (such as protein expression data) have become available acc is defined as the proportion of genes whose knockout phenotype classification is correctly predicted; PPV, positive predictive value, also known as precision, is defined as the proportion of genes with a positive prediction (lethal) that are correctly predicted; NPV, negative predictive value is defined as the proportion of genes with a negative prediction (non-lethal) that are correctly predicted; recall is defined as the proportion of genes with a lethal phenotype that is correctly predicted.
