Motivation: insertion deletion in del and amino acid substitution are two common events that lead to the evolution of and variations in protein sequences. Further, many of the human diseases and functional divergence between homologous proteins are more related to in del mutations, even though they occur less often than the substitution mutations do. A reliable identification of indels and their flanking regions is a major challenge in research related to protein evolution, structures and functions. Results: In this article, we propose a novel scheme to predict in del flanking regions in a protein sequence for a given protein fold, based on a variable order Markov model. The proposed in del flanking region in del fr predictors are designed based on prediction by partial match (PPM) and probabilistic suffix tree (PST), which are referred to as the PPM in del fr and PST in del fr predictors, respectively. The overall performance evaluation results show that the proposed predictors are able to predict in del frs in the protein sequences with a high accuracy and F 1 measure. In addition, the results show that if one is interested only in predicting in del frs in protein sequences, it would be preferable to use the proposed predictors instead of HMMER 3.0 in view of the substantially superior performance of the former. Contact:

introduction as new protein sequences are discovered on an everyday basis and protein databases continue to grow exponentially with time, analysis of protein families, understanding their evolutionary trends and detection of remote homologues have become extremely important. The proteins that evolve from the same ancestor protein are called homologous proteins. A protein molecule is created in a cell as a chain of amino acids, called the polypeptide chain. A polypeptide chain can be represented as a string of characters by using the letter code of each amino acid. This string of characters is called the primary structure of a protein. In addition to the primary structure, a protein has secondary and tertiary structures (). Secondary structure of a protein refers to well determined local sequence elements, such as an alpha helix, a beta strand or any other local sequence element that is neither a helix nor a strand. These other local sequences, usually called loops or coils, may have a large variety of shapes. These secondary structure elements of a protein can be combined together to create a motif, which is a simple combination of a few consecutive secondary structure elements with a specific geometric arrangement, such as helix loop helix or strand loop helix. Some, but not all, motifs are associated with specific biological functions. The tertiary structure of a protein refers to the 3 dimensional structure of the protein, where the secondary structure elements form the physical core of the 3 dimensional structure, and loops are located on the surface of the tertiary structure. A domain refers to a combination of several secondary elements and motifs, which may not necessarily be contiguous and which are usually packed in a compact structure. A protein may contain a single domain or several different domains, or several copies of the same domain. Normally, the proteins are classified into families based on the existence of a specific motif or domain in their structure, where the existence of such a motif or domain has a major indication about the biological role of the protein. The structural classification of proteins (SCOP) database is a comprehensive ordering of all the proteins of the known structures, according to their evolutionary and structural relationships (), where the fundamental unit of this classification is a domain. In this database, the proteins have been classified into families, superfamilies, common fold and, finally, into classes at the top level of the structural hierarchy. It is known that new proteins have evolved mainly through in del mutations (). in del mutations have been found to occur more often in the loop regions (), and mainly in essential proteins and in those proteins that interact highly with others (). The functional divergence between homologous proteins may also be caused by in del mutations that occur in the regions between secondary structures of a protein (). Further, it has been found that differences among species, as well as many of the human diseases, are related to in del mutations, which occur less often than substitution mutations do (). Sequence alignment is one of the most commonly performed tasks in bioinformatics, and has been used in many applications, including sequence annotation, phylogenetic tree estimation, evolutionary analysis, secondary structure prediction and database search (). In recent years, considerable effort has been devoted to the development of protein alignment algorithms that can efficiently detect mutations, and infer structural and functional relationships among the aligned protein sequences. By using position variant probability to score in del mutations, the profile hidden Markov model p hmm is able to use the fact that in del mutations occur more frequently in some parts of a protein more than other parts (e.g. in the loop regions) (). Several software packages, such as HMMER () and SAM (), have implemented the p hmm based alignment algorithms. Among these packages, HMMER is the most used software package in protein database search and comparison. A collection of ph mms covering many protein families have been generated using HMMER, and they are available in the Pfam database (). The disadvantage of using p hmm based alignments for detecting mutations would be that the corresponding alignment algorithms assume the occurrence of mutations in the protein sequence to follow a fixed first order Markov chain. When a pair of protein sequences has been aligned, an in del region is defined as a gap in any of the two sequences. Segments of protein sequence immediately before and after an in del region are called flanking regions (see Supplementary). The database called in del fr in del Flanking Region) database contains sequence and structure information of 2 925 017 indels with their flanking regions, including their positions, length, amino acid composition and secondary structure (). In the in del fr database, the structure based sequence alignment program pd be fold () has been used to align homologous non-redundant proteins obtained from the astral 95 database (), which in turn has used the non-redundant protein domains from the SCOP database that have similarity levels as high as 95%. It has been found that there exists a strong relationship between indels and their flanking regions (). The objective of this article is, therefore, to propose a novel scheme to predict in del flanking regions in a protein sequence, based on a variable order Markov model vom m of the flanking regions. We propose two in del flanking region in del fr predictors: one predictor using prediction by partial match (PPM) () and other using probabilistic suffix tree (PST) ().

conclusion in conclusion, the results show that if one is interested only in predicting the in del flanking regions in protein sequences, then it would be preferable to use the proposed predictors instead of using HMMER 3.0 in view of the substantially superior. Average accuracy and F 1 measure values for the proposed PPM and PST predictors with D = 4 and that obtained using HMMER 3.0 over all the protein sequences contained in the selected 11, 14 and 18 protein folds from the all protein all protein and and protein (a/b) classes, respectively, for (a) in del fr database, (b) sab mark superfamily set and (c) sab mark twilight set performance of the former. It should be noted that if HMMER 3.0 is used for prediction, one would need as many ph mms as the number of families in a given fold, while only one proposed predictor is needed for a given fold. Moreover, it should be noted that the proposed in del fr predictors are built in a fully automated manner without using any prior assumption about the occurrence of mutations in the protein sequences, as in the case of scoring schemes. We anticipate that our study will not only enable future studies on the modeling of in del mutations, but will also open up new avenues for research concerning protein evolution, structures and functions.
