Motivation: Laboratory RNA structure determination is demanding and costly and thus, computational structure prediction is an important task. Single sequence methods for RNA secondary structure prediction are limited by the accuracy of the underlying folding model, if a structure is supported by a family of evolutionarily related sequences, one can be more confident that the prediction is accurate. RNA pseudo knots are functional elements, which have highly conserved structures. However, few comparative structure prediction methods can handle pseudo knots due to the computational complexity. Results: A comparative pseudoknot prediction method called dot knot pw is introduced based on structural comparison of secondary structure elements and h type pseudoknot candidates. dot knot pw outperforms other methods from the literature on a hand curated test set of RNA structures with experimental support. Availability: dot knot pw and the RNA structure test set are available at the web site http://dotknot.

introduction macromolecules such as DNA, RNA and proteins have the ability to form diverse tertiary structures, which enable functionality and thus, life. For many decades, proteins were deemed the global players in the cell until RNA entered the spotlight. For example, RNA structures have been found to be catalytically active, which was assumed to be the privilege of proteins. Furthermore, small RNAs are known to regulate gene expression and RNA viruses employ a plethora of structure elements to invade the host cell. To gain insight into macromolecule function, one must investigate the structure. The first step in RNA folding is stable base pairing that leads to a secondary structure. As RNA structure formation is of hierarchical nature, secondary structure is the basis for the tertiary fold that produces the functional structure. Especially for RNAs, structure determination by experimental means is an intricate and expensive task. Computational RNA structure prediction is therefore an invaluable tool for biologists. Comparative structure prediction is considered the most reliable approach for computational RNA structure prediction. Single sequence structure prediction is always limited by the accuracy of the underlying folding model. Three main streams have been identified for comparative RNA secondary structure prediction i predict a structure from a pre-computed sequence alignment; (ii) simultaneously compute an alignment and a structure and (iii) alignment free methods (). Tools for multiple sequence alignments such as ClustalW () are readily available and thus, structure prediction from an alignment is a tempting approach [e.g. rna ali fold (. Such methods heavily depend on the sequence conservation and quality of the underlying alignment. However, nc rnas are conserved rather on the structure level than on the sequence level. The gold standard of RNA comparative structure prediction is the Sankoff approach as it does not rely on a high quality sequence alignment and captures the structural conservation of nc rnas introduced a theoretical dynamic programming algorithm for simultaneous folding and aligning for a set of N sequences that takes O(n 3N ) time and O(n 2N ) space. Practical variants have been derived which more or less retain the Sankoff principle by sacrificing optimality. alignment free methods aim to avoid the pragmatic restrictions made in a practical Sankoff approach as well as the reliance on a high quality alignment [e.g. CARNAC (. Note that all of these comparative structure prediction methods exclude the prediction of RNA pseudo knots. RNA pseudo knots are crossing structure elements with diverse functions. The principle of pseudoknot formation is that bases within a loop region pair with complementary unpaired bases outside the loop. From an algorithmic point of view, even the simplest type of pseudoknot adds considerable computational demands due to crossing base pairs. In fact, the majority of comparative RNA structure prediction methods exclude pseudo knots. Biologists have delivered a wealth of studies, which show that pseudo knots have an astonishing number of diverse functions and occur in most classes of RNA (). RNA viruses use pseudo knots for hijacking the replication apparatus of the host (). A limited number of RNA comparative structure prediction methods can handle pseudo knots due to the computational complexity. Several of these methods take a sequence alignment as an input. ILM is an algorithm that takes as an input either individual sequences or a sequence alignment (). A base pair score matrix is prepared initially and helices are added to the structure in an iterative fashion. In the approach hx match a maximum weighted matching algorithm with combined thermodynamic and covariance scores is used (). This program gives the option to be combined with rna ali fold. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited k net fold is a machine learning method, which takes a sequence alignment as an input and outputs a consensus structure allowing pseudo knots (). simul fold takes an alignment as an input and simultaneously calculates a structure including pseudo knots a multiple sequence alignment and an evolutionary tree by sampling from the joint posterior distributions (). t fold combines stem stability, covariation and conservation to search for compatible stems and subsequently for pseudo knots for a set of aligned homologous sequences (). Several comparative structure prediction methods including pseudo knots do not rely on an initial sequence alignment. The graph theoretical approach co mrna computes stem similarity scores and uses a maximum clique finding algorithm to find pseudo knotted structures (). scar na performs pairwise structural alignment of stem fragments with fixed lengths derived from the probability dot plot (). In the following, a novel comparative approach for predicting structures including h type pseudo knots called dot knot pw will be introduced. The input consists of two unaligned, evolutionarily related RNA sequences. Similarity scores between structure elements will be calculated. Statistically significant pairs will be used to find the set of conserved structure elements common to two sequences, which maximize a combined thermodynamic and similarity score. Using a hand curated test set of pseudo knotted structures with experimental support, the prediction accuracy of dot knot pw will be compared with methods from the literature.

discussion we presented dot knot pw for prediction of structures common to two RNA sequences, including h type pseudo knots. Both dot knot and dot knot pw have been designed as dedicated pseudoknot prediction tools. In the following, important aspects of pseudoknot prediction will be discussed.
