Chromosomal patterns of genomic signals represent molecular fingerprints that may reveal how the local structural organization of a genome impacts the functional control mechanisms. Thus, the integrative analysis of multiple sources of genomic data and information deepens the resolution and enhances the interpretation of stand-alone high throughput data. In this note, we present PREDA (Position RElated Data Analysis), an R package for detecting regional variations in genomics data. PREDA identifies relevant chromosomal patterns in high throughput data using a smoothing approach that accounts for distance and density variability of genomics features. custom designed data structures allow efficiently managing diverse signals in different genomes. A variety of smoothing functions and statistics empower flexible and robust workflows. The modularity of package design allows an easy deployment of custom analytical pipelines. Tabular and graphical representations facilitate downstream biological interpretation of results. Availability: PREDA is available in Bioconductor and at

introduction high throughput technologies allow the complete exploration of DNA and RNA molecules at genome wide scale, thus offering the opportunity to decipher the control mechanisms underlying the functional utilization of a genome. Although hundred of studies fully demonstrated the relevance of bioinformatics in analyzing each data type alone, fewer approaches have been proposed for the integrative analysis of genomics signals and genome structural organization. Some of these methods specifically address the identification of gene expression patterns at the chromosomal level (), others the integrative analysis of paired DNA copy number and gene expression data (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed here we describe PREDA, an r bioconductor package for detecting regional variations of genomic features from the integrative analysis of high throughput data and genome local structural organization. The program implements a generalized version of the integrative strategy first introduced by and further improved by to identify and prioritize targets for functional studies from diverse type of high throughput data in different genomes (). PREDA integrates high throughput signals and structural information using a non-linear kernel regression with adaptive bandwidth that efficiently accounts for the density variability of genomics data. The integrative analysis is performed through a modular and flexible framework that, accommodating different types of smoothing functions and statistics, facilitates its adoption in a broad spectrum of genomics studies. The potential applications range from the study of pathological processes involving genome structure modifications, as for chromosomal amplifications and deletions in cancer (e.g. integrative analysis of DNA copy number and gene expression), to the analysis of physiological mechanisms regulating genome utilization (e.g. identification of genes colocalized and co-expressed; analysis of tiling arrays). A detailed description and discussion of the package is reported in the Supplementary Material.
