Motivation: Selecting a small number of signature genes for accurate classification of samples is essential for the development of diagnostic tests. However, many genes are highly correlated in gene expression data, and hence, many possible sets of genes are potential classifiers. Because treatment outcomes are poor in advanced chronic myeloid leukemia (CML), we hypothesized that expression of classifiers of advanced phase CML when detected in early CML [chronic phase (CP) CML], correlates with subsequent poorer therapeutic outcome. Results: We developed a method that integrates gene expression data with expert knowledge and predicted functional relationships using iterative Bayesian model averaging. Applying our integrated method to CML, we identified small sets of signature genes that are highly predictive of disease phases and that are more robust and stable than using expression data alone. The accuracy of our algorithm was evaluated using cross validation on the gene expression data. We then tested the hypothesis that gene sets associated with advanced phase CML would predict relapse after allogeneic transplantation in 176 independent CP CML cases. Our gene signatures of advanced phase CML are predictive of relapse even after adjustment for known risk factors associated with transplant outcomes.

introduction the prediction of the diagnostic category of a tissue sample from its expression array phenotype given the availability of similar data from tissues in identified categories is known as 'classification' (or 'supervised learning'). In the context of gene expression data, the samples are usually the experiments, and the classes are usually different types of tissue samples, for example, cancer versus non-cancer e.g. (), different tumor types e.g. (), prognostic outcomes e.g. (van 't Veer * To whom correspondence should be addressed), or different stages of disease e.g. (). A challenge in predicting the diagnostic categories using gene expression data is that the number of genes is usually much greater than the number of tissue samples available, and only a subset of the genes is relevant in distinguishing different classes. Selection of predictive signature genes for classification is known as 'variable selection' or 'feature selection'. A wide variety of algorithms have been proposed in the literature to select predictive signature genes, e.g. (). A small set of relevant genes is essential for the development of inexpensive diagnostic tests. Different feature selection algorithms can potentially select different relevant genes, different numbers of relevant genes and lead to different classification accuracy (). ein reported that gene selection is heavily influenced by the subset of patients even when the feature selection method and data set stayed constant. This is mainly due to the fact that many genes have similar correlations with the class labels, and much larger training sets are needed to generate a robust gene list (). The lack of overlap between the genes of different prognostic signatures is well documented, e.g. ().commented that the discovery of the true gene signature remains a challenge, and emphasized the importance of independent validation and large sample size. Another critique of existing feature selection methods includes the lack of biological meaning of the signature genes (). In this article, we present a novel approach that integrates expert knowledge and predicted functional relationships with gene expression analysis to derive gene signatures. We aim to select 'robust' signature genes that are 'both predictive and biologically relevant' to the mechanism underlying the disease of interest. Our method uses expert knowledge and predicted functional relationships to guide our search for signature genes among the many possible genes that are highly correlated with the class labels and with each other. Our method is based on the idea that genes that are functionally related to a reference gene set known to be associated with the disease of interest are more likely to be biologically relevant to this disease shows an overview of our method.. Overview of our method integrating expert knowledge, predicted functional relationships and microarray data to derive predictive genes that are biologically relevant to the disease of interest. treated effectively progresses through accelerated phase (AP) to the acute leukemia phase of blast crisis (BC). A reciprocal translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 yields the bcra bl fusion protein that is the primary driver of CML disease. Tyrosine kinase inhibitors tk is such as imatinib (IM), da satin ib and ni lot in ib which target the constitutively active Abl tyrosine kinase, are effective first line therapy for CP CML (). However, tk is are significantly less effective in AP or BC CML where not only bcra bl dependent, but also bcra bl independent mechanisms are at work (; Quintas). Allogeneic hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) is generally reserved for CP patients who are resistant to TKI therapy, or patients who have AP or BC CML. HSCT is associated with 80% survival when performed in CP, but outcomes are significantly worse for advanced disease, 40% in AP and 20% in BC (). There are no established molecular predictors of transplant outcome in CML, thus clinical measures such as the Sokal, has ford or European Group for Blood and Marrow Transplantation (EBMT) Risk Scores have been used for prognostication (). The EBMT score has been validated extensively, and is used to predict outcomes prior to HSCT (). The variables that comprise the EBMT score are: phase of disease (CP, AP, or BC), transplant donor type (related donor versus unrelated donor), donor recipient sex combination (female donor into male recipient versus all other combinations), patient age and interval from diagnosis to transplantation (). However, the EBMT risk score does not entirely account for the heterogeneity observed in transplant outcomes. Consequently, our goal is to identify molecular prognostic predictors to supplement known clinical risk variables and guide risk adjusted therapy at diagnosis. We previously applied a probabilistic method called iterative Bayesian model averaging ibm a to a microarray data set consisting of patients in different phases of CML () and identified a 6-gene signature that accurately discriminated CP from BC. BMA is a multivariate method that accounts for the uncertainty in the selection of signature genes by averaging over multiple models (), i.e. sets of potentially overlapping predictive genes. It yields posterior probabilities of the predictions and of the inclusion of each gene in the model. We extended BMA to be applied to high dimensional gene expression data and showed that the ibm a algorithm identifies small gene sets with high prediction accuracy (). We also showed that our 6-gene signature discriminated CP, AP and BC patients and hypothesized a signature associated with progression when detected in CP may predict poorer outcomes, because expression of these genes reflects evidence of more advanced disease at the molecular level in CP patients (). In this study we build upon our ibm a method and validate this hypothesis.

discussion we present a novel method called integrated ibm a that incorporates expert knowledge and predicted functional relationships into expression analyses to identify genes predictive of CML progression. We showed that our method identified signature genes associated with disease progression with high prediction accuracy. We also showed that the signature genes identified by integrated ibm a were relatively stable in cross validation runs compared to genes selected using microarray data alone. We subsequently profiled selected signature gene sets from independent patient samples using qPCR and showed that our signature genes are predictive of CML phase progression in this independent data set. Lastly, because therapy response is so dependent on CML phase, we hypothesized that advanced phase gene signatures when detected in CP CML would predict poor response. Using integrated ibm a we derived gene signatures that were independent molecular predictors
