Motivation: Protein residue residue contact prediction can be useful in predicting protein 3D structures. Current algorithms for such a purpose leave room for improvement. Results: We develop ProC_S3, a set of Random Forest algorithm based models, for predicting residue residue contact maps. The models are constructed based on a collection of 1490 non– redundant, high resolution protein structures using 1280 sequence based features. A new amino acid residue contact propensity matrix and a new set of seven amino acid groups based on contact preference are developed and used in ProC_S3. ProC_S3 delivers a 3-fold cross validated accuracy of 26.9% with coverage of 4.7% for top L/5 predictions (L is the number of residues in a protein) of long range contacts (sequence separation ≥ 24). Further benchmark tests deliver an accuracy of 29.7% and coverage of 5.6% for an independent set of 329 proteins. In the recently completed Ninth Community Wide Experiment on the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP9), ProC_S3 is ranked as No. 1, No. 3, and No. 2 accuracies in the top L/5, L/10 and best 5 predictions of long range contacts, respectively, among 18 automatic prediction servers.

introduction knowing pair-wise protein residue residue (RR) contacts can be helpful in predicting 3D protein structures, because the contact information can be used to reduce the conformational phase space, while improving the minimum of the landscape funnel of the overall energy function (). In addition, the contacts have been used to construct a scoring function for protein model selection (). Currently, there are two kinds of approaches for RR contact predictions: template based threading and sequence based machine learning approaches. Although template based approaches can be more accurate than sequence based ones if proper templates are available, they are less useful in ab initio structure predictions for proteins not having known structure homologs as templates (). In this work, we focus on developing sequence based algorithms for RR contact predictions. * To whom correspondence should be addressed numerous sequence based methods have been developed using machine learning algorithms such as artificial neural networks (ANNs) (), support vector machines (SVMs) (), Hidden Markov Models (HMM) (), Genetic Algorithm (GA) (), etc. The mean accuracy achieved by state of the art RR predictors is often in the range of 2030%, suggesting that it remains in need of improvement. Nevertheless, some of these methods have already been put into practical use. For example, recently achieved significant performance improvement of their it asser server by adding a sequence based contact prediction module based on svm seq (). As results, the average tm score of the it asser models on the hard targets of the Ninth Community Wide Experiment on the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP9) was improved by as much as 4.6%. In several cases, the tm scores of it asser models were improved by 30%, essentially converting non foldable targets to 'foldable' ones. A general procedure of developing sequence based RR contact predictors includes several steps: (i) constructing a non-redundant and comprehensive protein structure set; (ii) calculating protein and residue properties that may be relevant to contact; (iii) training a model based on a machine learning algorithm and (iv) evaluating the performance of the predictive model. Therefore, improvement can be achieved in one or any combinations of the first three steps: a better representative dataset, properties more relevant to the RR contacts and a more robust machine learning algorithm. In this work, we attempt to improve prediction accuracy in all three steps. We develop statistical models for predicting RR contact maps based on the Random Forest (RF) algorithm (). The training dataset consists of 1490 non-redundant protein structures. We use a set of 1287 sequence based features that can be roughly grouped into four categories: local window features, residue pair features, separation segment features and whole protein information. In addition to features commonly used in these types of models, we introduce a new contact propensity matrix based on a large scale statistical analysis. We also develop a new set of seven amino acid groups using a clustering technique. To the best of our knowledge, ProC_S3 is the first RR predictor based on the RF algorithm (). RF is an ensemble approach that combines many classifiers to achieve a robust classifier. RF has been applied in broad classification tasks and has demonstrated good performance (). It is particularly suitable in classifying high dimensional and noisy data. One of its advantageous features is that it can handle a mixture of categorical and continuous predictors. In addition, RF models do not require a time consuming optimization process and make predictions considerably faster than many other algorithms such as SVM.

conclusion in this work, we develop ProC_S3, a RR contact map predictor based on the RF algorithm. cross validation and independent tests demonstrate that the new predictor achieves consistent improvement over its replaced version ProC_S1. In addition, ProC_S3 is ranked as one of the top automatic RR prediction servers participated in CASP9. Work is progressing on using feature selection to find features important to protein RR contacts. Preliminary results are encouraging. A model using top 600 features, ranked by the mean decrease in accuracy measure of RF, achieved an accuracy of 29.9% for top L/5 predictions on D329, a slight improvement to the 29.7% accuracy of the model using all features (Supplementary). Although the improvement is minimal, it proves that it is feasible to use feature selection to identify features important to protein residue contacts. More important, it may help in better understanding the biophysics behind the problem. Currently, we are evaluating several other feature selection approaches. New models will be participating in the upcoming CASP10 experiment in 2012.
