Motivation: Timely surveillance of the antigenic dynamics of the influenza virus is critical for accurate selection of vaccine strains, which is important for effective prevention of viral spread and infection. Results: Here, we provide a computational platform, called PREDAC-H3, for antigenic surveillance of human influenza A(H3N2) virus based on the sequence of surface protein hemagglutinin (HA). PREDAC-H3 not only determines the antigenic variants and antigenic cluster (grouped for similar antigenicity) to which the virus belongs, based on HA sequences, but also allows visualization of the spatial distribution and temporal dynamics of antigenic clusters of viruses isolated from around the world, thus assisting in antigenic surveillance of human influenza A(H3N2) virus. Availability and Implementation: It is publicly available from:

introduction the seasonal influenza viruses, i.e. the influenza A(H1N1), A(H3N2) and B virus, causes continual epidemics to human society due to their frequent antigenic drift (). Timely surveillance of the antigenic dynamics of influenza viruses is critical for selection of appropriate vaccine strains. The World Health Organization (WHO) established a Global Influenza Surveillance Network, which is composed of National Influenza Centers from all over the world, to monitor the spread and antigenic variation of influenza viruses (WHO, 2014). Despite these global efforts, vaccine mismatches occasionally happen (). Given the feasibility of rapid and high quality sequence determination, a number of sequence based computational approaches have been developed to understand the antigenic properties and). Previously, we developed a computational method pre dac to infer antigenic clusters for human influenza A(H3N2) virus based on protein sequences of the immunodominant part of HA (HA1) (). By accurate capture of the antigenic characteristics of the virus, pre dac proved helpful to improve the accuracy of vaccine recommendation in mainland China. Here, we made it easy to use for the public and further built a user friendly platform PREDACH3 for antigenic surveillance of human influenza A(H3N2) virus. This could assist in timely and accurate selection of vaccine strains.
