Motivation: In cancer genomics research, one important problem is that the solid tissue sample obtained from clinical settings is always a mixture of cancer and normal cells. The sample mixture brings complication in data analysis and results in biased findings if not correctly accounted for. Estimating tumor purity is of great interest, and a number of methods have been developed using gene expression, copy number variation or point mutation data. Results: We discover that in cancer samples, the distributions of data from Illumina Infinium 450 k methylation microarray are highly correlated with tumor purities. We develop a simple but effective method to estimate purities from the microarray data.

introduction advances of high throughput technologies have revolutionized the cancer genomics research. Tremendous efforts have been made to study the genomic characteristics of different types of cancers, for example by large consortiums like The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Results from these studies contribute significantly to the understanding of cancer etiologies and the discovery of diagnostic biomarkers and therapeutic targets. In cancer research, one important problem can not be overlooked is that the solid tissue sample obtained from clinical settings is always a mixture of cancer and normal cells. The mixture brings complication to data analysis and results in biased and even erroneous findings if not correctly accounted for (). The problem of estimating 'tumor purity', or the proportion of cancer cells from a mixed tissue, has been of great interests. A number of statistical methods and software tools were developed over the last several years, based on data for gene expression () or copy number variations and point mutations (). In particular, ABSOLUTE () is a statistical method for inferring tumor purity and absolute copy number from a mixed sample based on SNP array data. It takes the estimated copy ratios as input and jointly estimates purity and ploidy by maximizing the whole data likelihood. ABSOLUTE has been applied to most of the TCGA samples, and its purity estimates have become the de facto gold standards provided by TCGA. Nevertheless, many of the existing methods still require data from purified samples or significant prior biological knowledge, which could be difficult to obtain in clinical settings due to the heterogeneity of cancer. The limitations significantly undermine the practical usefulness of the existing methods in this work, we discover through extensive real data exploration that DNA methylation data from Illumina Infinium 450 k microarray are informative for tumor purities. DNA methylation is an important epigenetic modification of DNA molecule with essential role in many basic biological processes. It often shows abnormality in various types of cancers (). An important feature of DNA methylation is that a majority of the genome are either fully methylated or unmethylated (). From a mixed tumor tissue, genomic regions that are differentially methylated between cancer and normal will likely show mid-level methylation. So the distribution of mid-level methylation provides information for the tumor purity. Although there are several reports on the existence of intermediate ly methylated regions (IMR) even from pure sample (), our real data observations show that there are much more i mrs from mixed samples, so that the tumor purity can still be inferred from i mrs with carefully designed algorithm. A recently developed method methyl purify estimates tumor purity from bisulfite sequencing bs seq data (). The method uses the methylation information from single sequence read and performs estimation through a two component mixture model using EM algorithm. An important advantage of the method is that it does not require data from reference samples, so it has a wider application in clinical settings. However, because of the high cost of bs seq experiment, application of the method is still rather limited. In large scale population level studies, for example the epi genome wide association study e pig was microarray technology such as Illumina Infinium 450 k microarray is still widely applied. In this work, we seek to understand whether the tumor purity can be estimated from methylation microarray data. We discover that there exist probes, mostly with intermediate methylation levels, that are informative for inferring tumor purity. We develop a method to estimate tumor purity from Illumina Infinium 450 k microarray and then apply the method on the TCGA lung adenocarcinoma lu ad data. Results show that the method can accurately predict the tumor purity levels.

conclusion in this work, we discover that the methylation microarray data from tumor samples contain important information for tumor purity. In particular, the shape of the beta values distribution is strongly influenced by the purity. We explained the phenomenon using a statistical model and show that the distributions can be utilized to estimate tumor purity. In essence, beta values of informative probes (DMPs) follow a bimodal distribution, and the locations of the modes are related to the tumor purity. By obtaining the modes of these beta values, tumor purities can be estimated from a linear model. We design an algorithm infinium purify for purity estimation and show that it provides good results from several sets of TCGA data. There are several advantages of infinium purify compared with existing tumor purity estimation methods. First it does not require data from reference panels, which could be difficult to obtain in clinical settings due to the heterogeneity of cancer. Second, it is very cost effective compared with base resolution methylation data such as whole genome bs seq. Moreover, since the DNA samples are much easier to collect compared with mRNA, the purity estimation based on methylation data will provide a more practical mean in clinical settings. From large cancer related e pig was studies, the purity estimation can be obtained as a by product from the methylation microarrays. Finally, ABSOLUTE usually provides several solutions corresponding to local maxima of the likelihood. Prediction results from infinium purify can help researches make a final decision. We use ABSOLUTE estimates as benchmark for model training and results comparison because of the following reasons. First, ABSOLUTE is one of the earliest and arguably the most influential tools for tumor purity estimations. It is widely used as a gold standard to evaluate new purity estimation methods, for example a bscn seq and the te2. Second, it provides tumor purity estimates for several types of tumors and thousands of samples, which can facilitate large scale comparison. Third, infinium purify is designed and tested using data from TCGA samples, and ABSOLUTE is the official tumor purity predictor for TCGA consortium. The fact that infinium purify estimates are highly correlated with ABSOLUTE estimates, albeit using a very different data type and computational model, further justifies the accuracy of ABSOLUTE estimates independently. We compared our results with several cnv based methods and show good agreements in purity estimation. However, although both CNV and methylation contain information for cancer purity, they do not have to be correlated in the raw data level (). Both types of methods use genome wide distributions of quantities (CNV or intermediate methylated probes) to estimate purity, the CNV and methylation could be completely unrelated at finer scales such as within a few hundred base pairs. It is important to note that infinium purify does not take ploidy information of tumor cells into consideration, which could slightly bias our prediction. However, since the prediction is based on relatively large number of DMPs across the genome and a majority of them will not have copy number variation, we expect the aberrant copy numbers would not significantly change the overall result. The selection of DMPs plays an important role in the method. In its current form, infinium purify only works when the number samples is reasonably large. Fortunately, in TCGA, most important cancer types have large sample size. It will be interesting and useful to explore whether it is possible to combine data from different cancers and construct 'universal' DMPs. Moreover, infinium purify is only focused on estimating tumor purity. Decoupling signals from mixed sample to estimate the methylation levels from cancer normal is our research plan in the near future. infinium purify is specifically designed for data from Illumina Infinium 450 k arrays, which is the most widely used platform for DNA methylation. It is conceivable that the same principle and methods can be applied to data from other platforms. In this work, we present a simple but effective method to estimate tumor purity from methylation microarray data. The method can serve as an alternative for existing methods with similar goals. Although the method is focused on tumor tissues, it can potentially be applied to other highly heterogeneous samples such as blood or brain. Furthermore, it will be very interesting to combine methylation with other genetic and genomic data such as gene expression and genetic variants and build a joint model for tumor purity estimation. Such model will have potential to significantly improve the estimation accuracy.
