Motivation: Protein contact map describes the pairwise spatial and functional relationship of residues in a protein and contains key information for protein 3D structure prediction. Although studied extensively , it remains challenging to predict contact map using only sequence information. Most existing methods predict the contact map matrix element by element ignoring correlation among contacts and physical feasibility of the whole contact map. A couple of recent methods predict contact map by using mutual information, taking into consideration contact correlation and enforcing a sparsity restraint, but these methods demand for a very large number of sequence homologs for the protein under consideration and the resultant contact map may be still physically infeasible. Results: This article presents a novel method phy cmap for contact map prediction, integrating both evolutionary and physical restraints by machine learning and integer linear programming. The evolutionary restraints are much more informative than mutual information, and the physical restraints specify more concrete relationship among contacts than the sparsity restraint. As such, our method greatly reduces the solution space of the contact map matrix and, thus, significantly improves prediction accuracy. Experimental results confirm that phy cmap outperforms currently popular methods no matter how many sequence homologs are available for the protein under consideration. Availability:

introduction in this article, we say two residues of a protein are in contact if their Euclidean distance is58 A . The distance of two residues can be calculated using C or C atoms, corresponding to C-or c based contacts. A protein contact map is a binary L  L matrix, where L is the protein length. In this matrix, an element with value 1 indicates the corresponding two residues are in contact; otherwise, they are not in contact. Protein contact map describes the pairwise spatial and functional relationship of residues in a protein. Predicting contact map using sequence information has been an active research topic in recent years partially because contact map is helpful for protein 3D structure prediction () and protein model quality assessment (). Protein contact map has also been used to study protein structure alignment (). Many machine learning methods have been developed for protein contact prediction in the past decades (). For example, svm seq () uses support vector machines for contact prediction; nnc on () uses a recursive neural network; svm con () also uses support vector machines plus features derived from sequence homologs; Distill () uses a 2D recursive neural network. Recently, cmap pro (Di) uses a multi-layer neural network. Although different, these methods are common in that they predict the contact map matrix element by element ignoring the correlation among contacts and also physical feasibility of the whole contact map (physical constraints are not totally independent of contact correlation). A special type of physical constraint is that a contact map matrix must be sparse, i.e. the number of contacts in a protein is only linear in its length. Two recent methods psi cov () and ev fold (predict contacts by using only mutual information (MI) derived from sequence homologs and enforcing the aforementioned sparsity constraint. However, both of them demand for a large number (at least several hundreds) of sequence homologs for the protein under prediction. This makes the predicted contacts not useful in protein modeling, as a (globular) protein with many sequence homologs usually has similar templates in PDB; thus, template based models are of good quality and hard to be further improved using predicted contacts. Conversely, a protein without close templates in PDB, which may require contact prediction, usually has few sequence homologs even if millions of protein sequences are now available. Further, these two methods enforce only a simple sparsity constraint (i.e. the total number of contacts in a protein is small), ignoring many more concrete constraints. To name a few, one residue can have only a small number of contacts, depending on its secondary structure and neighboring residues. The number of contacts between two strands is bounded by the strand length. astro fold () possibly is the first method that applies physical constraints, which implicitly imply the sparsity constraint used by psi cov and ev fold to contact map prediction. However, some of the physical constraints are too restrictive and possibly unrealistic. For example, it requires that a residue in one strand can only be in contact with a residue in another strand. More importantly, astro fold does not take into consideration evolutionary information; thus, it significantly reduces its prediction accuracy. In this article, we present a novel method phy cmap for contact map prediction by integrating both evolutionary and physical constraints using machine learning, which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com secondary structure and distance dependent statistical potential. phy cmap then infers a given number of top contacts based on predicted contact probabilities by enforcing a set of realistic physical constraints on the contact map. These restraints specify more concrete relationship among contacts and also imply the sparsity restraint used by psi cov and ev fold. By combining both evolutionary and physical constraints, our method greatly reduces the solution space of contact map and leads to much better prediction accuracy. Experimental results confirm that phy cmap outperforms currently popular methods no matter how many sequence homologs are available for the protein under prediction.
