Motivation: Prediction of protein protein interaction has become an important part of systems biology in reverse engineering the biological networks for better understanding the molecular biology of the cell. Although significant progress has been made in terms of prediction accuracy, most computational methods only predict whether two proteins interact but not their interacting residues the information that can be very valuable for understanding the interaction mechanisms and designing modulation of the interaction. In this work, we developed a computational method to predict the interacting residue pairs contact matrix for interacting protein domains, whose rows and columns correspond to the residues in the two interacting domains respectively and whose values (1 or 0) indicate whether the corresponding residues (do or do not) interact. Results: Our method is based on supervised learning using support vector machines. For each domain involved in a given domain domain interaction (DDI), an interaction profile hidden Markov model ip hmm is first built for the domain family, and then each residue position for a member domain sequence is represented as a 20 dimension vector of Fisher scores, characterizing how similar it is as compared with the family profile at that position. Each element of the contact matrix for a sequence pair is now represented by a feature vector from concate-nating the vectors of the two corresponding residues, and the task is to predict the element value (1 or 0) from the feature vector. A support vector machine is trained for a given DDI, using either a consensus contact matrix or contact matrices for individual sequence pairs, and is tested by leave one out cross validation. The performance averaged over a set of 115 dd is collected from the 3 DID database shows significant improvement (sensitivity up to 85%, and specificity up to 85%), as compared with a multiple sequence alignment based method (sensitivity 57%, and specificity 78%) previously reported in the literature. Contact:

introduction protein protein interaction (PPI) plays a central role in cellular functions, and the prediction of PPI has become an important part of systems biology in reverse engineering the biological networks for better understanding the molecular biology of the cell. The cost and time of experimental approaches to determining PPI remain high and thus have motivated development of computational methods. Despite significant progress in prediction accuracy, most computational methods only predict whether two proteins interact but do not tell which amino acids on these two proteins actually interact the very information that can be extremely valuable for further understanding the interaction mechanisms and hence for designing modulation of the interaction via mutagenesis. It is therefore desirable to develop computational methods that can predict the contact matrix for interacting protein domains to indicate which residue pairs interact. PPI requires some 'compatibility' between the interacting partners in terms of structure, electrostatics and other properties, which shall be conserved during evolution due to the selection pressure and ultimately manifest themselves to certain degrees in the amino acid compositions of the domain sequences that make up the interaction interface (). It is such compatibility that most computational methods are trying to establish, by looking at features in protein sequences and structures, to predict the PPI (). The conservation of interface sequences leads to the use of interacting domains as surrogate of PPI, although PPI can not always be reliably predicted just based on interacting domains because for instance, in the presence of multi domains combination of domains may block interactions that would be otherwise implicated if solely based on individual domain interactions (). Nevertheless, domain domain interaction (DDI) provides a useful perspective to studying PPI and is adequate for our purpose here, which is to predict the contact matrix for proteins that are known to interact via certain domains. Specifically, pairs of interacting proteins will be organized in groups of domain domain interacting (DDI) families. Each member of such a family is an interacting protein pair whose interaction occurs through the association of a pair of domains, an interface that is common to all the members of the family, even though substantial variance might exist between the whole protein complexes to which the protein pairs belong, such as their folded state, cellular function, etc. These dd is form a relatively large and stable interface of $ 2000 2 on average. Identifying residues from the domain sequences that reside on the interface would provide the training data needed for developing a computational method with predictive power. Several groups have published work in organizing and standardizing known dd is (). The 3DID database () is among the most successful and widely used ones. This database identifies all cases of dd is of known three dimensional structure by first assigning Pfam domains () to each individual protein in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (). Next, the atomic contacts between domains in the same structure are computed, where a pair of interacting residues are defined by requiring one or more of hydrogen bonds (NO distances 3:5 ), salt bridges (NO distances 5:5 ) or van de Waals interactions (CC distances 5 ). A DDI is called when at least five of these contacts exist between a pair of domains (). As of March 2011, 3DID collected a total of 5971 distinct DDI families, where each family has on average 26.72 different PDB complexes in which the corresponding DDI was observed shows a graphical representation of the contact matrix for a DDI family. In the top left panel, there are four protein complexes, each with a pair of interacting sequence chains. The complexes are not in general homogeneous, but in the interface region, all of them do exhibit a similar shape. This is because, for each one of the protein pairs, the interaction occurs through domain A in the sequences marked red, and through domain B in the sequences marked green. Therefore, since in the domain A region of all the red sequences there is high sequence conservation, they can be aligned in a multiple sequence alignment (MSA A ), and the same happens to the domain B region of the green sequences (MSA B ). The matrix in the bottom right panel is the contact matrix of the DDI family. The black dots in the matrix show those positions in the three dimensional complexes where physical interactions occur between the protein pairs. Note that these residue residue interactions do not necessarily occur in all the complexes in the family. For instance, i 1 is observed only in complexes 1, 2 and 3; i 2 only happens in complex 1; whereas i 3 happens in all the four complexes. Such a representation of a DDI had previously been used into predict specificity of SH3 proteins binding to their ligands, where the domain B would correspond to the SH3 domain and the domain A to the binding ligand (peptide). As an intermediate step toward inferring the binding for a new sequence pair, each sequence will be aligned to the corresponding MSA and a consensus contact matrix will be used to determine the contacting residues. Although this method seems to be reasonable and straightforward to implement and had worked well in enhancing the inference of the SH3 domain specificity, its performance as a predictor for protein contact matrix is poor, as shown in the results when applied to the 3DID data, primarily due to its rigid reliance on the multiple sequence alignments proposed a method to construct the consensus contact matrix for a large number of homologue pairs without using structural information but only sequence variations, as measured by the so called direct information, which is computed by maximum entropy with constraints of matching the observed occurrence frequencies of amino acids. Being able to differentiate direct couplings of amino acids from transitive couplings, the method shows remarkable improvement in specificity, as compared with similar method of using the mutual information based on observed occurrence frequencies. Yet, being unsupervised, the method does not address particularly how to predict the contact matrix for a give pair of sequences, other than having them as members in the MSAs and then use the consensus contact matrix as the predicted contact matrix. In this work, we developed a computational method to predict more accurately the contact matrix for interacting protein domains, by (i) incorporating the structural information of the interface with interaction profile hidden Markov models ip hmms () over MSAs, (ii) tapping into the more subtle features present in the domain sequence with the use of Fisher scores over a simple alignment and (iii) using support vector machines for a supervised learning over the use of a family consensus contact matrix, which is often dependent on the initial multiple sequence alignments and the voting mechanism used to get the consensus. The performance from the leave one out cross validation averaged over 115 dd is for both methods shows significant improvement as compared with a multiple sequence alignment based method previously reported in the literature.

conclusion we have shown in this work that the contact matrix for a pair of interacting proteins can be predicted with high accuracy by combining sequence, structural and evolutionary information in an integrative manner, as captured in the ip hmms for the two protein domain families of these interacting proteins. By devising Fisher score vectors to represent amino acids at the interacting domains, our method is capable of extracting characteristic features without constraining the residues in the rigid multiple sequence alignments used in the previous methods. This enables our method to handle residues corresponding to delete and insert states, and allows for a supervised learning on individual contact points, eliminating the need of a consensus contact matrix for the domain families, which has been a main source for false predictions. While designed for predicting contact points between interacting protein domains, the method may be useful as a module in protein folding and docking, in which a recent study () has shown that the co-evolution couplings, distinguished from the noise set of observed correlation using maximum entropy, provide an excellent indicator for residue residue proximity in folded structures. As future work, we will investigate how to adapt the maximum entropy model into the framework of ip hmm fishers vm for further improvement in accuracy.
