Motivation: long range rna rna interactions (LRIs) play an important role in viral replication, however, only a few of these interactions are known and only for a small number of viral species. Up to now, it has been impossible to screen a full viral genome for LRIs experimentally or in silico. Most known LRIs are cross reacting structures pseudo knots undetectable by most bioinformatic al tools. Results: We present lris can a tool for the LRI prediction in full viral genomes based on a multiple genome alignment. We confirmed 14 out of 16 experimentally known and evolutionary conserved LRIs in genome alignments of HCV, tomb us viruses Flaviviruses and HIV-1. We provide several promising new interactions, which include compensatory mutations and are highly conserved in all considered viral sequences. Furthermore, we provide reactivity plots highlighting the hot spots of predicted LRIs. Availability: Source code and binaries of lris can freely available for download at

introduction long range rna rna interactions (LRIs) have been marginally reported in various positive strand RNA viruses like tomb us virus (8 in cir v and tbs v Hepacivirus (5 in HCV), Coronavirus (1 in t gev Flavivirus (3 in DENV and WNV), lute o virus (2 in by dv apt ho virus (2 in FMDV), pesti virus (1 in csf v and Human immunodeficiency virus (5 in HIV-1) (). According to their definition, a long range interaction spans distances between a few hundred and several thousands of nucleotides (26 kb in t gev. LRIs are often located in loop regions or internal bulges of local RNA structures (known as cis acting regulatory elements) and therefore build pseudoknot like structures. Various programs have been developed for general rna rna interaction prediction, which can be classified into five groups (): The first group neglects intra-molecular base pairs * to whom correspondence should be addressed based on the hybrids minimum free energy (MFE). Members of this group are rna duplex and rna plex () or rna hybrid (). The second category includes rna co fold () and pair fold (). These tools concatenate two interacting RNA sequences and calculate the MFE of the joint RNA sequences. The third group considers intra-molecular and inter-molecular rna rna interactions in separated steps, however only one binding site is predicted. Members of this group are in tarn a () or rna up (). The fourth group considers more complex rna rna interactions and allows also more than one binding site. This group includes tools like rac tip (), inteRNA () or in rnas (). The final group contains e.g. petco fold (), rna ali duplex (), irb is (), rip align () and simul fold (). These tools consider not only a pair of single sequences, like the tools mentioned above, they use multiple sequence alignments as input. With this comparative method, it is possible to reduce the false positive rate by incorporating evolutionary conserved information. All of these programs have different properties, unsuitable for viral genomes. For example, rna ali duplex is unable to predict pseudo knots and neglects intra-molecular RNA foldings. petco fold considers both, intra and inter-molecular interactions as well as pseudo knots but returns per default only a single secondary structure, which makes the detection of multiple functional binding sites impossible. rip aligns running time makes the program not applicable to viral sequences and irb is is only applicable for predictions of RNA interactions related to RNA splice sites. Up to now, we are aware of a single program that is designed for LRI prediction, called co varna (). This tool detects long range nucleotide covariation from multiple sequence alignments of eukaryotic genomes using an index based algorithm to find clusters of co varying base pairs. The extended function cov stat determines the statistical significance of observed covariation cluster. co varna has very strict filter criteria and is therefore very conservative in predicting LRIs. For short genomes, such as viral genomes, this leads to almost no predicted interactions. Here, we present lris can for detecting long range rna rna interactions in complete viral genome alignments without prior knowledge. Sparse alignment interaction dot plots in combination
