Motivation: In this article, we develop a novel edge based network i.e. edge network to detect early signals of diseases by identifying the corresponding edge biomarkers with their dynamical network bio-marker score from dynamical network biomarkers. Specifically, we derive an edge network based on the second order statistics representation of gene expression profiles, which is able to accurately represent the stochastic dynamics of the original biological system (with Gaussian distribution assumption) by combining with the traditional node network which is based only on the first order statistics representation of the noisy data. In other words, we show that the stochas-tic network of a biological system can be described by the integration of its node network and its edge network in an accurate manner. Results: By applying edge network analysis to gene expressions of healthy adults within live influenza experiment sampling at time points before the appearance of infection symptoms, we identified the edge biomarkers (80 edges with 22 densely connected genes) discovered in edge networks corresponding to symptomatic adults, which were used to predict the subsequent outcomes of influenza infection. In particular, we not only correctly predict the final infection outcome of each individual at an early time point before his her clinic symptom but also reveal the key molecules during the disease progression. The prediction accuracy achieves $90% under the leave one out cross validation. Furthermore, we demonstrate the superiority of our method on disease classification and predication by comparing with the conventional node biomarkers. Our edge network analysis not only opens a new way to understand pathogenesis at a network level due to the new representation for a stochastic network, but also provides a powerful tool to make the early diagnosis of diseases.

introduction time course data are increasingly used to study dynamical biological processes or disease progression, like drug treatment or virus infection that evolves in a stochastic and temporal fashion (). Instead of a snapshot of gene expression, the time course gene expression over several continuous time points, allows investigators to study or even predict dynamic behaviors of a biological system (). Based on high throughput time course data, although there are extensive works to identify molecular biomarkers for diagnosing complex diseases, it is strongly demanded to develop a systematical framework by exploiting such dynamical and stochastic information to predict early signals of disease states and also their occurrence times from both theoretical and computational viewpoint, which is also crucial to achieve predictive and preventive medicine (). In particular, molecular network is widely used to analyze the molecular response () as well as biomarkers for distinguishing disease and normal samples. Traditionally, a molecular network with node (e.g. gene or protein) as basic element, i.e. node network is constructed mainly in the following two ways: one is to extract the conditional existence of known molecular interactions, which consist of a subnetwork induced from a given background network (), such as Weighted Correlation Network Analysis (); the other is to directly infer de novo molecular associations, which represent a significant topological structure connecting molecules (), such as ar acne (), infer grn () and nar rom i (). This network can represent associations or interactions among molecules but can not directly describe the stochastic dynamics of a biological system. Generally, a biological system at a molecular level can be described by stochastic dynamics modeled by a master equation (). As shown in, with the linearization and Gaussian distribution assumption, the system can be exactly expressed by two sets of equations, i.e. one for the mean vector of molecules (used in first order statistics representation) and another for the covariance matrix of molecules (used in second order statistics representation). However, the traditional molecular network, e.g. gene network or protein interaction network, is based only on the equations of mean vector rather than the equations of covariance matrix, e.g. a set of linear equations for molecular concentrations, which can not represent whole stochastic dynamics of the original system (i.e. it is the representation of a biological system without any stochastic fluctuation or with zero noise). Different from *To whom correspondence should be addressed. those conventional node networks we propose a new edge based network, i.e. edge network to exploit higher order statistics information among molecules, where a node represents a pair of the connecting nodes, i.e. an edge in the traditional node network. As indicated in, the edge network is based on the covariance matrix of molecules governed by Lyapunov differential equation (). In an edge network a node is not a molecule but a pair of molecules (i.e. an edge), and a link represents the relationship between two molecule pairs (i.e. between two edges) rather than between two molecules as in a node network. Clearly, an edge network reflects the second order statistics information, and therefore theoretically with Gaussian distribution assumption on each molecule' expression it is able to recover stochastic dynamics of the original biological system by combining with the node network first order statistics). Recent studies () show that the second order statistics information can be used to predict the pre disease state (the state of an individual before the appearance of clinical symptom) and thus achieve the early diagnosis of a disease by detecting its dynamical network biomarker (DNB), in contrast to the molecular network that is mainly used to identify molecular biomarkers or node biomarkers for the diagnosis of a disease. Thus, one major advantage of the edge network is its predictive power for early diagnosis of a disease, which can not only predict the future occurrence of a disease but also estimate the critical time when the change from a normal to a disease state happens. As shown in, the progression of the disease progression, e.g. influenza infection can be considered to have three stages (or states), i.e. (i) normal stage possibly with the gradual progression of the disease, (ii) pre disease stage that is considered as the limit of the normal stage just before the disease symptom appears and (iii) disease or infection stage after the disease symptom appears (). Our edge biomarkers derived from the edge network are able. Disease progression, dnb s and time course gene expression profiles of 17 healthy adults within live influenza experiment. (A) The progression of the influenza infection can be considered to have three stages, i.e. (i) normal stage with the gradual progression of the disease, (ii) pre disease stage that is considered as the limit of the normal stage just before the symptom appears and (iii) disease or infection stage after the symptom appears. (B) edge biomarkers or dnb s are able to identify the pre disease stage due to dynamical and higher order statistics information, and therefore predict the outcome of the influenza infection before the symptom appears. (C) The biological time course expression data contains 17 subjects challenged with influenza h3n2 wisconsin for which, 9 subjects are infected (Sx), whereas 8 subjects stay healthy (Asx) finally. Gene expression profiles were obtained and measured on whole peripheral blood drawn from all subjects at an interval of 8 h post inoculation (hpi) through 108 hpi. In all, 268 gene microarrays were obtained for all subjects at 16 time points including baseline (24 hpi). For the purpose of the prediction, we only use the data with non symptom to identify the edge biomarkers. node network and edge network for a biological system. A biological system at a molecular level can be modeled as a master equation, where P is the probability of x; W is the propensity function; x is the numbers or concentrations of molecules following Gaussian distribution with a mean vector and a covariance matrix and s is the changes of molecules. By liberalizing the master equation, we have two sets of the equations, i.e. one is linear equations corresponding to the traditional molecular network or node network which is based only on the first order statistics information or average values of molecules, and another is Lyapunov differential equations corresponding to our edge network which is based on the second order statistics information or covariance between molecules. Theoretically, the information from those two level statistics can fully recover the stochastic dynamics of the original system. The first order statistics information or traditional node network is used to distinguish the disease and normal samples for disease diagnosis by identifying molecular biomarkers or node biomarkers, whereas the second order statistics information or edge network is able to distinguish the pre disease and normal samples by identifying edge biomarkers or dnb s thereby achieving the early diagnosis or the prediction of the disease to identify the pre disease stage due to its dynamical and additional covariance information, and therefore predict the outcome of the complex disease (e.g. influenza infection) before the clinic symptom appears (). Specifically, by applying edge network analysis to 268 gene expression profiles of 17 healthy adults within 16 time points across the whole live influenza experiment (), we discovered 80 edges (with 22 densely connected genes) involved in edge networks of most symptomatic adults before the appearance of clinic symptom, which were used as edge biomarkers to predict the subsequent outcomes of influenza infection for each individual. Our results indicated that those edge biomarkers in this case have similar dynamical features to DNB (). In particular, the results show that these edge biomarkers can predict the outcomes of influenza infection with 90% accuracy under leave one out cross validation loo cv i.e. not only predict the final infection outcome of each individual or subject but also estimate the early time point of the subsequent infection. Furthermore, we compare the results with the conventional biomarkers and methods, and also conduct the functional analysis on the edge biomarkers which all demonstrate the superiority of our method on disease classification and prediction. We also investigate the molecular mechanism of the disease development after virus infection by analyzing the identified key molecules at the critical time points. In all, our edge network analysis opens a new way to deeply understand disease progression, e.g. influenza virus induced pathogenesis from dynamical features and higher order statistics information of big biological data, and also provides a powerful tool to prevent disease occurrence or make the early diagnosis of a disease for each individual.
