Motivation: The folding free energy is an important characteristic of proteins stability and is directly related to proteins wild type function. The changes of proteins stability due to naturally occurring mutations, missense mutations, are typically causing diseases. Single point mutations made in vitro are frequently used to assess the contribution of given amino acid to the stability of the protein. In both cases, it is desirable to predict the change of the folding free energy upon single point mutations in order to either provide insights of the molecular mechanism of the change or to design new experimental studies. Results: We report an approach that predicts the free energy change upon single point mutation by utilizing the 3D structure of the wild type protein. It is based on variation of the molecular mechanics Generalized Born mm gb method, scaled with optimized parameters smm gb and utilizing specific model of unfolded state. The corresponding mutations are built in silico and the predictions are tested against large dataset of 1109 mutations with experimentally measured changes of the folding free energy. Benchmarking resulted in root mean square deviation = 1.78 kcal mol and slope of the linear regression fit between the experimental data and the calculations was 1.04. The smm gb is compared with other leading methods of predicting folding free energy changes upon single mutations and results discussed with respect to various parameters. Availability: All the pdb files we used in this article can be downloaded from

introduction protein folding free energy is an important characteristic directly related to protein stability. Some proteins are very stable, while others unfold under very small perturbation of the native conditions. In both cases, not all amino acids contribute equally to the protein stability and interactions, some of them being crucial and frequently termed 'hot spots' () while others contributing very little to the folding free * To whom correspondence should be addressed. energy. However, the contribution of a given amino acid to protein stability can not be easily predicted, even if the 3D structure of the corresponding protein is available. Therefore, developing methods to improve predictions of hot spots and even more to assess the contribution of a given amino acid to the folding or binding free energy is of great importance (). Accurate predictions [see Khan and vih in en (2010) for comparison of different methods] will be beneficial for understanding the role of individual amino acids on protein stability and to rationalize the effects of non-synonymous single nucleoside polymorphism () and missense mutations on the protein fold (). Of particular interest is predicting the effects caused by disease causing missense mutations since the function of protein can be affected in a variety of ways (). Among them, the most common effect is changing protein stability, i.e. destabilizing or stabilizing the wild type protein fold (), in addition to altering the macromolecular interactions (), hydrogen bond network () and many other effects (). However, the predictions about the changes of the folding energy should not only indicate if they favor the stability or not, but also the predicted absolute magnitude should be accurate as well to allow to distinguish between disease causing and harmless mutations. Because of this significance, efforts were devoted to develop methods and approaches to evaluate the stability changes upon amino acid substitutions, but despite of the efforts, accurate calculations of folding free energy are still a challenge (). Currently, there are several distinctive approaches that were developed to predict the protein stability changes due to mutations. They can be classified into four categories: (i) first principle methods, which calculate the folding free energy changes based on detailed atomic models () and may be quite computationally expensive and may not be applicable in cases of large set of mutations (). (ii) Methods using statistical potentials (), which were successfully used to

DISCUSSION
