Analyses of entire viral genomes or mtDNA requires comprehensive design of many primers across their genomes. Furthermore, simultaneous optimization of several DNA primer design criteria may improve overall experimental efficiency and downstream bioinformatic processing. To achieve these goals, we developed primer design m. It includes several options for multiple primer design, allowing researchers to efficiently design walking primers that cover long DNA targets, such as entire HIV-1 genomes, and that optimizes primers simultaneously informed by genetic diversity in multiple alignments and experimental design constraints given by the user. primer design m can also design primers that include DNA barcodes and minimize primer dimer-ization. primer design m finds optimal primers for highly variable DNA targets and facilitates design flexibility by suggesting alternative designs to adapt to experimental conditions. Availability and implementation: primer design m is available as a web tool at http://www.hiv.lanl. gov content sequence primer design primer design html Contact: tkl lanl gov or seq info lanl gov
introduction primer design is complicated by many factors, including desired primer specificity or promiscuity, restrictions in polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or sequencing lengths, matching of melting temperatures, heterogeneous evolutionary rates across genomes, avoiding primer primer dimerization and integrating bio barcodes. Typically, the process of finding the optimal placements for primers is a serial process in which each of the design criteria are optimized one at a time. This is unfortunate as one design step may influence another. Thus, designing primers while optimizing all design criteria simultaneously is desirable. Because no existing software was able to do that, we recently developed a tool that could include all these factors, given a multiple alignment and user input on desired constraints, to design primer pairs for single fragment analyses (). However, with the increased abilities of next generation sequencing (NGS) a need to design optimal multiple fragment analyses, such as tiled fragments that cover entire small genomes, has rapidly emerged. Many previous primer design software have focused on special purposes such as multiplexing, degenerate sites, discriminate amplification, nested PCR, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) protocols, and hybridization analyses such as micro-arrays and in situ hybridization, and DNA sequencing (). More generic software, such as primer 3 (), base their design on a single sequence, which inadvertently could place primers in more variable regions, leading to annealing failure with some templates or selective amplification in diverse populations. Motivated by the large genetic diversity found in Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and Simian immunodeficiency virus (SIV), and the need for a generic design tool that could dynamically optimize primers across their genomes, we developed primer design m. It can be used to design single or multiple fragment primers to any aligned set of DNA sequences, regardless of diversity level and organism.

conclusion primer design m can design primers for both single fragment analyses as well as multiple fragment walking primer analyses of highly variable genomes, and the designed primers have been experimentally confirmed to work (). primer design m should be useful to researchers in all fields of biology who need to design DNA primers. To make access easy, guarantee that the latest version of the tool is used and make the program independent of computer platform, the software is available as a web tool at the LANL HIV database conflict of Interest: none declared.. Multiple fragment design of walking primers to analyze a large part of the genome of HIV-1 subtype G. The x axis shows alignment position according to the original input multiple alignment, and y axes show entropy (green), complexity (red, log scale), and Tm (blue). The grey region is the user specified ROI. Primer pairs for each designed fragment are displayed as green (forward) and red (reverse) arrowheads
