PriSM is a set of algorithms designed to select and match degenerate primer pairs for the amplification of viral genomes. The design of panels of hundreds of primer pairs takes just hours using this program, compared with days using a manual approach. PriSM allows for rapid in silico optimization of primers for downstream applications such as sequencing. As a validation, PriSM was used to create an amplification primer panel for human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) Clade B. Availability: The program is freely available for use at: www broad institute org perl seq special projects
introduction viral populations are dynamic and the strains circulating in an infected population often vary geographically and temporally. RNA viruses, especially those that cause chronic disease such as hepatitis C virus (HCV) and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV), exhibit tremendous sequence diversity (). As such, primers designed from a single reference genome may limit the number of variants captured from within a single patient as well as variants isolated from different geographic regions and time periods. Here, we report on a novel primer design method that: (i) leverages existing genome sequence information to design degenerate primers that account for the significant diversity observed in viral populations, and (ii) maximizes the ability to successfully amplify and sequence the genomes of viruses from different individuals that may differ significantly from a single viral reference genome. Previous primer selection algorithms have been designed to amplify single target regions (), or optimized for SNP or gene specific PCR (), group specific PCR (), or for phylogenetically related DNA sequences (). These methods do not, however, permit push button, full genome length, primer pair design from very diverse organisms such as those represented by RNA viruses. * To whom correspondence should be addressed a comparison of the features of PriSM to those of several other primer design programs is included in Supplementary Table 1. PriSM takes advantage of existing sequence information for a given viral strain to select the optimal primers, based on user defined criteria. The algorithm then suggests pairs of primers to make up a panel that will generate amplicons of desired length and overlap. Diversity capture is increased through the use of degenerate base codes page 267 266267
