Motivation: high throughput sequencing technologies have impacted many areas of genetic research. One such area is the identification of relatives from genetic data. The standard approach for the identification of genetic relatives collects the genomic data of all individuals and stores it in a database. Then, each pair of individuals is compared to detect the set of genetic relatives, and the matched individuals are informed. The main drawback of this approach is the requirement of sharing your genetic data with a trusted third party to perform the relatedness test. Results: In this work, we propose a secure protocol to detect the genetic relatives from sequencing data while not exposing any information about their genomes. We assume that individuals have access to their genome sequences but do not want to share their genomes with anyone else. Unlike previous approaches, our approach uses both common and rare variants which provide the ability to detect much more distant relationships securely. We use a simulated data generated from the 1000 genomes data and illustrate that we can easily detect up to fifth degree cousins which was not possible using the existing methods. We also show in the 1000 genomes data with cryptic relationships that our method can detect these individuals. Availability: The software is freely available for download at

introduction detecting relatives from genetic data is one of the fundamental problems in genetics. As genotype chip technologies reduce the cost of collecting genetic data for each individual, many personal genomic companies provide various services. One such service is the identification of relatives using genetic data. The underling idea of this service is to collect genotypes of different individuals and to store their data in a database. Then, the genotype for each pair of individuals is compared and any pair of individuals that appear to be genetically related are notified of a match. Unfortunately, the current version of this service provided by all companies requires individuals to share their genetic data with a trusted company already raised many privacy issues by showing that we can detect the existence of an individual in a pool of individuals when the minor allele frequency is available. Thus, the disease status of any individual involved in a g was might be exposed to the public. furthermore extended the work () and showed that with access to thousands of variant summary statistics is enough for detecting the existence of an individual in a pool. recently have proposed a secure method for detecting the genetic relatives using genotype data. This method uses the 'fuzzy' encryption (). The 'fuzzy' encryption is very similar to the traditional encryption and decryption protocols where each individual has a public key and a private key. Public key for each individual is accessible by all the other individuals and the private key for each individual is hidden from all the other individuals. In the traditional protocol, we use the same private key to decrypt the message that was used to encrypt the message in the first place. However, in the 'fuzzy' encryption the two keys should be only close but not necessarily the same. Thus, an individual can detect the genetic relatives by downloading the available public key for all other individuals and compare their public key with his private key. They show if two individuals are genetically related their secure method can detect them while not leaking any information. Moreover, this method is designed such that individuals who are not related to others will not obtain any information. A drawback of this approach is that it can only be applied to common variants. We propose a novel encoding mechanism that convert each individual's haplotypes to a set of integer values such that the comparison between two sets approximate the genetic comparison between the two individuals where each individual has access only to its own variants list. The main innovations of our approach compared to is that we use a novel encoding which allows for us to utilize all variants in an individual's genome. This is challenging because many of the variants have not yet been discovered. In addition, our cryptographic scheme uses list decoding which has some advantages to other approaches for fuzzy encryption. We use both simulated and real data to show the utility of our method. We generated series of family relationships using the 1000 genomes data as the founder of the population. Then, we randomly generated offsprings for different generations. With the simulated data, we show that our secure protocol could detect up to fifth degree cousins. However, the previous *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com. method () can only detect up to third degree cousins. Furthermore, we use luh ya in we buy e l wk population from the 1000 genomes data (1000 Genomes) that contains cryptic relationships to show that method could detect these cryptic individuals.

discussion sequencing technologies have made personal genomics possible and many companies are providing information about ancestry and health of individuals by utilizing genetic data. However, to obtain these information, each individual has to share their genomic data. The sharing of genomic data raises privacy issues. One solution to the privacy issue is to use a trusted third party for detecting relatedness, however, individuals may not feel comfortable to share their genetic data with a trusted party for detecting related individuals. In this article, we demonstrate detecting the relatedness between two individuals where both individuals have access to their genetic data and no third party is needed. recently have proposed a secure method for detecting the genetic relatives using genotype data. This method uses the 'fuzzy' encryption. A limitation of is that only previously know variants which are common can be used in the method. Unfortunately, common variants are not as nearly as informative for identifying relatives as rare variants which are typically shared with only close family members. In this work, we provide a secure method for individuals to detect the genetic relatives from sequencing data without exposing any information about their genomes that utilizes both common and rare variants and through simulated data, we demonstrate, we can detect up to fifth degree cousins. We also show in two populations from the 1000 genomes data that contains cryptic relationships, our method can detect these individuals. Our method also utilized an encoding that allows us to compare individuals who utilized different genome builds for calling their variants. Thus, genomes encoded using to days genome build can be used to detect relatives called using future builds. The input to our method is the phased haplotypes, in the case we have un pa shed data, we phase our data using an existing method ();). We phased the individuals using a reference dataset of individuals which did not contain any individuals that are related to the ones we are phasing. We note that sequencing errors and phasing errors decrease the amount of segment matches between related individuals because an error in a segment that matches will appear as a segment that does not match. Our experiments over real data already implicitly take into account the sequencing and phasing errors because any errors decrease our observed amount of similarity among related pairs. As sequencing technologies mature and the error rates decrease, we expect that the number of matches between related individuals will increase accordingly in this section we describe a principled way to select a cut off to separate the related from unrelated individuals. Using real data we observe the number of segments shared between unrelated individuals follows a normal distribution N; 2  where the mean of the distribution is 19 325 and the standard deviation is 1080. supplementary illustrates the qq plot of the number of matched segments between each pair of unrelated individuals in l wk population. Unfortunately, the real data lack sufficient number of related individuals to observe if the number of segments between related individuals follows a normal distribution or not. Given that the number of shared segments for unrelated individuals follows a normal distribution X$N; 2 ; we select a cut off value of c such that the probability of observing a value 4c for the number of matched segment in unrelated individuals is extremely small such as 1e  8.
