We developed a Python package, prod y for structure based analysis of protein dynamics. prod y allows for quantitative characterization of structural variations in heterogeneous datasets of structures experimentally resolved for a given biomolecular system, and for comparison of these variations with the theoretically predicted equilibrium dynamics. Datasets include structural ensembles for a given family or subfamily of proteins, their mutants and sequence homologues, in the presence absence of their substrates, ligands or inhibitors. Numerous helper functions enable comparative analysis of experimental and theoretical data, and visualization of the principal changes in conformations that are accessible in different functional states. prod y application programming interface (API) has been designed so that users can easily extend the software and implement new methods.

introduction protein dynamics plays a key role in a wide range of molecular events in the cell, including substrate ligand recognition, binding, allosteric signaling and transport. For a number of well studied proteins, the Protein Data Bank (PDB) hosts multiple high resolution structures. Typical examples are drug targets resolved in the presence of different inhibitors. These ensembles of structures convey information on the structural changes that are physically accessible to the protein, and the delineation of these structural variations provides insights into structural mechanisms of biological activity (). Existing computational tools and servers for characterizing protein dynamics are suitable for single structures [e.g. Anisotropic Network Model an m server (), eln mo (), flex serv (, pairs of structures [e.g. open and closed forms of enzymes; mol mov db (, or nucleic magnetic resonance (NMR) models [e.g. pc a nest (. Tools for systematic retrieval and analyses of ensembles of structures are not publicly accessible. Ensembles include X-ray structures for a given protein and its complexes; families and subfamilies of proteins that belong to particular structural folds; or a protein and its mutants resolved in the presence of different inhibitors, ligands or substrates. The

discussion several web servers have been developed for characterizing protein dynamics, including eln mo (), an m () and flex serv (). These servers perform coarse grained enm based nm a calculations, and as such are useful for elucidating structure encoded dynamics of proteins. flex serv also offers the option to use distance dependent force constants (), in addition to protocols for coarse grained generation and pc a of trajectories. prod y differs from these as it allows for systematic retrieval and comparative analysis of ensembles of heterogeneous structural datasets. Such datasets includes structural data collected for members of a protein family in complex with different substrates inhibitors. prod y further allows for the quantitative comparison of the results from experimental datasets with theoretically predicted conformational dynamics. In addition, prod y offers the following advantages: (i) it is extensible, interoperable and suitable for use as a toolkit for developing new software; (ii) it provides scripts for automated tasks and batch analyses of large datasets; (iii) it has a flexible API suitable for testing new methods and hypotheses, and benchmarking them against existing methods with minimal effort and without the need to modify the source code; (iv) it allows for producing publication quality figures when used with Python plotting library Matplotlib; and (v) it provides the option to input user defined distance dependent force function or utilize elaborate classes that return force constants based on the type and properties of interacting residues [e.g. based on their secondary structure or sequence separation ()].

conclusion prod y is a free, versatile, easy to use and powerful tool for inferring protein dynamics from both experiments (i.e. pc a of ensembles of structures) and theory (i.e. GNM, an m and EDA of MD snapshots). prod y complements existing tools by allowing the systematic retrieval and analysis of heterogeneous experimental datasets, leveraging on the wealth of structural data deposited in the PDB to gain insights into structure encoded dynamics. In addition, prod y allows for comparison of the results from experimental datasets with theoretically predicted conformational dynamics. Finally, through a flexible python based API, prod y can be used to quickly test and implement new methods and ideas, thus lowering the technical barriers to apply such methods in more complex computational analyses. Funding: National Institutes of Health (1R01GM086238-01 to I.B. and UL1 RR024153 to A.B.).
