The multiplex capability and high yield of current day dna sequencing instruments has made bacterial whole genome sequen-cing a routine affair. The subsequent de novo assembly of reads into contigs has been well addressed. The final step of annotating all relevant genomic features on those contigs can be achieved slowly using existing web and email based systems, but these are not applicable for sensitive data or integrating into computational pipelines. Here we introduce pro kk a a command line software tool to fully annotate a draft bacterial genome in about 10 min on a typical desktop computer. It produces standards compliant output files for further analysis or viewing in genome browsers. Availability and implementation: pro kk a is implemented in Perl and is freely available under an open source GPLv2 license from http://

introduction genome annotation is the process of identifying and labeling all the relevant features on a genome sequence (). At minimum, this should include coordinates of predicted coding regions and their putative products, but it is desirable to go beyond this to non-coding RNAs, signal peptides and so on. There are various online annotation servers (). The NCBI provides a Prokaryotic Genomes Automatic Annotation Pipeline service via email, with a turn-around time measured in days. RAST is a web server for annotating bacterial and archaeal genomes that provides annotation results in under a day (), and xBASE2 does similar in a few hours (). These classes of tools are valuable, but they are not useful where throughput or privacy is critical. Here we present pro kk a a command line software tool that can be installed on any Unix system. pro kk a coordinates a suite of existing software tools to achieve a rich and reliable annotation of genomic bacterial sequences. Where possible, it will exploit multiple processing cores, and a typical bacterial genome can be annotated in $10 min on a quad core desktop computer. It is well suited to iterative models of sequence analysis and integration into genomic software pipelines.

DESCRIPTION
