Motivation: It has been known for more than 2 decades that after RNA polymerase II rnap ii initiates transcription, it can enter into a paused or stalled state immediately downstream of the transcription start site before productive elongation. Recent advances in high throughput genomic technologies facilitated the discovery that rnap ii pausing at promoters is a widespread physiologically regulated phenomenon. The molecular underpinnings of pausing are in completely understood. The cc ctc factor (CTCF) is a ubiquitous nuclear factor that has diverse regulatory functions, including a recently discovered role in promoting rnap ii pausing at splice sites. Results: In this study, we analyzed CTCF binding sites and nascent transcript omic data from three different cell types, and found that promoter proximal CTCF binding is significantly associated with rnap ii pausing.

introduction promoter proximal pausing of RNA polymerase II rnap ii has emerged as a widespread and important step in the regulation of transcription (). The role of pausing is not completely understood, but initial evidence suggests that it allows for precise and rapid transcriptional response to stimuli such as developmental cues or cellular stressors (). The underlying mechanisms of rnap ii pausing are thought to be complex (). Recent publications have reported a few key factors that regulate polymerase pause site entry and release, including GAGA (), c myc (), ELL () and XRN2 (); however, it is not clear whether and how many other complexes are also involved. As such, this area merits further investigation. The cc ctc factor (CTCF) is a multifaceted gene regulator, with demonstrated roles in transcriptional activation repression insulation, imprinting and chromatin remodeling (). In 2011, Shukla et al. published a seminal article, which reported for the first time that CTCF can facilitate exon inclusion by promoting rnap ii pausing at splice sites (). Another recent study postulated that CTCF may regulate vascular endothelial growth factor transcription in part by mediating rnap ii pausing (). Given these reports, and recent observations that at least 2025% of ctcf binding events are proximal to promoters (), we hypothesized that CTCF binding may be a cofactor in mediating promoter proximal rnap ii pausing. To investigate this possibility, we analyzed genome wide nascent RNA data (global nuclear run on followed by sequencing; grose q and empirically determined ctcf binding sites from the only three cell types for which both datasets are publicly available: human cell lines IMR90 (lung fibroblast) and MCF-7 (breast cancer) and mouse embryonic stem cells (mES).

discussion a recent study identified a novel role for CTCF in polymerase pausing at splice sites to facilitate exon inclusion (). Our findings provide the first indication that CTCF is associated with promoter proximal pausing. It is important to note that the study does not demonstrate that CTCF binding is necessary or sufficient for promoter proximal pausing. Substantial additional experimental work is required to uncover the molecular underpinnings of the observed association between CTCF binding and rnap ii dynamics. The greatest degree of association with pausing is observed for ctcf binding sites that are immediately downstream of the TSS. Therefore, an appealing mechanism for the observed association is steric hindrance that is, stably bound CTCF may serve to hinder rnap ii processivity. If this is the case, it is likely that many other transcription factors with binding sites immediately downstream of tss s also associate with rnap ii pausing. It will be possible to test this hypothesis as more transcription factor (TF) chips eq and grose q data are generated from the same cell type. We note, however, that because even sites that are upstream of the TSS are somewhat associated with pausing, steric hindrance is not likely to be the only mechanism involved.
