sequence derived structural and physiochemical features have been frequently used for analysing and predicting structural, functional, expression and interaction profiles of proteins and pep-tides. To facilitate extensive studies of proteins and peptides, we developed a freely available, open source python package called protein in python prop y for calculating the widely used structural and physi-cochemical features of proteins and peptides from amino acid sequence. It computes five feature groups composed of 13 features, including amino acid composition, dipeptide composition, tripeptide composition, normalized moreau bro to autocorrelation, Moran auto-correlation, Geary autocorrelation, sequence order coupling number, quasi sequence order descriptors, composition, transition and distribution of various structural and physicochemical properties and two types of pseudo amino acid composition pse aac descriptors. These features could be generally regarded as different cho us pse aac modes. In addition, it can also easily compute the previous descriptors based on user defined properties, which are automatically available from the aa index database. Availability: The python package, prop y is freely available via

introduction sequence derived structural and physicochemical features have been widely used in the development of machine learning models for predicting protein structural and functional classes (), protein protein interactions (), protein ligand interactions (), subcellular locations and peptides of specific properties (). These features are highly useful for representing and distinguishing proteins or peptides of different structural, functional and interaction profiles. Currently, these structural and physicochemical features of proteins and peptides were routinely used to characterize target proteins in drug target pairs and predict new drug target associations to identify potential drug targets (), following the spirit of chemo genomics. Several programs for computing protein structural and physicochemical features have been developed (); however, they are not comprehensive and can only be limited to a certain kind of features. Additionally, these are not freely and easily accessible. We implemented a selection of sophisticated protein features and provide them as a package for the free and open source software environment python. The prop y package aims at providing the user with comprehensive implementations of these descriptors in a unified framework to allow easy and transparent computation. To our knowledge, prop y is the first open source package computing a large number of protein features based on user defined structural and physicochemical properties. We recommend prop y to analyse and represent the proteins or peptides under investigation. Further, we hope that the package will be helpful when exploring questions concerning the structures, functions and interactions of proteins and peptides in the context of systems biology.

discussion sequence analysis of proteins and peptides has become more and more important in various bioinformatics fields. Apart from the prediction of structural and functional classes of proteins or peptides, there exist a few stand-alone applications to calculate protein peptide descriptors, which are designed to work with drug descriptors in the chemo genomics framework. prop y contains a selection of various cho us pse aac descriptors to analyse, classify and compare complex proteins and peptides. They facilitate to exploit machine learning techniques to drive hypothesis from complex protein or peptide datasets. The usefulness of the features covered by prop y for computing the structural and physicochemical features of proteins and peptides has been validated by a number of published studies (). The prop y implementation of each of these algorithms was extensively tested by using a number of test sequences. The computed descriptor values were compared with the known values for these sequences to ensure that our computation is accurate. prop y is a powerful open source package for the extraction of features of proteins and peptides. In our future work, we plan to apply the integrated features on various biological research questions and extend the range of functions with new promising descriptors for the coming versions of prop y
