Motivation: Model quality assessment programs are used to predict the quality of modeled protein structures. They can be divided into two groups depending on the information they are using: ensemble methods using consensus of many alternative models and methods only using a single model to do its prediction. The consensus methods excel in achieving high correlations between prediction and true quality measures. However, they frequently fail to pick out the best possible model, nor can they be used to generate and score new structures. single model methods on the other hand do not have these inherent shortcomings and can be used both to sample new structures and to improve existing consensus methods. Results: Here, we present an implementation of the ProQ2 program to estimate both local and global model accuracy as part of the Rosetta modeling suite. The current implementation does not only make it possible to run large batch runs locally, but it also opens up a whole new arena for conformational sampling using machine learned scoring functions and to incorporate model accuracy estimation in to various existing modeling schemes. ProQ2 participated in CASP11 and results from CASP11 are used to benchmark the current implementation. Based on results from CASP11 and cameo qe a continuous benchmark of quality estimation methods, it is clear that ProQ2 is the single model method that performs best in both local and global model accuracy. Availability and implementation: https://github.com/bjornwallner/ProQ_scripts

introduction protein structure modeling represents a fundamental challenge in structural bioinformatics and is crucial for a detailed understanding of the biological function of molecules. It can be used to guide and explain experiments, as well as for prediction of proteins whose structure for the most part is unknown (105k known structures vs. 50 000k known sequences). A common technique in structure modeling is to generate many alternative models and then use a program to estimate the model accuracy to select the best model. Alternatively, the estimated accuracy can also be used to assess the absolute quality of a single model, i.e. a measure that is related to similarity to true native structure (). ProQ2 () is a single model method that estimates model accuracy using a support vector machine (SVM) to predict the quality of a protein model by combining structural and sequence based features calculated from the model. The structural based features are contacts between 13 different atom types, residue residue contacts grouping amino acids into six different groups (hydrophobic, positively charged, etc.) and surface accessibility using the same residue groups. The sequence based features are calculated from information predicted from sequence, i.e. secondary structure, surface V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
