One gene can produce multiple transcript variants encoding proteins with different functions. To facilitate visual analysis of transcript variants, we developed protan not which shows protein annotations in the context of genomic sequence. protan not searches InterPro and displays profile matches (protein annotations) alongside gene models, exposing how alternative promoters, splicing and 3 0 end processing add, remove, or remodel functional motifs. To draw attention to these effects, protan not color codes exons by frame and displays a cityscape graphic summarizing exonic sequence at each position. These techniques make visual analysis of alternative transcripts faster and more convenient for biologists. Availability and implementation: protan not is a plug-in App for Integrated Genome Browser, an open source desktop genome browser available from http://www.bioviz.org.

introduction many genes produce multiple transcript variants due to alternative splicing, alternative promoters and alternative 3 0 end processing. Often these transcript variants encode proteins with different amino acid sequences and thus different functions. We and other groups have often used protein annotation methods to detect when this occurs. For example, we used BLOCKS, InterPro and TM-HMM to show that alternative transcription frequently remodels or deletes conserved regions and trans-membrane spans in human and mouse proteins (). However, even now it is difficult for biologists to perform similar analysis. Using Web tools (), biologists can identify conserved regions in proteins encoded by different splice variants, but mapping those regions back onto gene structures is time consuming and error prone. To address this, we developed protan not as a new plug-in extension for the Integrated Genome Browser i gb. i gb is a highly interactive, desktop genome browser that helps biologists explore and analyze experimental data from genomics, especially rnase q data (). Using protan not together with i gb users can achieve deeper insight into how alternative transcription affects protein sequence and function.

conclusion protan not benefits users by exposing how gene structures affect protein sequence and function. As such, protan not complements the MI Bundle, another i gb extension that links genomic features to protein interaction and structure viewers (). Like MI Bundle, protan not highlights relationships between the language of DNA (exons, introns, codons) and the more structure oriented
