Atomistic molecular dynamics simulation is a promising technique to investigate the energetics and dynamics in the protein surface adsorption process which is of high relevance to modern biotechnological applications. To increase the chance of success in simulating the adsorp-tion process, favorable orientations of the protein at the surface must be determined. Here, we present prot pos which is a lightweight and easy to use python package that can predict low energy protein orientations on a surface of interest. It combines a fast conformational sampling algorithm with the energy calculation of GROMACS. The advantage of prot pos is it allows users to select any force fields suitable for the system at hand and provide structural output readily available for further simulation studies. Availability and Implementation: prot pos is freely available for academic and non-profit uses at

introduction understanding the mechanisms of protein adsorption on surfaces is important for many biotechnological applications, such as the design of medical implants, protein biochips, drug delivery systems and point of care devices, etc. By virtue of molecular modeling and simulations, the protein adsorption processes, its dynamics and subsequent protein surface interactions can be studied at the molecular or atomic level of detail. However, a successful simulation of the adsorption process depends largely on the initial protein orientation relative to the surface (). To avoid sampling protein trajectory which will eventually fail to adsorb, a work-around is to firstly determine the preferred orientations of the protein and use them as starting structures in molecular simulations. Essentially, a search for the low energy protein orientation on a given surface is an optimization process which includes a conformation generation strategy and a scoring function. For the former, a systematic rotation (and translation) of the protein or a Monte Carlo simulation is commonly used (). For this structure determination problem, a simplified scoring function accounting for only protein surface interactions is usually preferred for higher computational efficiency. Interaction parameters can be taken from an empirical force field or modification from the scoring function of a docking method (). Interestingly, unlike other structure prediction problems such as protein ligand docking or protein protein docking where numerous tools exist to simplify the prediction task, there are only limited choices available for fast protein surface structure prediction. One such option is rosetta surface () which is included in the Rosetta molecular modeling package, and hence the use of rosetta surface entails a deep learning curve. Other prediction methods mentioned above, to our knowledge, are unavailable publicly for general use. Hence, to fill this gap, we have developed a self contained lightweight and easy to use software package called prediction of PROTein Preferred Orientation on a Surface prot pos based on the protein surface docking method described in (). It combines particle swarm optimization (PSO) algorithm () with energy minimization to perform global and local search over six degrees of freedom of the protein translation and rotation on V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
