Motivation: Accurate binding free energy functions for protein– protein interactions are imperative for a wide range of purposes. Their construction is predicated upon ascertaining the factors that influence binding and their relative importance. A recent benchmark of binding affinities has allowed, for the first time, the evaluation and construction of binding free energy models using a diverse set of complexes, and a systematic assessment of our ability to model the energetics of conformational changes. Results: We construct a large set of molecular descriptors using commonly available tools, introducing the use of energetic factors associated with conformational changes and disorder to order transitions, as well as features calculated on structural ensembles. The descriptors are used to train and test a binding free energy model using a consensus of four machine learning algorithms, whose performance constitutes a significant improvement over the other state of the art empirical free energy functions tested. The internal workings of the learners show how the descriptors are used, illuminating the determinants of protein protein binding. Availability: The molecular descriptor set and descriptor values for all complexes are available in the Supplementary Material. A web server for the learners and coordinates for the bound and unbound structures can be accessed from the website:

introduction protein protein interactions are involved in almost all biological processes, and the structural and thermodynamic characterization of protein interaction networks is a major goal of functional genomics. As progress is made in the structural annotation of interaction networks (), determining binding free energies is recognized as an important step in the modelling of biological systems (). The calculation of protein protein binding affinities is also fundamental to many endeavours in structural bioinformatics, ranging from the discovery of peptide * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. therapeutics () and docking () to protein engineering (), de novo interface design () and computational mutagenesis (Ben). Understanding the determinants of protein binding is thus a question of huge practical relevance, and the construction of accurate and efficient binding free energy functions of great importance. Methods of calculating protein protein binding free energies vary dramatically from one another in terms of physical plausibility, accuracy and computational cost. At one end of the spectrum lies exact methods, such as free energy perturbation and thermodynamic integration (), and end-point methods, such as mm pbs a and linear interaction analysis (). While in principle highly accurate, these methods use extensive molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo sampling, and are usually only applicable where the bound and unbound states have significant overlap. Thus, they can only be applied to proteins for which conformational changes are minimal and are only practical on a case by case basis or for low throughput studies. Empirical energy functions are much faster, and fall into three categories. The first of these are statistical potentials, in which the relative positions of atoms or residues observed in experimental structures are used to infer a potential of mean force (). Second are thermodynamic equations, in which the energy is calculated as a sum of terms arising from relevant phenomena (). The relative contributions of the terms can be determined by linear regression against known binding affinities (), or by other other means (). Third, there are functions which implicitly estimate binding free energies due to their being optimized for purposes such as docking, estimating free energy differences between mutants () or identifying biological assemblies (). Most previous binding free energy models have been parametrized and or evaluated on a narrow range of proteins. Flexible proteins were either explicitly rejected or implicitly underrepresented due to datasets being derived from previous works. Further, the complexes comprised either exclusively of protease inhibitor pairs () or mostly protease inhibitor interactions with a few others, such as the insulin

conclusion the recent publication of a large set of binding free energies has allowed an unprecedented opportunity to construct and evaluate predictive energy models. We have derived a large molecular descriptor set covering many aspects of protein binding including unbound to bound transitions, de solvation effects and entropy changes. This descriptor set was used to train and evaluate four binding free energy models. These models, and their consensus, can predict binding energies with greater accuracy than previous empirical functions, even when the ensemble and conformational descriptors are omitted. For the rigid proteins tested, the consensus model can predict the affinities to within the accuracy expected from experimental and environmental uncertainties. The internal working of the learners also allow the evaluation of feature importance. This shows that the London dispersion energy, vibrational entropy, statistical potentials and interface packing terms have the most predictive value, and that hydrophobic burial and hydrogen bonding are also important determinants of binding affinity. Additionally, retraining the models using descriptor subsets revealed that knowledge of unbound to bound conformational changes improves the performance of the consensus model, and that the greatest improvement is attained when energies are averaged over conformational ensembles. This work also highlights the importance of using experimental data validated by multiple experiments, and provides a benchmark of high quality affinities for a diverse range of complexes.
