Motivation: Earlier studies of protein structure revealed closed loops with a characteristic size 25–30 residues and ring like shape as a basic universal structural element of globular proteins. Elementary functional loops efl s have specific signatures and provide functional residues important for binding activation and principal chemical transformation steps of the enzymatic reaction. The goal of this work is to show how these functional loops evolved from pre domain peptides and to find a set of prototypes from which the efl s of contemporary proteins originated. Results: This article describes a computational method for deriving prototypes of efl s based on the sequences of complete genomes. The procedure comprises the iterative derivation of sequence profiles followed by their hierarchical clustering. The scoring function takes into account information content on profile positions, thus preserving the signature. The statistical significance of scores is evaluated from the empirical distribution of scores of the background model. A set of prototypes of efl s from archaeal proteomes is derived. This set delineates evolutionary connections between major functions and illuminates how folds and functions emerged in pre domain evolution as a combination of prototypes.

introduction enzymes are involved in all processes in living organisms. Well before the first protein sequence and structure were determined (), the function of enzymes became one of the central questions in biochemical studies. Despite the wealth of experimental data available nowadays, the functions of the majority of proteins are still uncharacterized (). Since the presence of certain biochemical activities is typically sought for, while all other possible activities (e.g. promiscuous functions) are ignored (), experimental determination of enzymatic function is in most cases confirm ative. Besides, biochemical assays are expensive, are subject to in vitro experimental conditions, and they can not be run on a genomic scale. All the above makes prediction of enzymatic function with computational methods an important alternative approach. There are several general assumptions on which such methods are based: (i) homologous proteins have similar functions; (ii) most of the functional variants emerged as a result of divergence from a common ancestor; (iii) structural homologs, so called fold superfamilies, persist down to 25% of sequence identity; (iv) divergence below 25% of sequence identity leads to the emergence of families with different organism, substrate, and or tissue specificities (). Though enzymatic * To whom correspondence should be addressed. function can be inferred by sequence and structure similarity, the relations between sequence, structure and function are far from being completely understood. Many folds display vast functional diversity. For example, structurally similar / barrels provide scaffolds to a number of biochemical functions (), while particular biochemical functions can be performed by different protein folds, e.g. hydrolase (). The contemporary evolution of protein structure and function takes place through mutations (), recombination and domain swapping and or interactions (). However, it is rather obvious that this process was preceded by the emergence of a first set of protein domain structures folds with a limited repertoire of biochemical functions. These structures emerged from peptides with rudimentary non-specific catalytic activities in the pre domain stage of evolution (). Understanding of this process is important for characterizing the most ancient functions and their connections to the modern proteins. The difficulties in understanding and, more importantly, in predicting protein function, are well reflected in the diversity of their descriptions. Enzymatic reactions are classified in enzyme nomenclature (EC) by the biochemical transformation and the substrate (). According to MACiE database, there could be different mechanisms employed for the same transformation (). Different biochemical reactions can have the same core mechanism, as it is exemplified by mechanistically diverse superfamilies (). In order to reconcile different approaches and to develop a generic description of enzymatic functions, one has to start from considering their elementary units which provide binding activation and principal chemical transformation steps of the whole reaction. Then it should be found out how combinations of these units result in a variety of enzymatic reactions, and how protein folds restrict the possibility of performing a particular biochemical transformation or binding a certain substrate. The first question that arises in this context is what elements of protein folds serve as elementary units of function. What were the structures of these units in pre domain evolution, and how did they affect the structures of modern proteins? Earlier studies have shown that soluble proteins contain a basic universal element, stemming from the polymer nature of polypeptide chains, namely closed loops or returns of the polypeptide chain backbone with a typical size of 2530 amino acid residues (). Any protein fold can be decomposed into sets of consecutively connected closed loops (), indicating their independence in the evolutionary past (). Can we reconstruct the pre-biotic peptides that gave rise to the elementary functional units of modern proteins? Our hypothesis is that a functional signature revealing the type of page i498 i497i503
