Motivation: Protein phosphorylation is the most common post-translational modification (PTM) regulating major cellular processes through highly dynamic and complex signaling pathways. large scale comparative phospho proteomic studies have frequently been done on whole cells or organs by conventional bottom up mass spec-trometry approaches, i.e at the phosphopeptide level. Using this approach , there is no way to know from where the phosphopeptide signal originated. Also, as a consequence of the scale of these studies, important information on the localization of phosphorylation sites in subcellular compartments (SCs) is not surveyed. Results: Here, we present a first account of the emerging field of subcellular phospho proteomics where a support vector machine (SVM) approach was combined with a novel algorithm of discrete wavelet transform (DWT) to facilitate the identification of compartment specific phosphorylation sites and to unravel the intricate regulation of protein phosphorylation. Our data reveal that the subcellular phosphorylation distribution is compartment type dependent and that the phosphorylation displays site specific sequence motifs that diverge between SCs. Availability and implementation: The method and database both are available as a web server at: http://bioinfo.

introduction protein phosphorylation is a reversible post-translational modification (PTM) regulating major cellular processes such as cell division, growth and differentiation through highly dynamic and complex signaling pathways. Approximately one third of proteins encoded by the human genome are presumed to be phosphorylated during their life cycle (). Mass spectrometry (MS) has been successfully used to identify protein phosphorylation in specific pathways and for global phospho proteomic analysis (). However, phospho proteomic approaches do not evaluate the subcellular localization of the phosphorylated forms of proteins, which is an important factor for understanding the roles of protein phosphorylation on a global scale and the function of protein phosphorylation s in regulating biological processes. Unfortunately, this understanding is limited by conventional MS technology to identify protein phosphorylation s and their subcellular localization (). Subcellular phospho proteomics still represents a major analytical challenge, as only a few studies were reported over the past 5 years although efficient phosphopeptide enrichment methods were available since. This is in stark contrast to the large number of subcellular proteomics studies that have been reported over the same time period, reviewed by. Several examples of subcellular phospho proteomics were chosen to illustrate how this emerging field already uncovered important biological paradigms as shown by. Although subcellular phospho proteomics has the potential to uncover new regulatory pathways, the in depth mapping of protein phosphorylation at the subcellular level and the further understanding of their biological significance require independent methods. Computational methods for identifying phosphorylation sites have become increasingly popular, which can predict potential targets to significantly reduce the number of candidates that need to be verified by MS. A recent review by Trost and kusa lik (2011) described a comprehensive list of these methods. Most current predictors focus on organism specific or kinase specific phosphorylation sites, and such predictors do not take into account for specific subcellular compartment (SC). Every subcellular context is highly dynamic because the expressed proteins, their abundance and their post-translational modifications (including phosphorylation) depend on the physiological state of the cell (). Therefore, annotating the subcellular phospho proteome is important as can be viewed from the following four aspects. (i) It can offer helpful clues or insights about their functions; particularly, one of the fundamental goals in proteomics and cell biology is to identify the functions of proteins in the context of a specific compartment. (ii) It can indicate in what kind of and how subcellular contexts the proteins interact with other molecules and with each other; this is particularly pivotal for the in depth study of in vivo phosphorylation networks, one of the current hot topics in phospho proteomics. (iii) It can help our understanding of the intricate phosphorylation pathways that regulate biological processes at the subcellular level (), and hence, it is indispensable for many studies in system *To whom correspondence should be addressed. biology. (iv) It is extremely useful for identifying and prioritizing drug targets (http://www.biocompare.com/Editorial-Articles/ 41619 subcellular targeting of proteins and drugs during the process of drug development. To efficiently accelerate development of the highly complex subcellular phospho proteomic an integrated platform combining experimentally data querying and unknown data annotation is highly demanded. Here, we developed a platform that provides both a searchable online database and a computational tool to efficiently and reliably accumulate the subcellular phospho proteome for further experimental investigation. In this work, we report the most thorough characterization of subcellular phospho proteome in humans to date. Originally, reliable experimental phospho proteomic data with verified information of subcellular localization in humans were collected from several sources and used to profile subcellular phospho proteome. Not only do we find that most phosphorylation proteins are uniquely resided in a specific SC, but also we show that the distribution of phosphorylated proteins in SCs is compartment specific. Functional enrichment analysis and protein protein network analysis reveal that the phosphorylation signaling pathways of SCs have higher specialization. Moreover, our large dataset allows us to delineate type specific phosphorylation sequence motifs contrary to general phospho proteome and we show that there are sequence motifs of specific SCs. Overall, our observations highlight compartment specific phosphorylation signaling pathways, which stress the importance of mapping protein phosphorylation in the physiologically relevant SC. Later, we developed a bioinformatics tool termed subp hosp red which combines a novel discrete wavelet transform (DWT) algorithm with a support vector machine (SVM) approach to identify phosphorylation sites for different SCs in humans. As one innovative character of our method, the most attractive character of wavelet transform is the ability to elucidate simultaneously both the spectral and temporal information () that was used for encoding as features for PTM prediction. cross validation tests show that the DWT algorithm can boost predictive performance and obtain encouraging prediction results for each compartment. Additionally, the independent test demonstrates that the proposed method outperforms mu site () when the customized models use the same training datasets as subp hosp red. For subp hosp red we have trained eight compartment specific phosphorylation prediction models [cell membrane (CM), nucleus (NU), cytoplasm (CY), mitochondrion (MI), Golgi apparatus (GA), endoplasmic reticulum (ER), secretion (SE) and lysosome (LY)] using datasets from our database sub phos db. Finally, the platform integrated sub phos db database and subp hosp red predictor are freely available for academic research at: http://bioinfo.ncu.edu.cn/SubPhos.aspx.
