Investigation of transcription factors (TFs) is of extreme significance for gleaning more information about the mechanisms underlying the dynamic transcriptional regulatory network. Herein, prot f is constructed to serve as a comprehensive data resource and phylo genomics analysis platform for prokaryotic TFs. It has many prominent characteristics: (i) detailed annotation information, including basic sequence features, domain organization, sequence homolog and sequence composition, was extensively collected, and then visually displayed for each TF entry in all prokaryotic genomes; (ii) work set was employed as the basic frame to provide an efficient way to organize the retrieved data and save intermediate records; and (iii) a number of elaborated tools for phylo genomics analysis were implemented to investigate the evolutionary roles of specific TFs. In conclusion, prot f dedicates to the prokaryotic TFs with integrated multi-function, which will become a valuable resource for prokaryotic transcriptional regulatory network in the post genomic era.

introduction identification classification and phylo genomics analysis of transcription factors (TFs) within or among specific organisms can help us to highlight how they evolutionarily conserved or diverse in order to fit in the ever changing environment effectively (). In the past decade, a number of specialized TF databases were established. The TRANSFAC and DBD databases were released as a universal data source covering putative TFs for all completely sequenced genomes and trs db contains the TFs derived from nine eukaryotic species (). Within the plant kingdom, progressively integrated and comprehensively annotated biological databases had * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First authors been constructed, such as plant tf db (), dpt f (), ra rtf (), planta pdb (), to bfa c (), dat fap (), grassi us () and plnt fdb (). Various information of TFs in animal are abundantly explored by databases such as tfc at (), tf db (), fly tf () and it fp (). In addition, fungal TFs can be accessed from ft fd (). Up to now, however, no comprehensive platform for computational repository is available to provide access to the large complete sets of prokaryotic TFs. reg trans base is a database of regulatory interactions in prokaryotes, which captures the knowledge in public scientific literature and contains 1131 TFs in the latest version (). oot fd is a database aimed at capturing information regarding the polypeptide interactions, which comprise and define the properties of TFs with limited species and TF entries (). extra train provides integrated and easily manageable information for 679 816 extra genic regions and for the genes delimiting each of them. For TF, it only contains 16 TF families (). In addition, the currently developed arac xy ls only holds information about TF family AraC in bacteria and the bact regulators contains three TF families (TetR, AraC and i clr in bacteria and archaea (). db tbs (), regulon db (), tractor db (), ctf base () and archaea tf () only aim to focus on the TFs in Bacillus subtilis, Escherichia coli, gamma-proteobacteria, cyanobacteria and archaea, respectively. Herein, a new TF database prot f is constructed to provide an integrated useful resource for TFs research and facilitate further investigation of transcriptional regulatory network in prokaryotes. In comparison with other comprehensive TF databases, prot f contains the following prominent characteristics: (i) offered an extensively detailed annotation information of each TF entry in all the completely sequenced prokaryotic genomes; (ii) employed the work set as the basic frame to well organize the retrieved data and save intermediate records; and (iii) implemented a number of phylo genomics analysis tools to investigate the evolutionary roles of specific TFs in or across different prokaryotic organisms. In conclusion, prot f is dedicates to the prokaryotic TFs with multiple integrated phylo genomics function page 2494 24932495
