We present proteo matic an operating system independent and user friendly platform that enables the construction and execution of MS/MS data evaluation pipelines using free and commercial software. Required external programs such as for peptide identification are downloaded automatically in the case of free software. Due to a strict separation of functionality and presentation, and support for multiple scripting languages, new processing steps can be added easily. Availability and Implementation: proteo matic is implemented in c qt scripts are implemented in Ruby, Python and PHP. All source code is released under the LGPL. Source code and installers for Windows, Mac OS X, and Linux are freely available at

introduction mass spectrometry has evolved as a powerful tool for the high throughput analysis of complex protein mixtures, producing immense amounts of data (). Dedicated software is essential for the identification of peptides and proteins from tandem mass spectra (MS/MS). In addition to commercial software, the increasing availability of free tools for different purposes allows for manifold alterations in the choice of individual programs and their arrangement in an MS/MS data evaluation pipeline. Most programs are controlled via the command line interface (CLI), which is necessary in order for the program to be included into an automated pipeline. On the other hand, this mode of interaction makes the program less accessible to users. Some programs are delivered with a dedicated graphical user interface (GUI), which facilitates changing parameters and running the program. However, in order to create an automated processing pipeline in which multiple programs are chained together, CLI tools must be used and programming knowledge is required. Here, we report on proteo matic a versatile and user friendly platform for the construction of MS/MS data processing pipelines. Although alternatives exist (), we chose to design a system that implements a strict separation of functionality and the GUI, where new processing steps
