Motivation: The functional impact of small molecules is increasingly being assessed in different eukaryotic species through large scale phenotypic screening initiatives. Identifying the targets of these molecules is crucial to mechanistically understand their function and uncover new therapeutically relevant modes of action. However, despite extensive work carried out in model organisms and human, it is still unclear to what extent one can use information obtained in one species to make predictions in other species. Results: Here, for the first time, we explore and validate at a large scale the use of protein hom-ology relationships to predict the targets of small molecules across different species. Our results show that exploiting target homology can significantly improve the predictions, especially for molecules experimentally tested in other species. Interestingly, when considering separately orthology and paralogy relationships, we observe that mapping small molecule interactions among ortho-logs improves prediction accuracy, while including paralogs does not improve and even sometimes worsens the prediction accuracy. Overall, our results provide a novel approach to integrate chemical screening results across multiple species and highlight the promises and remaining challenges of using protein homology for small molecule target identification. Availability and implementation: homology based predictions can be tested on our website http:// www swiss target prediction ch
introduction small molecules provide remarkable tools to modulate molecular mechanisms in cells, with therapeutic applications in human and veterinary, biotechnological or agricultural applications in many other species from animals, to plants, to microorganisms. Small molecules displaying bioactivity in a given organism typically bind specific proteins and modify their activity. Mapping the actual protein targets of small molecules is therefore a key step toward a better understanding of their mechanisms of action. In addition, several molecules bind to more than one target, which can be unrelated in terms of both sequence and function (). These secondary targets are typically responsible for many favorable or unfavorable side effects of known drugs. Unraveling small molecule secondary targets is helpful to predict and elucidate these side effects (). Moreover, it is a promising approach to repurpose existing drugs toward new applications by exploiting their activity on other proteins than those they were initially developed for (). Several experimental and computational strategies have been developed to determine the interacting partners and the activity of small molecules (). Small molecules can be screened in vitro against large arrays of proteins such as kinases or G protein coupled receptors (). In parallel, in vivo screening approaches are increasingly being developed using model organisms such as yeast () or zebrafish (). Several of these chemo genomics screens use the power of genetics to provide indirect information about the actual targets of small molecules, for instance by comparing the activity of small molecules across different mutant strains in yeast (). From the computational point of view, most target prediction approaches use similarity relationships between a new molecule and known ligands (). There top predicted targets are identified as those with one or more ligands that display high similarity with the query molecule. Different similarity measures between molecules can be used for this purpose (). Other studies have explored the use of additional information, such as side effect similarity () or gene expression profile similarity () to expand the similarity beyond features determined solely by the molecular structure of the compounds. Other groups have also used protein structures to predict small molecule targets and potential binding modes (). Computational target prediction tools are especially useful to analyze the results of high throughput phenotypic assays that are increasingly being used to identify bioactive compounds in different species but do not provide direct information about their targets (). Data from thousands of such assays are available in public repositories such as ChemBank () or PubChem (). In silico target predictions have been successfully applied to the results of phenotypic screening assays performed in diverse systems ranging from cell lines () to zebrafish (). Unfortunately, most current experimental and computational approaches to determine small molecule targets focus on one species such as human, mouse or rat. As such, information about protein orthology relationships to make predictions in less studied species or improve predictions in model organisms by integrating data from other species has been mostly disregarded. For instance, only a handful of recent studies investigated the properties of ligands binding to related proteins in distinct organisms () or within the same organism (). This is in stark contrast with many areas of biology and bioinformatics where the ability to transfer results obtained in one organism to others is a central dogma. For instance, mapping protein function based on orthology has proved extremely useful (). Protein structure predictions rely heavily on the existence of homologous proteins with available crystal structures (). protein protein interaction predictions also strongly benefit from information obtained in orthologous species (). All these studies have clearly established the use of homology relationships to better predict the properties of proteins. This lack in conceptual understanding and computational techniques to exploit target homology in small molecule protein interaction predictions is strongly limiting the scope of chemo informatics approaches for two main reasons. First, beyond model organisms such as human or rat, very few data are available in public databases for other organisms (e.g. zebrafish and bacteria) and accurate predictions would be very useful in these species. Second, it would be highly desirable to integrate data obtained in close orthologous species to improve existing techniques predicting small molecule protein interactions, even in well studied organisms. Understanding how small molecule targets can be mapped across species is also critically important for therapeutic applications since small molecules of therapeutic interest are first tested in model organisms (e.g. mouse or rat) before being considered for clinical trials in human. Here, we introduce a new strategy to integrate data from different species to improve small molecule target predictions. Our results reveal that protein orthology leads to improve prediction accuracy and is powerful to uncover new small molecule protein interactions, especially in species with less experimental data. Interestingly, paralogy relationships do not appear to improve prediction accuracy. Finally, our findings provide a strong basis for expanding small molecule protein target predictions beyond well studied organisms.

discussion mapping the properties of proteins across different species using orthology is a well established way of harnessing the wealth of data available in some organisms to make new and accurate predictions in others. However, this property has not been exploited to predict interactions between proteins and small molecule ligands. Here, we observe that target prediction accuracy is improved, both in terms of AUC and of the fraction of molecules with at least one correct target among the top predicted ones, when including data from other organisms in all four species analyzed in this work. This is especially striking when the query molecule has been already tested in some other species, which corresponds to the most straightforward way of mapping small molecule protein interactions across species (). The much larger number of potential targets that can be predicted using orthology (and) can sometimes result in lower number of correct predictions among the top 15 predicted targets (). However, when including only targets on which ligands have been tested in previous assays (here in version 16 of ch embl we observe that target orthology relationships lead to a clear improvement, especially in rat, mouse and cow (). This is likely because targets used in older assays are often reused in new ones, as observed in. First many of these 'old' targets have been selected based on their therapeutic or biotechnological interest and therefore are more likely to be studied. Second, when planning new experiments, researchers are typically guided by previous successful studies and therefore tend to preferentially study targets with already known ligands. Last, and possibly most importantly, 'old' targets often have well established experimental assays, possibly commercially available, that are more likely to be reused by experimentalists, rather than setting up a whole new assay for new targets. For these reasons, it is not surprising that orthology based predictions resulting in many more potential targets give lower performance in terms of the fraction of ligands with validated targets among the top predictions (and B). However, when correcting for the bias toward reusing the same targets in experimental studies, we see a clear improvement in the predictions (and D). Based on the improved accuracy when considering only 'old' targets, it is tempting to speculate that many of the orthology based predictions for new targets, especially in rat, mouse and cow, may actually be correct, but simply have not been tested. We observed that mapping small molecule targets between paralogs is often detrimental to the predictions. This likely reflects several factors. First, evolutionary studies indicate that paralogs have diverged more than orthologs. As a consequence, protein function is often more conserved among orthologs than paralogs (). In terms of protein ligand interactions, previous work also suggested that orthologous proteins share more of their ligands. Number of proteins that can be predicted as small molecule targets in different species using orthology relationships from known human, rat, mouse and cow protein targets shows how many of them are available in our predictions without including homology relationships. Column 4 shows how many in total are available for predictions (, gray bars). Column 5 shows how many of the targets in our dataset are available in our predictions when including target orthology relationships. Column 6 shows how many in total are available for predictions when considering target orthology relationships (, green bars) compared with paralogs (Kr ger and Overington, 2012). Second, small molecules are often designed to target only some specific members of a protein family (e.g. specific kinase inhibitors). Therefore, mapping their interactions within a family of paralogs may often lead to false positives. Although some of these results might have been guessed, our work demonstrates for the first time that paralogy relationships are in general not appropriate for transferring small molecule target interactions within an organism. To validate and compare predictions with and without orthology relationships, we used AUC and the fraction of ligands with at least one correct target among the top 15 predictions. This strategy does not require fixing an arbitrary threshold on the target scores, which may not be the same for all ligands, and takes a more pragmatic approach (correct prediction among the top predicted targets), which corresponds to what can be reasonably tested experimentally. Other studies have used measures such as sensitivity and specificity assuming a fixed and uniform threshold to separate interacting from noninteracting pairs (). A natural question is whether orthology based predictions will be as successful in more distant species, such as those displayed in. Unfortunately, much less data are available in most species apart from human, rat, mouse and cow. For instance, horse, zebrafish or worm have less than five targets each with reported binding data in ch embl. When attempting to check the predictions in these species with little interaction data, we could not find significant validations of the predictions. However, because of the sparsity of data, we expect that this observation may not truly reflect the reality. In particular, orthology based target predictions are likely to be useful in species like zebrafish, as attested by many biological studies that map small molecule activity across vertebrate species (). Our work is the first attempt to establish the use of protein homology for bioactive small molecule target predictions at a large scale. Overall, we observe that clear improvement can be achieved by using target orthology, whereas paralogy relationships do not result in significantly better predictions. In this work, we used our previously published method () to determine ligand similarity and ligand target interaction scores. However, the idea of integrating orthology relationships into target predictions can be easily generalized to other small molecule similarity metrics. Our analysis also reveals a strong bias in recent small molecule protein interaction datasets where the same targets are used over and over. This aspect should be considered when benchmarking cross species target prediction approaches. Although there are many practical reasons for this bias, this work could serve as a guide to develop new assays to test potentially interesting targets in different species. These would increase our sampling of the ligand space for many proteins, which could then further improve the in silico predictions from model organisms to humans. homology based predictions can be tested at our website: http://www.swisstargetprediction.ch.
