Motivation: Proteins are responsible for a multitude of vital tasks in all living organisms. Given that a proteins function and role are strongly related to its subcellular location, protein location prediction is an important research area. While proteins move from one location to another and can localize to multiple locations, most existing location prediction systems assign only a single location per protein. A few recent systems attempt to predict multiple locations for proteins, however, their performance leaves much room for improvement. Moreover, such systems do not capture dependencies among locations and usually consider locations as independent. We hypothesize that a multi location predictor that captures location inter-dependencies can improve location predictions for proteins. Results: We introduce a probabilistic generative model for protein localization, and develop a system based on it which we call md loc that utilizes inter-dependencies among locations to predict multiple locations for proteins. The model captures location inter-dependencies using Bayesian networks and represents dependency between features and locations using a mixture model. We use iterative processes for learning model parameters and for estimating protein locations. We evaluate our classifier md loc on a dataset of single and multi localized proteins derived from the dbm loc dataset, which is the most comprehensive protein multi localization dataset currently available. Our results, obtained by using md loc significantly improve upon results obtained by an initial simpler classifier, as well as on results reported by other top systems.

introduction proteins are responsible for a multitude of diverse vital tasks in all living organisms (). Given that a protein's function and role are strongly related to its subcellular location, protein location prediction is an important research area (). Furthermore, the location of a protein helps understand the protein's prospective utility as a drug target (). Methods for determining protein locations include experimental as well as high throughput computational ones. The experimental methods accurately determine protein locations, but are typically time consuming and are typically not cost effective for finding locations for a large number of proteins. Such methods include mass spectrometry () and green fluorescence detection (). On the other hand, the computational methods are fast, and can potentially predict locations for proteins whose actual locations have not yet been experimentally determined. Most of the prediction systems represent proteins using sequence derived features and utilize machine learning methods (e.g.). Proteins move from one location to another and localize to multiple subcellular compartments (). For instance, the enzyme TREX1, which assists in DNA repair, is V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
