We present a web server to predict the functional effect of single or multiple amino acid substitutions, insertions and deletions using the prediction tool prove an. The server provides rapid analysis of protein variants from any organisms, and also supports high throughput analysis for human and mouse variants at both the genomic and protein levels. Availability and implementation: The web server is freely available and open to all users with no login requirements at http://provean.

introduction large scale genotyping and genome re-sequencing projects have generated a large amount of sequence variant data for healthy and diseased individuals in human and model organisms. Sequence variants may reside in the protein coding or non-coding regions of the genome. Whereas non-coding variants can potentially play a regulatory role and affect gene expression, coding variants can affect protein function and activity by altering the gene product such as substitution, insertion or deletion of amino acids, frameshift or truncation. As the number of genome wide variants is usually large, it is a challenging problem to identify the causal variant for a disease or specific phenotype of interest. For this purpose, computational tools such as poly phen () and SIFT () were developed to provide functional predictions for coding variants. Since then many other tools have been developed until recently (). We have developed a new tool Protein Variation Effect Analyzer prove an which uses an alignment based score approach (). Unlike most existing tools, prove an can generate predictions not only for single amino acid substitutions but also for multiple amino acid substitutions, insertions, and deletions using the same underlying scoring scheme as the original prove an web server () was limited to supporting the analysis of single protein queries, we have expanded the prove an web server to support high throughput online analysis using the prove an tool. The prove an web server can now provide precomputed prediction for large sets of genome wide nucleotide or amino acid variants for both human and mouse. For the original single protein query function, run time has been greatly improved in the current new version by storing and reusing previously computed homologous protein sequences (supporting sequences) information for query proteins.

discussion to provide binary predictions, the cut off for prove an scores was set to 2.5 for high balanced accuracy. However, users can reapply their own cutoffs for their analysis to achieve either higher sensitivity or higher specificity. The sensitivity and specificity obtained using different score cutoffs are shown in the Supplementary Material (Supplementary). It was shown that the performance of prove an for single amino acid substitutions is comparable with other tools (). Here we also examine the prediction consistency with other tools, SIFT and PolyPhen-2, using the UniProt human polymorphisms and disease mutations dataset. The three tools agree on a large portion of the variants, but there are still many variants for which three tools make different predictions. The results are summarized using Venn diagrams in the Supplementary Material (Supplementary).
