A polygenic risk score (PRS) is a sum of trait associated alleles across many genetic loci, typically weighted by effect sizes estimated from a genome wide association study. The application of PRS has grown in recent years as their utility for detecting shared genetic aetiology among traits has become appreciated; PRS can also be used to establish the presence of a genetic signal in under-powered studies, to infer the genetic architecture of a trait, for screening in clinical trials, and can act as a biomarker for a phenotype. Here we present the first dedicated PRS software, prs ice (precise), for calculating, applying, evaluating and plotting the results of PRS. prs ice can calculate PRS at a large number of thresholds ( high resolution ) to provide the best fit PRS, as well as provide results calculated at broad p value thresholds, can thin Single Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) according to linkage disequilibrium and p value or use all SNPs, handles genotyped and imputed data, can calculate and incorporate ancestry informative variables, and can apply PRS across multiple traits in a single run. We exemplify the use of prs ice via application to data on schizophrenia, major depres-sive disorder and smoking, illustrate the importance of identifying the best fit PRS and estimate a p value significance threshold for high resolution PRS studies. Availability and implementation: prs ice is written in R, including wrappers for bash data management scripts and PLINK-1.9 to minimize computational time. prs ice runs as a command line program with a variety of user options and is freely available for download from http://PRSice.info Contact:

introduction the polygenic model of human phenotypes has long been hypothesized, but only in recent years have the results from genome wide association study g was revealed that much of the genetic basis for most complex traits comprises small effects of hundreds or even thousands of variants. For clinical outcomes, this polygenic effect can be considered a genetic liability to disease risk. While prediction of phenotype from an individual's genetic profile is compromised by this polygenic ity the application of polygenic risk scores (PRS) has shown that prediction is sufficiently accurate for a number of applications. A PRS for an individual is a summation of their genotypes at variants genome wide weighted by effect sizes on a trait of interest. Effect sizes are typically estimated from published g was results, and only variants exceeding a p value threshold, P T , are included (). Since even large g was achieve only marginal evidence for association for many causal variants, PRS are usually calculated at a set of p value thresholds, e.g. P T  1  10 5 ;with no effect and using effect size estimates from published g was can provide a reliable indicator of genetic liability. This has motivated several other applications, including polygenic Mendelian Randomisation (), where causality of potential intermediate phenotypes in a disease pathway can be tested (), use of PRS as biomarkers, and the enrolment of clinical trial participants according to risk (). Here we describe the first dedicated and fully automated software package for the application of prsp rs ice. prs ice has a high resolution option that returns the best fit PRS, has a flexible set of user options intended to capture current standard practices in PRS studies and the different applications of PRS, and produces plots for inspection of results. We also perform a simulation study to estimate a p value significance threshold for high resolution PRS studies.

discussion here we have described our prs ice software, illustrating its use with three PRS studies. We have illustrated the potential benefit of obtaining the best fit PRS and have estimated a corresponding significance threshold. There is great potential for the future application of PRS in genetics: for gaining insights into the genetic architecture of a trait by comparing observed PRS with theoretical expectations across a range of P T (), for assessing the genetic overlap of a trait(s) across populations, for use as biomarkers, as instrumental variables, or even to provide evolutionary insights (). The PRS approach, and prs ice software, could be extended to test the effects of copy number variants, epigenetic markers and more. We believe. Bar plot from prs ice showing results at broad p value thresholds for Schizophrenia PRS predicting MDD status. A bar for the best fit PRS from the high resolution run is also included. high resolution prs ice plot for SCZ predicting MDD status. The thick line connects points at the broad p value thresholds of prs ice that prs ice can simplify PRS studies greatly, expand the application of PRS and aid the implementation of best practice in PRS studies.
