The Plant Small RNA Maker Site p sams is a web tool for the simple and automated design of artificial miRNAs a mirnas and synthetic transacting small interfering RNAs synta sirnas for efficient and specific targeted gene silencing in plants. p sams includes two applications , p sams a mirna Designer and p sams synta sirna Designer. The navigation through both applications is wizard assisted and the job runtime is relatively short. Both applications output the sequence of designed small RNA(s), and the sequence of the two oligonucleotides required for cloning into B/c compatible vectors. Availability and implementation: The p sams website is available at

introduction artificial miRNAs a mirnas and synthetic trans-acting small interfering RNAs synta sirnas are two classes of designed small RNAs used to silence plant transcripts with high sequence complementarity (). a mirna and synta sirna differ in their biogenesis but are functionally similar. Methods to computationally design plant small RNAs are based on several criteria, including the requirement for a high degree of small rna target RNA base pairing (). We recently reported efficient molecular methods to generate a mirna and synta sirna constructs by ligation of synthesized dsDNA oligonucleotides that include the a mirna or synta sirna sequence into 'B/c' expression vectors (). B/c a mirna vectors were tested in both monocots and eu dicots and express a single a mirna that targets one or multiple sequence related transcripts. B/c synta sirna vectors express several synta sirnas targeting sequence unrelated transcripts in Arabidopsis and closely related species. p sams is a wizard assisted web tool for the simple and automated design of plant a mirnas and synta sirnas. p sams includes two applications, p sams a mirna Designer and p sams synta sirna Designer. Both applications output a list of recommended a mirna or synta sirna and the sequence of the two oligonucleotides required for cloning into compatible B/c vectors.
