Although in silico drug discovery approaches are crucial for the development of pharmaceuticals, their potential advantages in agrochemical industry have not been realized. The challenge for computer aided methods in agrochemical arena is a lack of sufficient information for both pesticides and their targets. Therefore, it is important to establish such knowledge repertoire that contains comprehensive pesticides profiles, which include physicochemical properties , environmental fates, toxicities and mode of actions. Here, we present an integrated platform called pesticide target interaction database (PTID), which comprises a total of 1347 pesticides with rich annotation of ecotoxicological and toxicological data as well as 13 738 interactions of pesticide target and 4245 protein terms via text mining. Additionally, through the integration of chem mapper an in house computational approach to poly pharmacology PTID can be used as a computational platform to identify pesticides targets and design novel agrochemical products.

introduction agrochemical products help us and our crops defend from the invasion of insects, weeds and fungi. Unfortunately, the resistance arising from the increasing selection pressure as well as the cross resistance of pesticides acting on the same target limits the continuing use of almost all pesticides (). On the other hand, environmental safety and toxicity are major factors to the failures in last stages of pesticides development. In the face of ever increasing stringent demands of efficacy and environmental safety, the discovery of new agrochemicals is clearly imperative. Since the 1990's, in vivo and in vitro high throughput screen has been routinely used in agrochemical discovery (). However, both of these random screening methods require a large number of compounds and produce few hits. In the past decade, rational methods such as structure based design were introduced into agrochemical industries, and the combination of rational and non rational methods was realized to be more efficient than traditional high throughput screen (). Recently in silico approaches, which are routine methods for developing new pharmaceuticals, have entered the lead discovery processes of agrochemical industry (, b). These methods can discover new active ingredients with ideal properties at lower cost in much quicker time. Additionally, risk assessment and toxicity prediction are also considered. However, both of rational in vitro and in silico approaches and analysis demand enormous information not only on the structure, physicochemical properties, toxicity and mode of action of existed pesticides but also the structural data of the active sites. Although these data are available via a diversity of sources including government departments, manufacturers and universities, the dispersed data source and a lack of search and analysis tools make accessing inconvenient. Moreover, insufficient knowledge of targets and three dimensional structures also impedes the applications of computer aided methods. Consequently, there is a severe need for a comprehensive database covering physicochemical properties, environmental fates and mode of action, with integration of high level search system and analysis tools, for novel pesticide discovery and risk assessments. The purpose of pesticide target interaction database (PTID) is to establish a web accessible database providing association information of pesticides and corresponding potential targets via text mining.

conclusion the current version of PTID contains 1347 pesticides with annotation of toxicity and environmental fates. More than 4245 potential target terms were derived by text mining tool; sequence data were also annotated for each target term. In addition to these data, several computational tools for target exploration and virtual screen were also integrated into PTID. Potential application of PTID includes identification of pesticides by structures or properties interest; prediction of potential targets; or assessment of toxicity and environmental effect. To our knowledge, PTID is the first attempt to establish a pesticide database, which is integrated with the knowledge of protein protein interactions. It is expected that PTID will serve as a useful resource for the development of agrochemicals.
