Phenotypic Up-regulated Gene Support Vector Machine pugs vm is a cancer Biomedical Informatics Grid (caBIG TM) analytical tool for multiclass gene selection and classification. pugs vm addresses the problem of imbalanced class separability, small sample size and high gene space dimensionality, where multiclass gene markers are defined by the union of one versus everyone phenotypic upregulated genes, and used by a well matched one versus rest support vector machine. pugs vm provides a simple yet more accurate strategy to identify statistically reproducible mechanistic marker genes for characterization of heterogeneous diseases.

introduction microarray gene expression studies provide new opportunities for the molecular characterization of heterogeneous diseases (). Multiclass gene selection is an imperative task for identifying phenotype associated mechanistic genes and achieving accurate diagnostic classifications (). Most existing multiclass gene selection methods heavily rely on the direct extensions of two class gene selection methods (). However, simple extensions of binary discriminant analysis to multiclass gene selection are suboptimal and not well matched to the unique characteristics of a multi category classification problem. Specifically, the existing methods will select gene subsets that preserve the distances of well separated classes, while likely create error prone large overlap between neighboring classes (). In Phenotypic Up-regulated Gene Support Vector Machine pugs vm see schematic flowchart and mathematic descriptions * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of the method in the Supplementary Material) (), we select genes that are highly expressed in one phenotype relative to each of the remaining phenotypes, namely one versus everyone Phenotypic Up-regulated Genes ove pug. ove pug provides evenhanded gene resources for discriminating both neighboring and well separated classes, and intends to assure the statistical reproducibility and biological plausibility of the selected genes. ove pug is well suited for small sample size problems (a concern with many current microarray datasets). We also implement other competing peer methods for multiclass gene selection, including signal to noise ratio (SNR) (), t statistic t stat (), pooled ratio of between groups to within groups sum of squares (BW) () and svm based recursive feature elimination svm rfe (). In the classification component of pugs vm we implement the ovr svm committee classifier, which has proved highly successful in multi category classifications with finite or limited amounts of high dimensional data in real world applications (). We also include several other popular multi category classifiers, including k nearest neighborhood (kNN) (), nave Bayes classifier (NBC) () and ovo svm (). pugs vm was developed through the caBIG cabig nci nih gov In Silico Research Centers of Excellence is rce effort, and offers users across the broader cancer research community a unique yet effective tool for identifying multiclass gene markers and predicting clinical outcomes in cancer treatment. pugs vm is an open source software package. The Java and Matlab codes and documents are freely available at the authors' web site, enabling users to easily modify the program and add new functions or extensions (http://www.cbil.ece.vt.edu/caBIG-PUGSVM.htm).

DESCRIPTION

discussion pugs vm is a comprehensive open source tool that consists of interconnected components for multiclass gene selection and predictive classification. The core algorithms in the package are ove pug and ovr svm which address several critical yet subtle issues in molecular characterization of heterogeneous diseases for both biological research and clinical applications. pugs vm emphasizes the statistical reproducibility of the selected gene markers under small sample size, supported by their biologically plausible interpretations. Several competing gene selection and classification methods are also incorporated into the package to demonstrate the superior performance of pugs vm via objective comparisons. Through the caBIG is rce effort, we plan to adapt pugs vm to identify gene markers as drug gable targets and predict breast cancer resistance and recurrence after tamoxifen treatment. We have established several workflow pipelines for using pugs vm. For example, we first download breast cancer gene expression datasets from TCGA and g doc and then normalize and label the data using caBIG tools, such as gene pattern. We feed the processed data to pugs vm. The gene candidates identified by pugs vm will be sent to VIsual Statistical Data Analyzer for visualization, mapping onto known signaling pathways and further analysis. We are currently working to create Taverna workflow modules for all analyses and making them publicly available to the cancer community.
