New sequence data useful for phylogenetic and evolutionary analyses continues to be added to public databases. The construction of multiple sequence alignments and inference of huge phylogenies comprising large taxonomic groups are expensive tasks, both in terms of man hours and computational resources. Therefore, maintaining comprehensive phylogenies, based on representative and up-to-date molecular sequences, is challenging. PUmPER is a framework that can perpetually construct multi-gene alignments (with ph law d and phylogenetic trees (with exam l or ra xml light for a given NCBI taxonomic group. When sufficient numbers of new gene sequences for the selected taxonomic group have accumulated in GenBank, PUmPER automatically extends the alignment and infers extended phylogenetic trees by using previously inferred smaller trees as starting topologies. Using our framework, large phylogenetic trees can be perpetually updated without human intervention. Importantly, resulting phylogenies are not statistically significantly worse than trees inferred from scratch. Availability and implementation: PUmPER can run in stand-alone mode on a single server, or offload the computationally expensive phylogenetic searches to a parallel computing cluster. Source code, documentation, and tutorials are available at https://github. comf izquierdo perpetually updated trees
introduction sequence data continues to accumulate in public databases at an increasing pace. With the addition of new data for species and individuals or genes, existing phylogenies of taxonomic groups need to be updated. re initiating phylogenetic inferences from scratch every time new data are added to public databases represents wasted effort in the form of man hours and energy consumption (computations). Nonetheless, adding new tax a or genes to a phylogenetic tree may also unravel new evolutionary relationships that were not supported by previous smaller datasets. We present the PUmPER framework and make available a phylogenetic analysis pipeline that can automatically update existing huge reference phylogenies and alignments by new sequence data, without the need to recompute everything from scratch. We call this procedure a perpetual tree update. Other pipelines, such as STAP (), have used publicly available databases and packages like BLASTN, ClustalW and phy ml to automate the process of alignment construction and phylogenetic inference. The mor () pipeline implements the automated extension of phylogenetic trees with new tax a albeit with the specific focus of producing automated taxonomies of homo basidiomycetes
