We developed a novel algorithm, purity est to infer the tumor purity level from the allelic differential representation of hetero-zygous loci with somatic mutations in a human tumor sample with a matched normal tissue using next generation sequencing data. We applied our tool to a whole cancer genome sequencing datasets and demonstrated the accuracy of purity est compared with DNA copy number based estimation. Availability: purity est has been implemented in PERL and is available at

introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) provides a platform to comprehensively characterize somatic mutations, DNA copy number changes and rearrangements in tumor tissues. Because tumor tissues usually consist of a mixture of multiple tumor clones and normal cells including fibroblasts and infiltrating lymphocytes, the observed magnitude of copy number changes is diminished, which is basis of tumor clone purity estimation using SNP array data ().converted mapped reads to DNA copy number ratios between tumor and normal genomes for purity estimation. In principle, NGS also provides an alternative to copy number based methods, which is to use mutant allele fractions in the heterozygous loci with somatic mutations in a tumor mixture. However, modeling the mutant allele fractions is complicated by two factors. One is that mutant allele fractions in a sample may take multiple levels. The founder mutations may have the higher levels and latent mutations lower levels. The second factor is that copy number change can also alter the observed fractions. When the mutant allele is amplified, the observed mutant allele fraction can be increased; when the wild type allele is amplified (lost), the mutant allele fraction can be decreased (increased). When the mutant allele is lost, the mutant allele is simply not observable. Here, we propose a simple approach to the purity estimation problem. We assume that the tumor tissue can be largely approximated by a mixture of a normal clone and a tumor clone. Our method gives a purity estimate from somatic mutations in each chromosome and takes a robust average of the chromosome wide estimates to be the purity estimate of the tumor tissue. Since copy number changes can both enrich and deplete the fractions of mutated alleles depending on whether the copy number change occurs to the mutated allele or the wild allele, it is unlikely to affect the chromosome wide estimate drastically.
