Motivation: high throughput sequencing (HTS) has revolutionized gene regulation studies and is now fundamental for the detection of protein dna and protein rna binding, as well as for measuring RNA expression. With increasing variety and sequencing depth of HTS datasets, the need for more flexible and memory efficient tools to analyse them is growing. Results: We describe pyi cos a powerful toolkit for the analysis of mapped reads from diverse HTS experiments: chips eq either punctuated or broad signals, clips eq and rnase q. We prove the effectiveness of pyi cos to select for significant signals and show that its accuracy is comparable and sometimes superior to that of methods specifically designed for each particular type of experiment. pyi cos facilitates the analysis of a variety of HTS data types through its flexibility and memory efficiency, providing a useful framework for data integration into models of regulatory genomics. Availability: open source software, with tutorials and protocol files, is available at

introduction gene expression is regulated through a complex network of protein interactions with RNA and DNA. Recent advances in high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies provide a very effective way to obtain information about these interactions at genome wide level at reasonable cost. chips eq (chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by HTS) has become the preferred method for current analysis of transcriptional regulation in vivo, since it provides genome wide coverage at a high sensitivity and signal to noise ratio (). However, to unravel the complete gene expression network, it is also necessary to systematically identify protein rna interactions in cells. hits clip or clips eq (cross-linking immunoprecipitation followed by HTS) provides a powerful mean to obtain global information about direct protein rna interactions in cells (). Additionally, the rnase q experiments provide a way to measure RNA levels at a higher sensitivity and coverage than microarray experiments. Despite the inherent biases, rnase q can overcome some of the array limitations and provides the possibility to measure alternative splicing events () or expression levels (), to detect single nucleotide polymorphisms () and to discover novel genes (). short read sequencing platforms such as Illumina are very suitable for the study of protein dna and protein rna interactions, since they can produce enough data to perform accurate quantitative analysis. Furthermore, the resulting reads are of sufficient length to be mapped accurately to a reference sequence, but short enough to define the interaction sites with enough precision. However, not all interactions can be detected at the same coverage. For instance, transcription factors produce generally a clearly localized, or punctuated, signal (), whereas histone marks or RNA polymerase II rnap ii produce broad signals, covering more extended regions (). Most of the tools published for the analysis of chips eq data focus on punctuated signals (), with only few methods devoted to analyse broad signals (). However, these methods are not readily applicable to other HTS data types like clips eq or rnase q making it necessary to incorporate additional tools to perform gene regulation studies, which generally involve multiple HTS experiments. The increase in variety and sequencing depth of such experiments, as well as the growing need for memory efficient tools that can be applied to various data types motivated us to develop pyi cos. In this article, we describe pyi cos a versatile toolkit operating on short HTS reads that have already been mapped to a reference coordinate system, like a genome or a transcriptome. We demonstrate its accuracy on punctuated chips eq data comparing it to MACS (), find peaks () and use q (), using published chips eq datasets. We also describe the accuracy of pyi cos enrichment analysis (EA) to detect differentially expressed (DE) genes from rnase q data by comparing it with the Bioconductor packages deg seq (), de seq () and edgeR () using published rnase q data and microarray experiments on the same samples. Furthermore, we illustrate the flexibility of
