Conserved water molecules play a crucial role in protein structure, stabilization of secondary structure, protein activity, flexibility and ligand binding. Clustering of water molecules in superimposed protein structures, obtained by X-ray crystallography at high resolution , is an established method to identify consensus water molecules in all known protein structures of the same family. py water is an easy to use PyMOL plug-in and identifies conserved water molecules in the protein structure of interest. py water can be installed via the user interface of PyMOL. No programming or command line knowledge is required for its use. Availability and Implementation: py water and a tutorial are available at https://github.com/hiteshpatel379/PyWATER. PyMOL is available at http://www.pymol.org/ or http://sourceforge.net/projects/ pymol/.

introduction water molecules play a crucial role in protein structures, their stabilization, flexibility and activity. One approach to finding conserved water molecules is to calculate energy terms of the molecules in protein structure models. That can be achieved by energy minimization, molecular dynamics simulations or quantum mechanics. GRID determines energetically favorable binding sites for water molecules (); Rank uses the HINT force field and classifies water molecules based on the number of hydrogen bonds and their binding strength (). These methods are precise and can be applied to a single available structure but they are computationally expensive and only applicable for expert users. If many crystal structures are available for a protein, conserved water molecules can be also determined via cluster analysis and electron density of existing crystal structures. The method water score uses a regression analysis to establish a statistical correlation between the structural properties of water molecules of a free protein crystal structure compared with the ligand complexed form (). B  os and p leiss predicted six conserved water molecules located at the loop in class a lactamases with the WatCH software () and showed that these conserved water molecules reduce the flexibility of the loop (B  os and). A similar approach has been used to identify and analyze the consensus water sites in thrombin and trypsin. These highly conserved water molecules generally have more protein atom neighbors, a more hydrophilic environment and hydrogen bonds to the proteins, making them less mobile (). Major histocompatibility complex (MHC) class I proteins have three highly conserved water molecules, which are believed to be involved in stabilizing the twisted turn modulating peptide recognition and determining the position of n terminal segment of the 2 helix (). Cluster analysis of water molecules in alanine racemase reveals the consensus water sites in the active site and at the interface of two monomers, where they play a structural role in maintaining and stabilizing the alanine racemase dimer (). By a similar method, Loris et al. identified conserved waters in a large family of microbial ribonucleases RNase T1 and in legume lectin crystal structures (). Using deuterium exchange mass spectroscopy and molecular dynamics simulations, t eze et al. predicted conserved water molecules channels to be probably involved in the function of family 1 glycosidases (). As the importance of conserved water molecules is generally accepted, a simple and rapid tool for their identification in protein structures is desirable before structural bioinformatics studies are performed. Up to now two tools are available: sans chagrin and Kuhn presented a command line tool called WatCH () and C. A. Bottoms et al. described a semi automated method to identify conserved solvent sites and studied conserved waters in six protein families (). No other comprehensive open source tools with a graphical user interface (GUI) are available for such kind of analyses. Here, we present a tool, py water with an intuitive graphical user interface that can be seamlessly integrated into PyMOL (http://sourceforge.net/projects/pymol), including all important steps that are crucial for identifying the conserved water molecules.
