Motivation: Molecular dynamics (MD) simulations have dramatically improved the atomistic understanding of protein motions, energetics and function. These growing datasets have necessitated a corresponding emphasis on trajectory analysis methods for characterizing simulation data, particularly since functional protein motions and transitions are often rare and or intricate events. Observing that such events give rise to long tailed spatial distributions, we recently developed a higher order statistics based dimensionality reduction method, called quasi anharmonic analysis (QAA), for identifying bio physically relevant reaction coordinates and substates within MD simulations. Further characterization of conformation space should consider the temporal dynamics specific to each identified substate. Results: Our model uses hierarchical clustering to learn energetically coherent substates and dynamic modes of motion from a 0.5 µs ubi qut in simulation. Autoregressive (AR) modeling within and between states enables a compact and generative description of the conformational landscape as it relates to functional transitions between binding poses. Lacking a predictive component, QAA is extended here within a general AR model appreciative of the trajectory s temporal dependencies and the specific, local dynamics accessible to a protein within identified energy wells. These metastable states and their transition rates are extracted within a qaa derived subspace using hierarchical Markov clustering to provide parameter sets for the second order AR model. We show the learned model can be extrapolated to synthesize trajectories of arbitrary length.

introduction conformational changes in proteins constitute the underlying behavior of cellular regulation. As part of regulating cellular homeostasis, proteins perform a number of functions through native fluctuations at multiple length and timescales. A variety of experimental techniques have illuminated the linkage between protein dynamics and function; however, resolving the precise spatio-temporal relationships in protein motions which confer biological function remains a long-standing challenge in protein biochemistry he nz ler. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Governing the protein's rich conformational space is a high dimensional energy landscape with multiple hills and valleys (). To characterize this energy surface, theoretical and computational modeling of protein dynamics have been widely used (), as have molecular dynamics (MD) and Monte Carlo techniques to provide atomistic insights into protein fluctuation (). These techniques are now being extensively used to investigate various biophysical and biochemical processes including protein ligand binding (), protein folding () and enzyme catalysis (). As the timescales accessible to all atom MD (and other coarse grained approaches) continue to reach the micro and millisecond timescales, the data generated from such simulations can potentially reach o petabytes. The availability of large datasets that cover the native state dynamics and folding and unfolding pathways of the entire fol dome called dy name omics (van der), has allowed scientists to simulate over 2000 proteins with a combined timescale of 340 s. Projects such as folding home () have also accelerated the availability of large datasets of protein folding trajectories as have specialized hardware, such as Anton (), field programmable gate arrays (FPGA;), and GPUs (). The availability of such datasets, while useful, has created new challenges in (i) extracting low dimensional bio physically relevant coordinates that elucidate how the protein functions (for example, how a protein recognizes its binding partner), (ii) separating the landscape spanned by the simulations (or even groups of simulations) into a coherent set of conformational substates, (iii) quantifying the intrinsic structural and dynamical properties within a substate and finally, (iv) determining transition rates between these conformational substates. Indeed, important dynamical phenomena within simulated trajectories must be extracted from an enormous quantity of non-specific, ambient fluctuations. Clustering techniques for mining this noisy conformational space often use structural similarity measures, such as root mean square deviation (RMSD) which quantifies an average value of structural deviation. However, functional motions need not elicit large global RMSD values; indeed, localized protein regions commonly exhibit small but important flexibility. These observations motivated us to examine the statistical nature of atomic fluctuations from long timescale simulations (). Our studies across multiple simulations and page i53 i52i60
