Motivation: The sensitivity of de novo short linear motif (SLiM) prediction is limited by the number of patterns (the motif space) being assessed for enrichment. q slim finder uses specific query protein information to restrict the motif space and thereby increase the sensitivity and specificity of predictions. Results: q slim finder was extensively benchmarked using known slim containing proteins and simulated protein interaction datasets of real human proteins. Exploiting prior knowledge of a query protein likely to be involved in a slim mediated interaction increased the proportion of true positives correctly returned and reduced the proportion of datasets returning a false positive prediction. The biggest improvement was seen if a short region of the query protein flanking the interaction site was known.

introduction all biological processes are underpinned by protein protein interactions (PPI). To understand the 'interactome', we must know how PPI are regulated in time and space to produce biological functions (). An emerging field of biology is the study of the role in PPI networks of intrinsically disordered protein regions (), which lack a stable (unbound) three dimensional structure. Of particular interest, short linear motifs (SLiMs) mediate an important subset of the cell's disordered PPI via domain motif interactions (). SLiMs are typically 215 amino acids in length with fewer than six (and as few as two) functionally specific residues (). SLiMs are involved in an incredibly diverse range of biological processes, including cell cycle, cell signalling, post-translational modification, subcellular localization, gene expression, membrane binding, protein folding, cell adhesion and cell death, with over 200 annotated classes (). SLiMs usually bind with low affinity, making them ideal for quick or transient responses, and are likely to be particularly enriched in signalling pathways (). The small protein sequence signature of SLiMs, combined with their low affinity PPI, makes experimental discovery difficult. Considerable attention has therefore been given to computational methods for SLiM prediction (). These same features confer evolutionary plasticity on slim mediated PPI and enable high functional density, which is frequently exploited by pathogens to hijack host cellular processes (). Convergent (i.e. independent) evolution is also prevalent within species. Consequently, identifying over-represented motifs by explicitly modelling convergent evolution is among the most successful approaches for de novo prediction of SLiMs from V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
