Motivation: Programs that evaluate the quality of a protein structural model are important both for validating the structure determination procedure and for guiding the model building process. Such programs are based on properties of native structures that are generally not expected for faulty models. One such property, which is rarely used for automatic structure quality assessment, is the tendency for conserved residues to be located at the structural core and for variable residues to be located at the surface. Results: We present con qu ass a novel quality assessment program based on the consistency between the model structure and the proteins conservation pattern. We show that it can identify problematic structural models, and that the scores it assigns to the server models in CASP8 correlate with the similarity of the models to the native structure. We also show that when the conservation information is reliable, the methods performance is comparable and complementary to that of the other single structure quality assessment methods that participated in CASP8 and that do not use additional structural information from homologs. Availability: A perl implementation of the method, as well as the various perl and R scripts used for the analysis are available at

introduction the function of a protein is largely determined by its 3D structure. Therefore, the determination of a protein's structure is an important step in understanding how the protein achieves its function, and it can also aid in predicting protein function or designing experiments. However, experimental structure determination can be a long and difficult procedure, and naturally errors may occur (). This was recently demonstrated when several protein structures published in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) were discovered to be erroneous (). Even when the structure determination process is correct, the determined structure may adopt a non physiological fold, for example, due to non physiological constraints imposed by the crystal in the case of X-ray crystallography. Such errors can cause confusion and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. mislead further research, so it is important to be able to spot them before the structures are published. Errors are even more frequent in computationally derived structures, which are built either by extrapolating from a homologous protein whose structure is already solved () or by computer simulation (). In the latter case, many alternative conformations might be generated during the simulation, and differentiating between erroneous conformations and structures that are more likely to be correct could help guide the simulation and limit the search space. Programs that try to numerically assess the correctness of a given structural model for a protein are called Model Quality Assessment Programs mq aps. The need for such programs is widely recognized by the structural biology community, as evidenced by the inclusion of a category for assessing m qap performance in the biennial Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (CASP) experiment, starting from its seventh round (CASP7;). The two pioneering mq aps still widely used today, are verify 3d () and pros a (). Both methods check the compatibility between the protein's structure and its sequence. verify 3d for example, classifies each residue in the protein into one of the 18 classes according to the residue's structural environment in the input model. The propensity of each amino acid to exist in each such structural environment class is calculated according to statistics collected from structures in the PDB, and the final score given to the protein structure is the sum of propensities of the individual residues. Newer mq aps were recently assessed in the blind experiments of CASP7 () and CASP8 (). The models given as input to the mq aps were the 'server models', which are generated by the various servers participating in CASP shortly after the round starts, and long before the native structures are published. Many of the participating mq aps including q mean () and multicom refine (), functioned similarly to verify 3d and pros a receiving only one structure as input and assigning it a quality score based on the compatibility of various features computed from the sequence with the predicted 3D structure. However, the most successful mq aps in CASP8 were the consensus based methods, such as p cons () and mod fold clust (), which used as input the entire decoy set instead of just coordinates of a given model and took a consensus approach to rate each model according to how similar it was to the other structures in the set. This approach, while clearly advantageous in the setting of the CASP experiment, is not applicable in many scenarios in which page 1300 12991307

conclusion here we have presented con qu ass a very simple m qap based directly on the compatibility between the conservation and accessibility patterns of a given structural model. We studied the scores that con qu ass assigns to experimental structures, demonstrated its ability to discern erroneous models and checked the relation between the con qu ass scores given to different models and the models' resemblance to the native structure. We have also shown that con qua sss performance is comparable to that of other pure single structure mq aps despite being much simpler than most. Our approach is different from previous mq aps that used evolutionary conservation, which were based on the spatial clustering of the conserved residues. We feel our approach is more direct, since this clustering is mostly an effect of the conserved residues' tendency to be buried in the structural core (for a direct comparison with the method developed by miha lek and coworkers; see Supplementary Section S1.5). con qu ass is also the first conservation based approach to be rigorously compared with contemporary mq aps. In addition, our score is based on summation of information that is local in the structure (the propensity of the conservation class of each residue for its accessibility class), so it should be adaptable to provide a local quality score for each residue of the structure, as is done by local quality assessment tools (). Preliminary tests for a local m qap based on summing the propensities over a fixed width window on the sequence have yielded promising results (data not shown). In this study, we have clearly shown that evolutionary conservation is a powerful property for use in model quality assessment, so it would be advantageous for new mq aps to integrate this property with other more commonly used properties. Evolutionary conservation is currently not used directly by any m qap although some methods, like q mean and MULTICOM, use it indirectly by comparing model surface access i bilities with the predicted access i bilities which are associated, in part, with the evolutionary conservation. However, we have demonstrated that these methods do not use the conservation information to its full extent, as their results improve when their scores are integrated with Page: 1306 12991307
