Motivation: phosphorylation dependent cellular signaling is known to play a diverse role in regulating multiple cellular processes such as proliferation, differentiation and apoptosis. Recent technological advances in mass spectrometry based phospho proteomics have enabled us to measure network wide signaling dynamics in a comprehensive and quantitative manner. As conventional protein protein interaction (PPI) information based network analysis is insufficient to systematically analyze phosphorylation site dependent complex interaction dynamics, here we develop and evaluate a platform to provide a high resolution molecular network description for kinase substrate interactome analysis. Results: In this study, we developed a cytoscape based bioinformatic al platform named Post Translational Modification mapper pt mapper to integrate PPI data with publicly available kinase substrate relations at the resolution of phosphorylated amino acid residues. The previous phospho proteome data on egf induced cellular signaling in glioblastoma stem cells was applied to evaluate our platform, leading to discovery of phosphorylation dependent crucial signaling modulation in the p70s6k1 related pathway. Our study revealed that high resolution cellular network description of phosphorylation site dependent kinase substrate signaling regulation should accelerate phospho proteomics based exploration of novel drug targets in the context of each disease related signaling. Availability and Implementation: pt mapper and the example data for construction of phosphoryl-ation site oriented networks are available at https://github.com/y-narushima/PTMapper.

introduction protein phosphorylation is one of the most well known post translational modifications (PTMs) at serine, threonine and tyrosine residues within protein sequences and plays important roles in various cellular signaling pathways correlated with cell fate control. Due to the technical development of phosphoprotein peptide enrichment methodologies and the analytical improvement of lcms ms systems, quantitative phospho proteomics are now widely used to uncover global phosphorylation dynamics in cellular signaling networks (). As with the analysis of genome and transcriptome data, advanced computational methodology is essential to translate phospho proteome data into high resolution protein interaction networks towards better understanding of the detailed biological mechanisms triggered by phosphorylation dependent signal transduction. Quantitative phospho proteomics based network analyses could be mainly categorized into the two methods: (i) visualization of activation dynamics by mapping the quantification data to each signaling molecules and (ii) sub-network extraction through the statistical calculation of network pathway enrichment based on the quantified phospho proteome data. The former is basically used for explanation of phosphorylation related fold changes in particular signaling pathways (). The latter enables us to unbiased ly reveal functionally important parts of signaling networks which reflect quantitative changes observed in the phospho proteome data, leading to discovery of regulatory interactions unannotated in the conventional signaling pathways (). These network analyses are mainly based on protein protein interaction (PPI) information, although the phosphorylation induced reaction is controlled by site specific kinases phosphatases. In recent studies, the information on enzyme substrate relationships between kinases and the corresponding phosphorylation sites has rapidly accumulated in public phosphorylation site databases, such as phospho site plus (), phospho elm () and phospho networks (). The representative protein databases, including Uniprot KB (), Human Protein Reference Database () and next prot (), also keep updating the large scale information on phospho yr lation sites and their specific kinases. In spite of the drastic expansion of these public databases, there are few platforms to analyze quantitative phospho proteome data using the kinase phosphorylation site datasets as noted above. Moreover, phosphorylation site oriented network analysis is mainly applied for visualization of phospho proteome data, but not for statistical interpretation of network dynamics. Therefore, we developed a cytoscape based network analysis platform named 'Post Translational Modification mapper pt mapper which enables us to describe phosphorylation site dependent PPI dynamics and statistically analyze network properties through combination with other Cytoscape applications. The pt mapper based analysis of our previous quantitative phospho proteome data on egf stimulated glioblastoma stem cells () led to discovery of phosphorylation dependent association regarding the p70s6k1 related pathway upon EGF stimulation, which was not unveiled in the network structure based on the conventional PPI information.

conclusion in this study, we developed a bioinformatic al platform named pt mapper to characterize the structures of phosphorylation site oriented PPI networks. From the quantitative phospho proteome data on egf stimulated glioblastoma stem cells, our pt mapper based network analysis unveiled p70s6k related signaling as one of the most significantly regulated sub-networks, which was not observed in the conventional PPI network. As some previous studies demonstrated that p70S6K was correlated with survival and stem ness maintenance of glioblastoma stem cells, the strategy based on phosphorylation site oriented network analysis proved to be effective to unbiased ly extract crucial signaling pathways from the complex signaling networks. Our pt mapper based computational pipeline will be applied not only to phosphorylation but also to other PTMs such as acetylation and ubiquitination, and contribute to further understanding of highly diversified ptm dependent PPI networks.
