Motivation: Microscopy advances have enabled the acquisition of large scale biological images that capture whole tissues in situ. This in turn has fostered the study of spatial relationships between cells and various biological structures, which has proved enormously beneficial toward understanding organ and organism function. However, the unique nature of biological images and tissues precludes the application of many existing spatial mining and quantification methods necessary to make inferences about the data. Especially difficult is attempting to quantify the spatial correlation between heterogeneous structures and point objects, which often occurs in many biological tissues. Results: We develop a method to quantify the spatial correlation between a continuous structure and point data in large (17 500 Â 17 500 pixel) biological images. We use this method to study the spatial relationship between the vasculature and a type of cell in the retina called astrocytes. We use a geodesic feature space based on vascular structures and embed astrocytes into the space by spatial sampling. We then propose a quantification method in this feature space that enables us to empirically demonstrate that the spatial distribution of astrocytes is often correlated with vascular structure. Additionally, these patterns are conserved in the retina after injury. These results prove the long assumed patterns of astrocyte spatial distribution and provide a novel methodology for conducting other spatial studies of similar tissue and structures. Availability: The Matlab code for the method described in this article can be found at

introduction the advent of high throughput large scale microscopy has been a boon to the biological community; technological advances have enabled the capture of whole tissue at micrometer resolution, providing opportunities of study that have previously been unavailable. These improvements have especially had a profound impact on examination of the spatial distribution and correlation of biological entities, as the locations of large amounts of cells and other structures can be imaged in situ. Studying the spatial arrangement and relationships inherent in tissues can improve our understanding of the various development or pathological processes that underlie proper organ or organism function (). Despite the abundance of image data, mining or quantifying spatial properties in tissue can be a challenging task. Although automated microscopy has significantly improved acquisition rates, capturing the spatial layout of whole cell populations or structures at high resolution can require thousands of images that take many days to acquire. Under limited time constraints, oftentimes small samples of tissue are imaged and analyzed to infer spatial properties of a whole tissue. However, many tissues are spatially heterogeneous; application of mining or quantification methods on small images may not provide a representative sample necessary to draw conclusions about the whole tissue. As such, development of spatial mining and quantification methods that can be effectively applied to extremely large images with diverse structures are highly desirable. Yet many spatial mining methods are not suitable to handle the complex and non-traditional spatial relationships found in these large biological images. For example, neuronal or vascular structures are pervasive in many tissues, and oftentimes are spatially correlated with other cells (). Traditional spatial quantification methods such as co-location (), k function or nearest neighbor methods () can not be applied to model the relationship between these structures and cells because they inherently operate on discrete points in Euclidean space. Methods that can model the complex relationship between biological structure and cellular spatial distribution are needed to take full advantage of these rich images. In addition, comparative analysis of spatial relationships between normal and pathological tissues is highly beneficial for understanding underlying biological processes. These existing spatial methods are difficult to apply to different specimens or conditions because the Euclidean orientation and scaling between a set of images may not be the same (). One tissue that exhibits many of the aforementioned spatial characteristics is the mammalian retina. The nerve fiber layer (NFL) of the retina is blanketed by a cell known as the astrocyte, which performs a multitude of physiological functions (). Astrocyte processes physically contact the vascular structure (), and they also play a key *To whom correspondence should be addressed. functional role in the development of the retinal vasculature (). An apparent spatial correlation between astrocytes and the blood vessels has been noted (), but only observational evidence of such a relationship has been provided. Strong evidence of astrocyte spatial correlation with various vascular properties would lend further support to additional hypotheses of astrocyte function, such as the suspected role of astrocytes in vasodilation and constriction (). Attempts to quantify the correlation between vascular structure and the spatial placement of astrocytes will suffer from the problems previously discussed. The vasculature is a large heterogeneous structure with specific arterial and venous delineations (;) that requires us to image the entire retina. In addition, while astrocytes can be represented as points in Euclidean space, the vasculature is a continuous structure and can not be represented as such. Hence, a quantification method is needed that can map these disparate and large data sources into a common space. In this article, we describe a method to quantify the spatial correlation between features of heterogeneous biological structures and Euclidean points in tissue, and apply it to the retina. The proposed method is capable of capturing differences between the features of heterogeneous structures and spatial distribution of points. The method implements a geodesic coordinate system that is based on the vascular structure. The vasculature and astrocytes are converted to this geodesic feature space such that the position of astrocytes relative to the vasculature is preserved. Astrocyte distribution in the geodesic feature space is then empirically compared with the vascular distribution. We show that the distribution of astrocytes often spatially correlates with changes in the vascular structure. Finally, we apply our methodology to a set of injured retinas and demonstrate that long term detached retina do not deviate from the spatial patterns observed on normal retinas. Our methodology uses a geodesic feature space that is independent of Euclidean space: the scale of the images and rotation of the retina about the optic nerve have no impact on the results. The scale and rotation invariance facilitates comparison between retinas and different cell types. For example, retinal neurons, pericytes or Muler cells can be converted into this same feature space for comparative analysis. In addition, this methodology can be used on spatial studies between other structures and cells, such as the relationship between neuronal networks and supporting cells. Our results demonstrate that we can successfully quantify the spatial correlation between these disparate biological entities, and provide a foundation for future research aimed at studying the spatial distribution of various biological components in large tissue images.

discussion in this work, we developed a method to quantify the spatial relationship between a heterogeneous structure and discrete points in Euclidean space. We used a novel geodesic feature space and studied the relationship between astrocytes and the vasculature in the retinal NFL. The vasculature and astrocytes are converted to this feature space, which facilitates comparison of astrocyte spatial distribution relative to the vasculature. Empirical quantification using the Mallows distance reveals that astrocytes are spatially distributed independently from the vasculature, with the exception of increased astrocyte density on thick portions of veins. Our method of quantifying the spatial relationship between large structures and point objects has many advantages. The used feature space is based on the geodesic distance to a common object in all the images, thus enabling direct comparison of all data. Furthermore, conversion of the vascular data to geodesic distance allows different resolutions of spatial relationships to be tested; such varying resolutions could be applied to other domains as well; for instance, from individual neurons to larger circuits. Lastly, use of the Mallows distance to compare histograms provides an accurate reflection of the differences between vascular structure and astrocyte spatial distribution. Clustering of point objects around specific regions of large continuous structures in diverse tissues can be easily identified using our method. Our method and subsequent results already have an immediate impact on our understanding of the underlying biological processes occurring in the retina. It is clear from our results that detachment appears to have no discernible effect on the distribution of astrocytes with respect to the vasculature. This is an unexpected result, as it has been shown in various animals that astrocytes react in response to trauma, such as the up-regulation of GFAP in astrocytes (), or by proliferation (). These previously observed injury responses by astrocytes appear to have little to no long term impact on their spatial distribution relative to the vasculature, indicating that a specific spatial configuration of astrocytes may be required for healthy function of the retina. These results lend insight into biological processes that are occurring in an adult retina. There are significant broader implications of our proposed method as well. The geodesic distance in our method is not restricted to radial vascular structures; it only requires a reference point. Therefore, it can be used on other vascular networks, such as the brain vascular network, or even complete organisms where the entire vasculature is observable. In addition, many other the astrocyte histogram was denser. In (A), there are large regions where the two histograms significantly differ, as seen by the intense light and dark biological tissues exhibit similar structure and relationships to those encountered in the retina. Our feature space and quantification methodology can be used to study spatial relationships in these domains as well. For instance, connect omes of neurons and glial cells () contain large continuous structures similar to the vasculature and are often spatially correlated with other cells or entities (). The geodesic feature space can be adapted for neuronal axons or circuitry; a common physiological or anatomical reference point can be used in lieu of the optic nerve (e.g. cell soma), along with axonal width or any other spatially correlated structural feature. The locations of other nearby cells can then be converted into this geodesic space (now based on neurons), and the spatial correlation between cells and neuronal structure can be quantified in a similar manner to astrocytes and the vasculature. There have also been efforts to quantify the structure of neurons using methods similar to our proposed method. These methods attempt to characterize the morphology of neuronal structures using topological features, such as diameter, path length or branching factors (). While these approaches are not specifically designed to measure spatial correlation, they can be incorporated into our method as an additional histogram dimension. For instance, Sholl analysis () could be used in conjunction with soma distance and dendrite width to measure spatial correlation between neurons and other biological features using our method. Finally, our methodology will provide further insight into the biological processes in the retina. Spatial correlation can be studied using our method in new experimental conditions, such as development or disease. These additional spatial studies of retinal conditions, as well as spatial studies on tissues with similar structure, are promising avenues of future research efforts.
