We describe a tool for quantifying the uniformity of mapped reads in high throughput sequencing experiments. Our statistic directly measures the uniformity of both read position and fragment length, and we explain how to compute a p value that can be used to quantify biases arising from experimental protocols and mapping procedures. Our method is useful for comparing different protocols in experiments such as rnase q. Availability and implementation: We provide a freely available and open source python script that can be used to analyze raw read data or reads mapped to transcripts in BAM format at

introduction in biological experiments, controlling the quality of data is fundamental to the reliability and reproducibility of the results. Quality control is especially important in modern sequencing experiments, where small biases in the preparation of DNA libraries can be amplified in the subsequent sequencing steps which typically yield millions of reads. Sequenced reads ideally represent fragments sampled uniformly at random from a library, and expected coverage statistics can be obtained from the classic lander waterman model Lander and. However, a key aspect of current experiments is variable fragment length, requiring the extension of the Lander Waterman model to account for random fragment position as well as length. Such a generalization was described in where it was shown that the data from a sequencing experiment can be modeled by a two dimensional spatial Poisson process. We present a statistical test for uniformity in the reads of a sequencing experiment based on this idea and show how it can be used to compare multiple sets of reads in order to assess different protocols. Our test requires the alignment of paired end reads to a reference transcriptome so that fragment positions and lengths can be determined. Fortunately, such alignments are routinely produced after sequencing experiments, so that our test can easily be incorporated into sequencing analysis pipelines.
