Motivation: Proteins exhibit complex subcellular distributions, which may include localizing in more than one organelle and varying in location depending on the cell physiology. Estimating the amount of protein distributed in each subcellular location is essential for quantitative understanding and modeling of protein dynamics and how they affect cell behaviors. We have previously described automated methods using fluorescent microscope images to determine the fractions of protein fluorescence in various subcellular locations when the basic locations in which a protein can be present are known. As this set of basic locations may be unknown (especially for studies on a proteome wide scale), we here describe unsupervised methods to identify the fundamental patterns from images of mixed patterns and estimate the fractional composition of them. Methods: We developed two approaches to the problem, both based on identifying types of objects present in images and representing patterns by frequencies of those object types. One is a basis pursuit method (which is based on a linear mixture model), and the other is based on latent Dirichlet allocation (LDA). For testing both approaches, we used images previously acquired for testing supervised un mixing methods. These images were of cells labeled with various combinations of two organelle specific probes that had the same fluorescent properties to simulate mixed patterns of subcellular location. Results: We achieved 0.80 and 0.91 correlation between estimated and underlying fractions of the two probes (fundamental patterns) with basis pursuit and LDA approaches, respectively, indicating that our methods can un mix the complex subcellular distribution with reasonably high accuracy.

introduction to investigate the subcellular localization of proteins at a proteome wide scale, we need to be able to characterize all observed patterns. Identification of subcellular localization patterns from fluorescence images using supervised machine learning methods has become an established method, with excellent results in its field of application. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors however this method is, by design, limited to hard assignments to classes predefined by the researcher. Some researchers have explored using unsupervised learning technologies (), which do not require the researcher to specify classes. These methods still result in each protein being assigned a single label. However, not all proteins can be thus characterized. In particular, there are many proteins that exhibit 'mixed patterns', i.e. patterns that are composed of more than one location. For example, while some proteins locate in the nucleus and others locate in the endoplasmic reticulum, there is a third group that locates in both of these locations. A simple class assignment does not adequately represent the relationship between these three possibilities. One alternative is to assign multiple labels to a single pattern. In one large scale study of the yeast proteome, a third of proteins were annotated with multiple locations, which demonstrates that this is not a problem confined to 'special case' proteins (). However, this approach fails to quantify the contribution of each element and shows the need for a system that directly models the mixture phenomenon. We have previously presented some methods that address this pattern un mixing problem in a supervised setting: given images of fundamental patterns (e.g. nuclear and endoplasmic reticulum in the above example) and mixed images, map mixed images into a set of coefficients, one for each fundamental pattern (). These methods were observed to perform well on both synthetic and real data in recovering the underlying mixture coefficients (which had been kept hidden from the algorithm). However, the supervised approach still requires the researcher to specify the fundamental patterns of which other patterns are composed. For example, for the quantitative analysis of translocation experiments as a function of time or drug concentration, the extreme points could be easily identified as the patterns of interest. However, they are still inapplicable to proteome wide studies where it would be a difficult (and perhaps impossible) task to identify all fundamental patterns that are present. We note that the set of fundamental patterns that can be identified depends both on the specific cell type and the technology used for imaging, high resolution confocal microscopes being able to distinguish patterns that lower resolution systems can not. Therefore, it is necessary to tackle the unsupervised pattern un mixing problem: given a large collection of images, where none has been tagged as being a representative of a fundamental pattern, map all images into a set of mixture coefficients automatically derived from the data a The algorithms use a collection of images as input in which various concentrations of two probes are present (the concentrations of the mi to tracker and ly so tracker probes are shown by increasing intensity of red and green, respectively). Example images are shown from wells containing only mi to tracker (b), only ly so tracker (c) and a mixture of the two probes (d).In this article, we present and compare methods to address this problem using a test dataset previously created to test supervised un mixing methods ().

discussion we have described two approaches for performing unsupervised un mixing of subcellular location patterns, and demonstrated good performance with both on a test dataset acquired by high throughput microscopy and previously used for testing supervised methods. In our supervised work, we had presented two methods, one based on a linear mixture, whose adaptation to the unsupervised case results in the basis pursuit method described here, and another based on multinomial mixtures, which results in the LDA model. The newer LDA model led to slightly better results than the basis pursuit method. This model has the apparent disadvantage that it does not return examples of the underlying patterns, which could for the two fundamental patterns, we display the average coefficient for the three discovered fundamental patterns. potentially make interpretation harder. However, we observed that this was, empirically, not a major issue as the identified bases were indeed well aligned with the underlying (hidden) concentrations as opposed to forming a complex mixture with a difficult interpretation. The methods are comparable in terms of computational cost as it is the image processing, feature computation and, particularly, the k means clustering that has the highest cost (the clustering is done over objects and even this evaluation set of 12 K images resulted in 750 K objects). Once the clustering is done, both algorithms are very fast. Therefore, in their current forms, the LDA algorithm is superior. It is notable that both unsupervised methods led to higher correlation with the underlying coefficients than the supervised methods. A possible cause of this is the appearance of new object types in the mixture patterns. Under the unsupervised framework, with massive clustering, these objects might be assigned labels different from the ones of the fundamental patterns, while in the. Comparison of results for different un mixing methods. The inferred fraction of pattern 1 is displayed as different intensities of gray (black corresponding to pure pattern 1). The design matrix, which was kept hidden from the algorithms is shown on the top left, for comparison; the other three panels are results of computation.
