Motivation: Increasing attention has been devoted to estimation of species level phylogenetic relationships under the coalescent model. However, existing methods either use summary statistics (gene trees) to carry out estimation, ignoring an important source of variability in the estimates, or involve computationally intensive Bayesian Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithms that do not scale well to whole genome datasets. Results: We develop a method to infer relationships among quartets of tax a under the coalescent model using techniques from algebraic statistics. Uncertainty in the estimated relationships is quantified using the nonparametric bootstrap. The performance of our method is assessed with simulated data. We then describe how our method could be used for species tree inference in larger tax on samples, and demonstrate its utility using datasets for sist rur us rattlesnakes and for soybeans. Availability and implementation: The method to infer the phylogen-etic relationship among quartets is implemented in the software

introduction with recent advances in DNA sequencing technology, it is now common to have available alignments from multiple genes for inference of an overall species level phylogeny. While this species tree is generally the object that we seek to estimate, it is widely known that each individual gene has its own phylogeny, called a gene tree, which may not agree with the species tree. Many possible causes of this gene incongruence are known, including horizontal gene transfer, gene duplication and loss, hybridization and incomplete lineage sorting (). Of these, the best studied is incomplete lineage sorting, which is commonly modeled by the coalescent process (). Much recent effort has been devoted to the development of methods to estimate species level phylogenies from multi-locus data under the coalescent model (). Here, we consider this basic problem, although our approach to the problem differs from previous approaches in several important ways. Previous approaches can be divided into two groups (): summary statistics approaches and sequence based approaches. summary statistics approaches first estimate a gene tree independently for each gene, and then treat the estimated gene trees as data for a second stage of analysis to estimate the species tree. The most popular approaches in this category are Maximum Tree () [also implemented in the program STEM ()], STAR (), s teac (), m pest () and Minimize Deep coalescence s [as implemented in the program phylon et (. These methods are computationally efficient for large datasets, but generally ignore variability in the estimated gene trees and thus potentially lose accuracy. The second group of methods uses the full data for estimation of the species tree via a Bayesian framework for inference. The three most common methods in this group, BEST (), *BEAST () and SNAPP (), all seek to estimate the posterior distribution for the species tree using Markov chain Monte Carlo (MCMC), but differ in some details of the implementation. These methods become time consuming when the number of loci is large, and assessment of convergence of the MCMC can be difficult. Our proposed method is distinct from both classes of existing approaches in that it uses the full data directly, but does not utilize a Bayesian framework. It is thus computationally efficient while incorporating all sources of variability (both mutational variance and coalescent variance (cf.) in the estimation process. The theory underlying our method applies to unlinked single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data, for which each site is assumed to have its own genealogy drawn from the coalescent model; however, we use simulation to show that the method also performs well for multi-locus sequence data. To describe our proposed method, we first begin with a brief overview of the coalescent model in the context of species level phylogenetics. We use simulation to assess the performance of the method for both simulated and empirical data. We conclude with a short discussion of how the proposed method can be scaled up to larger tax on sets for estimation of species phylogenies in a coalescent framework, and apply it to two empirical datasets. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com
conclusion we have presented a method to reliably infer the valid split in a set of four tax a. We have demonstrated that the method performs very well over a range of simulation conditions. The method can be easily extended for use in inferring species phylogenies in larger tax on samples, as demonstrated by our applications to the rattlesnake data and to the soybean data. The method thus makes a valuable contribution to the collection of methods for inferring species level phylogenetic trees under the coalescent model for either multi-locus or unlinked SNP data.
