phenome wide association studies p he was have been used to replicate known genetic associations and discover new phenotype associations for genetic variants. This p he was implementation allows users to translate ICD-9 codes to p he was case and control groups, perform analyses using these and or other phenotypes with covariate adjustments and plot the results. We demonstrate the methods by replicating a p he was on rs3135388 (near hla drb associated with multiple sclerosis) and performing a novel p he was using an individuals maximum white blood cell count (WBC) as a continuous measure. Our results for rs3135388 replicate known associations with more significant results than the original study on the same dataset. Our p he was of WBC found expected results, including associations with infections, myeloproliferative diseases and associated conditions, such as anemia. These results demonstrate the performance of the improved classification scheme and the flexibility of p he was encapsulated in this package.

introduction genome wide association studies g was have been an important research method for the past 10 years. These studies typically take the form of a case control study where many genotypes are analyzed with a specific phenotype. Many software packages, such as Plink and snp test have been developed to support g was (). More recently, phenome wide association studies p he was have been used to interrogate with which phenotypes a given genetic variant may be associated (). p he was was originally described within an electronic medical record (EMR) cohort, and emr based p he was have been recently shown to replicate 66% of sufficiently powered known associations across many disease domains as well as discover new associations (). p he was methods have been applied to research cohorts as well, successfully replicating many known associations and finding potential novel associations (). Visualization software has also been developed to help present and investigate p he was results (). Focused on evaluating many phenotypes for a given set of genotypes, p he was methods do not translate well to traditional g was software, which typically follows a one phenotype, many genotypes paradigm. Although it is possible to perform analyses using existing software packages, it requires scripting many runs of the software. To foster adoption of p he was we developed an R implementation of the most common functionality needed to perform and visualize emr based p he was. This R package follows the methods detailed in, but has been designed to use either genetic or non genetic data as the independent variable.
