Motivation: Considerable attention has been focused on predicting rna rna interaction since it is a key to identifying possible targets of non-coding small RNAs that regulate gene expression post transcriptionally. A number of computational studies have so far been devoted to predicting joint secondary structures or binding sites under a specific class of interactions. In general, there is a trade-off between range of interaction type and efficiency of a prediction algorithm, and thus efficient computational methods for predicting comprehensive type of interaction are still awaited. Results: We present rac tip a fast and accurate prediction method for rna rna interaction of general type using integer programming. rac tip can integrate approximate information on an ensemble of equilibrium joint structures into the objective function of integer programming using posterior internal and external base paring probabilities. Experimental results on real interaction data show that prediction accuracy of rac tip is at least comparable to that of several state of the art methods for rna rna interaction prediction. Moreover, we demonstrate that rac tip can run incomparably faster than competitive methods for predicting joint secondary structures. Availability: rac tip is implemented in C++, and the source code is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/ractip/

introduction recent years have seen a renewal of interest in the biological roles of functional non-coding RNAs nc rnas. Modern studies have provided evidence that they can act as ubiquitous regulators in living cells (). A class of small nc rnas downregulates gene expression post transcriptionally via base pairing with target mRNAs of the nc rnas to inhibit the translation into the corresponding proteins. Eukaryotic microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) are very short and have almost full sequence complementarity to their targets. On the other hand, several regulatory antisense RNAs have been found in bacterial chromosomes, which have relatively long sequences and interact with their target mRNAs in a more intricate manner (). This type of interaction comes from the fact that the genes encoding the antisense RNAs are located at loci different from those encoding their targets (i.e. trans encoded antisense RNAs) (). In particular, kissing hairpin structures (see) caused by loop loop interaction have been observed (). To help to understand the mechanism of rna rna interaction further, as well as to identify target RNAs of specific nc rnas it is desirable to develop fast and accurate computational methods for predicting interacting RNA structures. rna rna interaction prediction has so far been performed by several computational approaches, which can be roughly classified into four groups. The first group including una fold (), rna hybrid () and rna duplex from the Vienna RNA Package () disregards intramolecular bonds in both sequences and computes the minimum free energy (MFE) hybridization. They work out for short interacting RNAs but are impracticable for long sequences with intramolecular structures. The second group belongs to the category that uses the idea of concatenating two RNA sequences and considering them as a single strand so that the MFE structure of the resulting sequence can be computed. pair fold () and rna co fold () adopt this procedure, but these methods can not predict general type of interaction such as kissing hairpins. Other approaches such as rna up (), in tarn a (), in rnas () and bista rna () fall into the third group, which considers rna rna interaction as the stepwise process of individual intramolecular foldings and their hybridization. rna up and in tarn a can predict only one binding site, whereas in rnas and bista rna can predict multiple binding sites. The final group aims at predicting the MFE joint secondary structure or computing the interaction partition function under the comprehensive type of interaction. IRIS (), inteRNA (), RIG (), pirn a (), rip () and also in rnas () are listed as this category. These methods impose natural constraints on the joint structure such that there are no internal pseudo knots crossing interactions and zigzags (). Note that suggested that these constraints are satisfied by all examples of page i461 i460i466

conclusion we proposed rac tip a novel method for predicting RNA RNA interaction of general type using IP. In our approach, the threshold cut technique was adopted to reduce the complexity of the solution space of the IP problem, which also leads to maximizing expected accuracy. Experimental results on real interaction data demonstrated that prediction accuracy of rac tip is at least comparable to that of several state of the art methods for joint structure prediction and binding site prediction. Although it is difficult to evaluate theoretically the time complexity of our ip based approach, experimental validations revealed that rac tip can run much faster than competitive methods for predicting joint secondary structures. This is an important fact to stress since rac tip is expected to improve prediction performance in unknown target search in long genomes by predicting respective intramolecular structures as well as intermolecular binding sites in practical time. For this purpose, we should also show that rac tip can discriminate between targets and non targets which is left as our future work. rac tip not only achieved success in rna rna interaction prediction but also showed further possibility of applying the fast ip based method with threshold cut to other biologically important problems, which are worthwhile and challenging tasks.
