Motivation: Public archives contain thousands of trillions of bases of valuable sequencing data. More than 40% of the Sequence Read Archive is human data protected by provisions such as db gap. To analyse db gap protected data, researchers must typically work with IT administrators and signing officials to ensure all levels of security are implemented at their institution. This is a major obstacle, impeding reproducibility and reducing the utility of archived data. Results: We present a protocol and software tool for analyzing protected data in a commercial cloud. The protocol, rail db gap is applicable to any tool running on Amazon Web Services Elastic map reduce. The tool, rail rna v0.2, is a spliced aligner for rnase q data, which we demonstrate by running on 9662 samples from the db gap protected g tex consortium dataset. The rail db gap protocol makes explicit for the first time the steps an investigator must take to develop Elastic map reduce pipelines that analyse db gap protected data in a manner compliant with NIH guidelines. rail rna automates implementation of the protocol, making it easy for typical biomedical investigators to study protected rnase q data, regardless of their local IT resources or expertise. Availability and Implementation: rail rna is available from http://rail.bio. Technical details on the rail db gap protocol as well as an implementation walkthrough are available at https://github.com/ nellore rail db gap. Detailed instructions on running rail rna on db gap protected data using Amazon Web Services are available at

introduction the Database of Genotypes and Phenotypes db gap () hosts controlled access raw and processed human genomic data and associated phenotypic data. While datasets are stripped of metadata linking them with specific individuals, the remaining data is still sensitive in part because it could be combined with external information to identify individuals. The NIH requires adherence to security guidelines for the proper handling of db gap protected data, from acquisition through destruction (see http:// www ncbi nlm nih gov projects gappdfdbgap2b security procedures. pdf). These include physical security of computing infrastructure, restricting inbound internet access, multi-factor authentication (MFA) and password policies, encryption of data, enforcing the principle of least privilege and logging data access. For many investigators, the guidelines pose a practical challenge: institutional computer clusters may not be compliant, requiring IT policy revisions or intervention by IT administrators.

application the rail db gap protocol is implemented in the v0.2 line of rail rna. Detailed instructions on implementation are available at https://github. com nellore rail db gap and rail rna v0.2.x may be downloaded at http://rail.bio. We used the rail db gap protocol to align 9662 paired end rnase q samples obtained by the g tex consortium () in 30 batches across various human tissues over a period of 5 days, 5 h and 28 min for US$0.32 per sample. Computational details, mapped read proportions and a cost calculation are described in the Supplementary Material. Scripts for reproducing our results are available at https://github.com/nellore/runs/tree/master/gtex. Ronald Dowden and Brian Willey of it jh for assistance in designing and validating the protocol.
