Decreasing costs of modern high throughput experiments allow for the simultaneous analysis of altered gene activity on various molecular levels. However, these multi omics approaches lead to a large amount of data, which is hard to interpret for a non bioinformatic ian. Here, we present the remotely accessible multilevel ontology analysis (RAMONA). It offers an easy to use interface for the simultaneous gene set analysis of combined omics datasets and is an extension of the previously introduced MONA approach. RAMONA is based on a Bayesian enrichment method for the inference of overrepresented biological processes among given gene sets. Overrepresentation is quantified by interpretable term probabilities. It is able to handle data from various molecular levels, while in parallel coping with redundancies arising from gene set overlaps and related multiple testing problems. The comprehensive output of RAMONA is easy to interpret and thus allows for functional insight into the affected biological processes. With RAMONA, we provide an efficient implementation of the Bayesian inference problem such that ontologies consisting of thousands of terms can be processed in the order of seconds. Availability and implementation: RAMONA is implemented as asp net Web application and publicly available at http://icb.helm holtz muenchen de
introduction decreasing costs of large scale molecular profiling studies, such as transcript omics or proteomics, allow for the joint analysis of several molecular levels in parallel. The crucial step in the analysis of such diverse data is to combine the different levels such that a comprehensive insight in the response of genes to these conditions can be assessed. This in turn can be directly linked to the underlying biological processes affecting the activity of genes on several molecular levels. However, these kinds of analyses are not straightforward, and often the molecular levels are treated as independent to allow the use of single omics analysis techniques. In practice, gene response is initially determined by using statistical methods. Among the resulting set of altered genes, one usually searches for overrepresented biological processes by applying common gene set enrichment methods () that incorporate functional annotations from databases like Gene Ontology (GO) () or the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (). Even though there exists a multitude of easy to use web based enrichment tools (), they are only capable of analyzing a single molecular level. Furthermore, no Web tool is available that properly deals with term redundancies appearing frequently, e.g. due to the tree structure of GO. To provide a powerful method to integrate multilevel gene response data for the determination of altered biological processes, we recently introduced the multilevel ontology analysis (MONA) (). MONA is a model based Bayesian method, which is able to integrate datasets from multiple molecular levels by simultaneously dealing with term redundancies and related multiple testing problems. However, the usage of the standalone MONA application can be a cumbersome process, as the user has to specify the data structure of the activated genes and their term annotations by himself herself. Furthermore, it lacks a comprehensive visualization of the results and can be run only on Windows machines, as it depends on the .NET library. Here we introduce a web based implementation of MONA, called remotely accessible MONA (RAMONA), which is designed with the focus on practical usability for any applied researcher. It offers three models to analyze most common experimental setups. The Web interface is capable of processing many given gene identifiers as well as of automatically mapping them to widely used ontologies derived from GO and KEGG. The detailed output of RAMONA includes an interactive visualization of the inferred active terms in the context of their respective pathways or ontology hierarchy. This provides functional insight into the activity of biological processes and the role of associated genes responding to the given conditions by providing relevant details on the resulting processes.

conclusion the integration of data from multiple molecular levels for gene set analysis is becoming more and more important and therefore requires appropriate methods, which are easy to use for applied researchers. Important challenges we address with RAMONA include dependencies between terms with an ontology and interactions between molecular levels. We provide an easy to use Web application that can be used to infer non-redundant biological processes either from multiple molecular levels or from a single molecular level.
