Motivation: The de novo assembly of genomes from whole genome shotgun sequence data is a computationally intensive, multi-stage task and it is not known a priori which methods and parameter settings will produce optimal results. In current de novo assembly projects, a popular strategy involves trying many approaches, using different tools and settings, and then comparing and contrasting the results in order to select a final assembly for publication. Results: Herein, we present RAMPART, a configurable workflow management system for de novo genome assembly, which helps the user identify combinations of third party tools and settings that provide good results for their particular genome and sequenced reads. RAMPART is designed to exploit High performance computing environments, such as clusters and shared memory systems, where available.

introduction the de novo genome assembly of whole genome sequence data is a complex task and typically involves testing multiple tools, parameters and approaches to produce the best possible assembly for downstream analysis. This is necessary because it is not always known a priori, which tools and settings will work best on the available sequence data given the organism's specific genomic properties, such as size, ploidy and repetitive content. Despite advances in computing hardware and sequencing technologies, de novo assembly, particularly for more complex eukaryotic genomes, remains a nontrivial task and an ongoing challenge. Recently, several tools, such as i met amos () and A5 (), approach this problem by exhaustively testing many tools in parallel and then identifying and selecting the best assembly. However, these pipelines focus on prokaryote assemblies, where the computational demands are manageable and the genomes are easier to assemble. The complexities of eukaryotic genomes prohibit exhaustive testing of all tools and parameters with current computing hardware. For these projects the user must use the literature and their own experience to decide which avenues are worth considering.
