Motivation: The topology of the network induced by the neurons connectivity s in the Caenorhabditis elegans differs from most common random networks. The neurons positions of the c elegans have been previously explained as being optimal to induce the required network wiring. We here propose a complementary explanation that the network wiring is the direct result of a local stochastic synapse formation process. Results: We show that a model based on the physical distance between neurons can explain the c elegans neural network structure, specifically, we demonstrate that a simple model based on a geometrical synapse formation probability and the inhibition of short coherent cycles can explain the properties of the c elegans neural network. We suggest this model as an initial framework to discuss neural network generation and as a first step toward the development of models for more advanced creatures. In order to measure the circle frequency in the network, a novel graph theory circle length measurement algorithm is proposed. Contact:

introduction neural networks can have up to 100 billion synapses (). The information defining the position of each synapse is not hard coded into the genome, since the number of genes coding for the properties of the neural network does not exceed a few hundred, even for the complex network of the Homo sapiens (). Axon guidance, for example, is determined by a few tens of genes [specifically 93 in the Caenorhabditis elegans] mainly ner tins ephrin s and se mph or ins (). The position of each synapse must therefore be determined by other means. The synapse positions can be a combination of genetically coded hardwired connections, stochastic processes or learning mechanisms (). The relation between the neurons positions and the network wiring has been extensively studied in the context of optimal wiring (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.; perez escudero and). The neuron positioning was proposed to be optimized to minimize the total axon and dendrite lengths (). The neuron positions were indeed found to reduce the wiring length (compared to a random positioning). However, it is not clear whether the neuron positioning is optimized to minimize the wiring or if the short wiring is simply the result of the preferential attachment of nearby neurons. The only currently existing fully mapped neural network is the one of the CE. As part of the CE project, a full map of the CE cells was produced, and all neurons and synapses were mapped (). The observed CE has 302 neurons and 2170 synapses, which are divided into motor, sensor and intermediate neurons. A wide distribution of synaptic connections characterizes the CE network. Neurons with a high number of synaptic connections are mostly localized on the main nerve ring. The nerve rings, bundles of 100 axons encircling the outside of the pharynx, are the principal circumferential tracts in the CE nervous system (). Axons from sensory neurons in the anterior ganglia form six labial nerves that enter the nerve ring at its anterior margin. Most axons from neurons in the lateral ganglia enter the nerve ring at its posterior margin either laterally or ventrally via the ventral ganglion. Other neurons, such as sensors and motor neurons, are naturally localized near the edges of the nematode. However, there are also a large number of sensors near the pharynx because the pharynx centralizes much of the sensory activity of the nematode. In the current work, we propose to study the CE NN generation mechanism using network theory tools. We represent the CE NN neurons as nodes and synapses as edges. Hundreds of network generation mechanisms were proposed in the last few years, some very generic and some specific to a given network (e.g. among many others (). The simplest network generation mechanism model was suggested by. In this model, a network is constructed by randomly connecting nodes. For a given Erdos Renyi Network with n nodes er nnp the probability of connecting each pair is p. This network has a Poisson degree distribution, 1 and short average geodesic distances between nodes. 2 page 648 647652

discussion the CE NN is currently the only fully mapped network. Beyond its obvious physical parameters (size, number of neurons, number of synapses and the physical position of the neurons), it has several well defined properties, such as its peculiar degree distribution, clustering coefficient, centrality and shortest distance and circle distribution. This fully mapped network allows us to test if the network structure is predetermined and rigid, or is based on a simple stochastic process. We have tested the simplest stochastic process where the probability of creating a synapse decreases geometrically with the physical distance. This model contains a single parameter and can explain the vast majority of the network properties. The main difference between the proposed model and the experimentally measured CE NN is the low number of coherent circles in the observed network. This may be due to a secondary process that limits useless very short information cycles and increasing the number and length of long circles. Such an inhibitory process is reasonable, taking into account that most axon guidance and neural adhesion genes are inhibitory. Thus, the network generation is a mixture of spatial and functional limitations. The proposed model suggests that the network properties can be explained by the need to maintain global connectivity and a local structure. Such a balance leads to the creation of local nerve rings with a high internal clustering on the one hand and the creation of long range axons on the other hand. At the mathematical level, these two requirements limit the values of  to a very narrow range and explain most of the network properties. A complementary view of neural networks is that the neurons positions have evolved over long periods to minimize the wiring length. Neuron positions may have evolved to optimize some functionality, for example, through the aggregation of neurons in rings. However, the observed minimal wiring length can not serve as a proof for such a mechanism. The proper positioning of neurons based on their wiring properties can be an artifact of the network generation mechanism. We have applied an optimal wiring algorithm () to the network produced by the simulation and obtained a average error of 0.17  0.03 in the node positions (random positions would give 0.35  0.01). A similar error was obtained when the CE NN was used. The analysis was performed assuming a single synapse between each pair of connected neurons. While the nematode's NN is much simpler than that of primates and advanced vertebrates, its generation rule may hint to the way much more complex networks are generated. One may extrapolate from these results two basic building elements: (i) a local stochastic creation mechanism combined with functional limitations on short coherent circles, (ii) local structure and long range connectivity need to be maintained. Such a model can be the prototype for the way the structure of large complex networks can be theoretically coded by a very small number of genes.
