Motivation: In the post genomic era, automatic annotation of protein sequences using computational homology based methods is highly desirable. However, often protein sequences diverge to an extent where detection of homology and automatic annotation transfer is not straightforward. Sophisticated approaches to detect such distant relationships are needed. We propose a new approach to identify deep evolutionary relationships of proteins to overcome shortcomings of the available methods. Results: We have developed a method to identify remote homologues more effectively from any protein sequence database by using several cascading events with Hidden Markov Models (C-HMM). We have implemented clustering of hits and profile generation of hit clusters to effectively reduce the computational timings of the cascaded sequence searches. Our C-HMM approach could cover 94, 83 and 40% coverage at family, superfamily and fold levels, respectively, when applied on diverse protein folds. We have compared C-HMM with various remote homology detection methods and discuss the trade-offs between coverage and false positives. Availability and implementation: A standalone package implemented in Java along with a detailed documentation can be downloaded from https://github.com

introduction rapid increase in genome sequencing initiatives has led to the accumulation of a huge amount of sequence information that needs detailed annotation. Structural and functional characterization of new proteins is a critical task and it is often based on the sequence similarity with proteins of known structure and function. But in some cases, proteins diverge to an extent where relationships between them can not be easily established using direct sequence search based approaches. Such evolutionary distant proteins are called as remote homologues, and detection of such remote relationships is still a challenging task. Accurate detection of remote homologues can facilitate the assignment of putative functions to uncharacterized proteins improving genomic function annotations. In many cases, functional annotation can be achieved using protein structures, as structural divergence is much slower than sequence divergence. However, protein structural information is limited and the growth of structure databases is also relatively very slow (). With the continuous expansion of sequence databases, there is a growing need for a protocol to identify such distant homologues by exploiting mere sequence information. Many methods based on position specific scoring matrices (PSSM) and profile Hidden Markov Models (HMM) have been developed to detect distant relationships between protein sequences (). For example, position specific iterated BLAST derives a PSSM from multiple sequences identified by BLAST searches, which are further used to search sequence database to identify newer hits in an iterative manner (). The drawback of PSI-BLAST is that it can converge before finding all the true positive hits. On the other hand, probabilistic model based profile HMMs () are more sensitive and efficient in remote homolog detection (). HMMER utility provides one such package named jack hmmer which iterates profile hmms till convergence, to detect distant relationships of proteins (). Profile HMMs are similar to sequence profiles, but in addition to the amino acid frequencies in the columns of a multiple sequence alignment, they also contain position specific probabilities for insertions and deletions along the alignment. Profile HMMs are more sensitive than BLAST ps sms since position specific gap penalties penalize chance hits more, as compared with true positives. hmm hmm comparison, as implemented in hh search and hh blits is also an effective method to identify remote homologues (). In principle, these methods extract information from intermediate sequences that share sequence properties of multiple remotely related proteins to detect remote homologues (). When the relation between two remote homologues is not evident, these intermediate sequences serve as stepping stones for hopping through sequence space. For example, hits from the first 'generation' serve as intermediate sequences to detect homologues in the second generation of PSI-BLAST. We have shown earlier that the intermediate sequence approach can be utilized more effectively by cascading through PSI-BLAST over various generations to cover more distant relationships at family, superfamily and fold levels (). Yet, a major drawback of using PSI-BLAST in cascade searches is the computational time, which increases considerably with the size and complexity of the databases, lending it almost impossible to apply on large sequence databases. In this study, we have proposed a new protocol called cascade hmm (C-HMM) that can be used to identify remote homologues from protein sequence databases. The primary motivation of developing C-HMM is to permit effective remote homology detection against any available sequence database, irrespective of its size. CHMM involves cascading of HMMs through various generations to detect true distant homologues even at superfamily and fold levels. We also show that, clustering of protein sequences, followed by profile generation helps in effective detection of remote homologues. In addition, we have compared different remote homology detection methods to provide insights about proper usage of different approaches prior to initiating sequence searches. Our analysis highlighted that blast based methods perform more adequately at the family and superfamily levels, while hmm based methods are overall more efficient for sequence searches even at the fold level.
