Motivation: The detection of subtle genomic allelic imbalance events has many potential applications. For example, identifying cancer associated allelic imbalanced regions in low tumor cellularity samples or in low proportion tumor subclones can be used for early cancer detection, prognostic assessment and therapeutic selection in cancer patients. We developed haplo h seq for the detection of subtle allelic imbalance events from next generation sequencing data. Results: Our method identified events of 10 mega bases or greater occurring in as little as 16% of the sample in exo me sequencing data (at 80Â) and 4% in whole genome sequencing data (at 30Â), far exceeding the capabilities of existing software. We also found haplo h seq to be superior at detecting large chromosomal changes across a series of pancreatic samples from TCGA. Availability and Implementation: haplo h seq is available at sche et org software distributed under an open source MIT

introduction a critical mechanism by which cancer cells operate is through activation of oncogenes or inactivation of tumor suppressor genes. This may happen via acquired chromosomal alterations, such as amplification, deletion or copy neutral loss of heterozygosity cnl oh that result in allelic imbalance a i. Because a i provides insights into the progression towards malignancy and metastasis, a i detection can be applied to help in cancer prognosis and therapeutic decision making (). In the last decade, array comparative genomic hybridization a cgh and single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) array based approaches have become popular technologies for a i detection (). More recently, the advent of next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies for studies of cancer genomic variation () has brought the potential for finer resolution (detection and boundary refinement) due to a denser marker set and arbitrarily high coverage. However, costs limit depth of coverage through whole genome sequencing (WGS) and therefore whole exo me sequencing (WES) is often preferred for genomic studies. WES presents a particular challenge for inferring a i since coverage is variable across regions and the target is limited to $3% of the genome. Several tools model expected coverage based on summaries from a WES reference panel to account for technical variability in V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
