The open source environment R is f the most widely used software to statistically explore biological data sets including sequence alignments. BAM is the de facto standard file format for sequence alignment. With rb am tools we provide now a full spectrum of accessibility to BAM for R users such as reading, writing, extraction of subsets and plotting of alignment depth where the script syntax closely follows the samba m format. Additionally, rb am tools enables fast accumulative tabulation of splicing events over multiple BAM files. Availability and implementation: rb am tools is available on CRAN and on r forge
introduction the sam tools format specifies various data slots for sequence alignments many of which are difficult to understand when sequencing experiments are to be analyzed. For analysis of sequencing data, detailed access to contents of BAM files is needed, especially when technical problems arise. rb am tools allows R users to investigate alignment results by reading the header section or retrieve and view alignments from regions of interest using basic R structures. rb am tools provides functions for creation and modification of BAM file header or alignment section contents. rb am tools also facilitates writing of BAM files which is not possible in Bioconductor (). Additionally rb am tools contains a framework for sequential and fast extraction of alignment gap positions (see) on rnase q data which are candidate sites for true splicing events. rb am tools is part of an analysis pipeline for analysis of splicing events in rnase q data which consists of three R packages: rb am tools and ref genome () and splice sites (Kaisers, 2013b). The identification of splicing inaccuracies is a non trivial task on BAM files, since the positions of alignment gaps must be accounted on billions of reads. With rb am tools processing data from, e.g. 60 rnase q samples (containing 8:37  10 9 alignments) can be done in 1.75 h on a standard workstation with minimal working memory demand. Current versions of the sam tools C library contain misalignment (bus) errors (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Bus_error), which may cause program crashes on some architectures (e.g. SPARC). In rb am tools these misalignment errors are corrected (see Supplementary Material).
