We have developed r chem pp a web service that identifies structurally similar compounds (structural analogs) in large scale molecule databases. The service allows compounds to be queried in the widely used ch embl drug bank and the Connectivity Map databases. r chem cpp utilizes the best performing similarity functions, i.e. molecule kernels, as measures for structural similarity. Molecule kernels have proven superior performance over other similarity measures and are currently excelling at machine learning challenges. To considerably reduce computational time, and thereby make it feasible as a web service, a novel efficient pre filtering strategy has been developed, which maintains the sensitivity of the method. By exploiting information contained in public databases, the web service facilitates many applications crucial for the drug development process, such as prioritizing compounds after screening or reducing adverse side effects during late phases. r chem cpp was used in the deep tox pipeline that has won the to x21 Data Challenge and is frequently used by researchers in pharmaceutical companies. Availability and implementation: The web service and the R package are freely available via

introduction one strategy to remedy the steadily declining efficiency of the drug development process is to utilize the vast information on chemical compounds that is already present in public and internal databases (). To this end, compounds that are structurally similar to the current drug candidate have to be identified in public databases. This 'structural analog ing step can enhance the drug development process at different phases: After high throughput screening, a number of compounds are selected, of which typically very little information about their biological effects is available. Querying these compounds in a database can yield similar compounds that have already been measured in various biological experiments and provide relevant information () (). This information can improve the drug development process at various stages and decreases the risk of late failures (). The best performing similarity measures for identifying structurally similar compounds in a database are molecule kernels. Molecule kernels have been developed for similarity based machine learning methods, such as Support Vector Machines, and their efficiency and precision have been demonstrated in various tasks (). The drawback of molecule kernels is that they are computationally demanding, since they consider all possible common substructures of a compound. To reach a query time of a few seconds, which is desired for web services, we have V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com developed a novel and computationally fast criterion that maintains the sensitivity of the molecule kernels. We have extensively tested the presented software in our computational pipeline for prediction of toxic effects of chemical compounds. This computational pipeline deep tox has won both the to x21 Data Challenge (http://www.ncats.nih.gov/ news and events features tox21 challenge winners html and the prediction of average cytotoxicity at the niehs n cats unc DREAM toxic o genetics Challenge (https://www.synapse.org/ synapses yn2208373wiki. We provide a web service, called r chem cpp to identify structurally similar compounds in ch embl (), drug bank () and the Connectivity Map (). This provides researchers with various types of information about chemical compounds and thereby helps to prioritize structures and facilitates decisions based on biological measurements. r chem cpp combines efficiently implemented molecule kernels with a new pre filtering strategy and offers a user friendly interface to adjust the kernel parameters. r chem cpp is a valuable tool for researchers in many areas in particular in drug design, toxicity prediction and cancer research. The web service r chem cpp has many advantages over a programming library for molecule kernels. To use molecule kernels requires extensive programming efforts. Therefore, many researchers are restricted to database queries provided by the database interfaces, which are based on simple substructure searches. We provide molecule kernels as a hands on tool for researchers of all areas and backgrounds. Furthermore, the preparation, curation and clean-up of the databases that is necessary for applying molecule kernels is included the r chem cpp web service. Additionally, the problem of high computational power that restricts queries in the large databases such as the ch embl has been solved by our pre filtering strategy.
