Motivation: The Illumina human methylation 450 bead chip has been extensively utilized in epi genome wide association studies. This array and its successor, the methylation epic array, use two types of probes infinium I (type I) and Infinium II (type ii in order to increase genome coverage but differences in probe chemistries result in different type I and II distributions of methylation values. Ignoring the difference in distributions between the two probe types may bias downstream analysis. Results: Here, we developed a novel method, called Regression on Correlated Probes (RCP), which uses the existing correlation between pairs of nearby type I and II probes to adjust the beta values of all type II probes. We evaluate the effect of this adjustment on reducing probe design type bias, reducing technical variation in duplicate samples, improving accuracy of measurements against known standards, and retention of biological signal. We find that RCP is statistically significantly better than unadjusted data or adjustment with alternative methods including SWAN and bmi q. Availability: We incorporated the method into the R package en mix which is freely available from the Bioconductor website (

introduction the advance of DNA methylation arrays in recent years has enabled large scale epi genome wide studies at single CpG site resolution. The Illumina Infinium human methylation 450 bead chip () is currently the most commonly utilized array. It provides measurement of methylation level at about half a million individual CpG sites. Its successor, the Infinium methylation epic bead chip provides measurement of methylation level at more than 850 000 sites. To increase CpG coverage across the human genome, both arrays utilize probes of two different chemistries, Infinium I (type I) and Infinium II (type II). However, methylation measurements (beta values) derived from the two types of probes exhibit different distributions. In particular, beta values derived from type II probes have a smaller dynamic range and are not as reproducible as the beta values derived from type I probes (). Several methods have been proposed to normalize the beta values derived from the two types of probes. These include adjusting the beta values from both types of probes so that they are more 'comparable' (e.g. SWAN () implemented in the min fi package), or adjusting beta values from type II probes using beta values from type I probes as referents, (e.g. the Peak Based Correction (PBC) () and Beta MIxture Quantile dilation bmi q (). Here, we proposed a novel method of adjusting type II probe beta values based on the correlation between a subset of closely spaced pairs of type I and II probes. This method, Regression on Correlated Probes (RCP), is simple, accurate and efficient. We tested RCP on multiple datasets and found that RCP outperformed bmi q and other methods. RCP has been implemented in Bioconductor package en mix (), is freely available for use, and can be combined with other pre-processing methods.
