Motivation: retro copies are copies of mature RNAs that are usually devoid of regulatory sequences and introns. They have routinely been classified as processed pseudo-genes with little or no biological relevance. However, recent findings have revealed functional roles for retro copies as well as their high frequency in some organisms, such as primates. Despite their increasing importance, there is no user friendly and publicly available resource for the study of retro copies. Results: Here, we present rc pedia an integrative and user friendly database designed for the study of retro copied genes. rc pedia contains a complete catalogue of the retro copies that are known to be present in human and five other primate genomes, their genomic context, inter-species conservation and gene expression data. rc pedia also offers a streamlined data representation and an efficient query system. Availability and implementation: rc pedia is available at http://www. bioinfo.

introduction retro copies are gene copies that are generated by reverse transcription and genomic integration of transcribed mRNAs. Although retro copies have been described since the early 1980s (), their functional roles have only recently been revealed (). retro copies occur frequently in many genomes, including those of primates (), and some retro copies are transcribed and have putative functions [see () for a review]. Interestingly, retro copies have idiosyncrasies that simplify their identification. The four main characteristics are as follows i an original multi exonic parental gene copy in the genome; (ii) a mono exonic region, without intronic regions; (iii) a poly-A stretch located in the 3 0 most region; or (iv) direct repeats of 812 nucleotides (nt) flanking them [see () for a review]. These characteristics make retro copy identification through computational pipelines reasonably straightforward, especially for species for which well assembled genomes and transcriptome s are available. Despite this, there is still a lack a publicly available and easy to use resources dedicated to the study of retro copies (), making it necessary either to use manual and multi-step approaches to explore retro copies or to use non specialized databases, such as the pseudogene databases (e.g. http://www.pseudogene.org/), that contain only basic and/ or restricted information. Here, we describe rc pedia a publicly available database that was developed for the study of retro copies. rc pedia contains a myriad of information on retro copied genes from six primate genomes (human, chimp, gorilla, orangutan, rhesus and marmoset), as well as a streamlined graphical data representation and an efficient information query system.

conclusion rc pedia is a well organized user friendly and streamlined graphical representation resource dedicated to the study of retro copies in primate genomes. To the best of our knowledge, rc pedia is the most comprehensive and publicly available database in this field, although some resources providing similar information (). We strongly believe that rc pedia will significantly improve the annotation and functional characterization of retro copies present in primate genomes.
