The r david web service package provides a class based interface from R programs scripts to fully access control the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery, without the need for human interaction on its Web site (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov). The library enhances the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery capabilities for Gene Ontology analysis by means of gostats based direct acyclic graph conversion methods, in addition to the usual many genes to many terms visualization. Availability and implementation: r david web service is available as an R package from the Bioconductor project www bioconductor org and on the authors Web site wwwb dmg comar under GPL-2 license, subjected to the terms of use of DAVID

introduction one of the most accessed systems for functional genomics proteomics analysis is the database for annotation, visualization and integrated discovery (DAVID), a web based online bioinformatics resource (http://david.abcc.ncifcrf.gov) that aims to provide tools for functional interpretation of large lists of genes/ proteins (). Its access is carried mainly through a Web site. There is also a uniform resource locator url based application programming interface, to query DAVID programmatically, accessible through david query R package (). However, the url application programming interface has limited capabilities, such as URL length, and only works with the default settings. In 2012, a web service interface was made available allowing full access and control over all its functionalities except visualization (). Although it is possible to handle DAVID web services (DWS) through R, it requires high programming skills. In addition, query results are difficult to manage, as they are XML (SOAP package, Temple Lang, 2012) or Java objects r java package,). Here we provide a versatile class based R interface to access DAVID. It is an R wrapper to all DWS functionalities, with several new features such as offline processing (allows using previously queried saved reports) and native R classes data types. Additionally, it overcomes DWS visualization constraints, providing the usual many genes to many terms feature, and enhances DAVID capabilities for Gene Ontology (GO,) analysis by means of gostats based () direct acyclic graph (DAG) conversion methods. Therefore, it expands DAVID features by allowing new developments through one of the most used computer languages in Bioinformatics, R (R Core).
