reads can is a highly scalable parallel program to identify non host sequences (of potential pathogen origin) and estimate their genome relative abundance in high throughput sequence datasets. reads can accurately classified human and viral sequences on a 20.1 million reads simulated dataset in 527 min using a small Beowulf compute cluster with 16 nodes (Supplementary Material).

introduction the idea of computational subtraction of human host sequences to identify microbial sequences was first implemented on Amazon EC2 (Elastic Compute Cloud) environment in the form of software path seq (). An alternative open source workflow available on desktop computers was recently provided by Rapid Identification of Non-human Sequences (RINS) (). More recently, a platform called CaPSID () to store and visualize the identified non-human sequences was described. We present reads can a highly scalable and efficient tool to analyze ultra high volume of data produced by the latest sequencers like Illumina his eq (http://www.illumina.com/systems/hiseq_ systems il mn that can produce 36 billion short reads in a single run. reads can uses the data parallelism in the sequenced reads and effectively distributes the processing on multiple Central Processing Unit (CPU)s. read scans core alignment procedure on multiple known references is based on s malt (H. posting l 2012, personal communication; http://www.sanger. ac uk resources softwares malt a fast and accurate short read mapper that works for a range of sequencing platforms (e.g. Illumina, Roche-454, Applied biosystems solid. reads can is highly portable to work on a dual core laptop computer with as small as 2 GB memory to a large Beowulf cluster with 100 s of compute nodes. reads can reports the genome relative abundance (GRA) of those identified non host microbial sequences implemented based on a proven finite mixture model and expectation maximization algorithm (). The results are ranked in the order of most to least abundant species grouped by National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) taxonomical tree. The software performs an alignment based assembly to report the length of the region covered by the reads and weighted mean length of such contigs produced as a result. This serves as a useful metric in assessing the true positive results and also eliminates the need for an assembly program for microbial sequences with known reference genomes.
