Motivation: The vast amount of already available and currently generated read mapping data requires comprehensive visualization, and should benefit from bioinformatics tools offering a wide spectrum of analysis functionality from just one source. Appropriate handling of multiple mapped reads during mapping analyses remains an issue that demands improvement. Results: The capabilities of the read mapping analysis and visualization tool read xplorer were vastly enhanced. Here, we present an even finer granulated read mapping classification, improving the level of detail for analyses and visualizations. The spectrum of automatic analysis functions has been broadened to include genome rearrangement detection as well as correlation analysis between two mapping data sets. Existing functions were refined and enhanced, namely the computation of differentially expressed genes, the read count and normalization analysis and the transcription start site (TSS) detection. Additionally, read xplorer 2 features a highly improved support for large eukaryotic data sets and a command line version, enabling its integration into workflows. Finally, the new version is now able to display any kind of tabular results from other bioinformatics tools.

discussion the comprehensive read mapping data visualization and automatic analysis tool read xplorer 2 features substantially enhanced capabilities from one source. The major improvement presented here is the extended read mapping classification which leads to more specific analysis results as shown in the results section. Further, the extended classification enables meaningful integration of multiple mapped reads and creates awareness for the different types of multiple mapped reads, e.g. to identify repetitive regions (). Moreover, two newly implemented analysis functions and substantial improvement of existing analyses widen the spectrum covered by read xplorer 2 and enable the user to screen for genome rearrangements and correlation between two data sets without the need to install additional software. The read count normalization can now be compared between different samples as the added TPM normalization is invariant between samples. With DESeq2 another widely used differential gene expression analysis package is available from within the software. The enhanced TSS detection allows deeper insights into the TSS landscape by analyzing additional properties of the TSS and presenting them to the user. The application range of read xplorer 2 is further broadened by improving the handling of eukaryotic data. Using our A. thaliana rnase q data set, we were able to successfully evaluate the new features and could show that the enhanced read classification helps to improve the analysis results. With the new command line interface, integration into automatic analysis pipelines is enabled. This allows handling experiments with many samples more efficiently than in the graphical user interface as only a single command is needed to import all data and subsequently run all desired analyses. Finally, integration of results from multiple tools and viewing the read mapping data along with analysis results is important for researchers. Therefore, the new possibility to import arbitrary data tables starting with a genomic position column aids this need.
