Motivation: Fast algorithms and well arranged visualizations are required for the comprehensive analysis of the ever growing size of genomic and transcript omic next generation sequencing data. Results: read xplorer is a software offering straightforward visualiza-tion and extensive analysis functions for genomic and transcript omic DNA sequences mapped on a reference. A unique specialty of read xplorer is the quality classification of the read mappings. It is incorporated in all analysis functions and displayed in read xplorer s various synchronized data viewers for (i) the reference sequence, its base coverage as (ii) normalizable plot and (iii) histogram, (iv) read alignments and (v) read pairs. read xplorer s analysis capability covers RNA secondary structure prediction, single nucleotide poly-morphism and deletion insertion polymorphism detection, genomic feature and general coverage analysis. Especially for rnase q data, it offers differential gene expression analysis, transcription start site and operon detection as well as rp km value and read count calculations. Furthermore, read xplorer can combine or superimpose coverage of different datasets. Availability and implementation: read xplorer is available as open source software at http://www.readxplorer.org along with a detailed

introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies () like the well established and continuously improved sequencing by synthesis () and pyrosequencing () or third generation sequencing technologies like SMRT () and semiconductor sequencing () generate an ever growing amount of genomic and transcript omic sequence data. Currently, single deep sequencing datasets even for prokaryotic organisms can consist of tens of millions of read sequences. At the same time, sequencing costs have fallen to 41000 dollars for a complete human genome. Analyzing differences and commonalities () or validating and refining the region annotations () of genomes is a task that has become routine in virtually all research institutes in the fields of microbiology and biotechnology because of the affordable costs of such an analysis (). The same holds for massive parallel complementary DNA (cDNA) sequencing rnase q experiments, which isolate a snapshot of the transcriptome of an organism () under prevailing or induced environmental conditions. These rnase q datasets can be studied with respect to the abundance of expressed genes and noncoding RNAs under different environmental conditions. Besides differential gene expression analysis, the identification of transcription start sites tss s can be improved by using 5 0 enriched rnase q datasets (), which contain only the first bases of the sequenced transcripts. Without automated analyses, advanced visualization and efficient handling of large datasets, it would be a tedious and interminable task to investigate these data. Hence, efficient and scalable algorithms are needed for the automated analysis and evaluation. To quickly browse the tremendous amounts of data and facilitate drawing conclusions, visualization of DNA sequence datasets has to be easy to use. Analysis results need to be visualized immediately, and important regions of a genome or transcriptome have to be accessible instantly. The list of popular published applications already available for visualizing short read mapping data in a genomic context includes SAVANT (), genome view (), IGV (), i gb () and Artemis (). All of these tools are desktop genome viewers, which are mainly designed for interactively displaying and handling various NGS data formats. Artemis was first a genome annotation tool, which has been extended to visualize high throughput read mapping data, variant calls and user defined input types. IGV is a flexible viewer for various NGS data formats but does not include automatic analysis capabilities. i gb is a viewer for real time zooming and panning through genomes. It can display annotations and position specific numerical graphs, e.g. calculated from coverage data. genome view is a dynamic short read and whole genome *To whom correspondence should be addressed there are several more useful published and also unpublished tools, like seq monk (http://www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac. uk projects seq monk available. Many of the published tools are listed in (). All currently available applications have in common that they display read mapping data as it is stored in read mapping files. These files, however, provide no information about the quantity and quality of each single read mapping. Such a classification of mapped reads, however, is a crucial step toward increasing the reliability of mapping analyses, as reads can map multiple times on the reference either with the same or with different amounts of mismatches. To add this knowledge and allow the user to freely decide upon the read type to be used for an analysis, we developed our software read xplorer. It is an interactive genome browser with broad analytic capabilities built around this read mapping classification. Moreover, it contains novel analysis methods and visualization modes for NGS datasets.
