Motivation: Ontologies have become indispensable in the Life Sciences for managing large amounts of knowledge. The use of logics in ontologies ranges from sound modelling to practical querying of that knowledge, thus adding a considerable value. We conceive reasoning on bio ontologies as a semi automated process in three steps: (i) defining a logic based representation language; (ii) building a consistent ontology using that language; and (iii) exploiting the ontology through querying. Results: Here, we report on how we have implemented this approach to reasoning on the OBO Foundry ontologies within bio gateway a biological Resource Description Framework knowledge base. By separating the three steps in a manual curation effort on meta rel a vocabulary that specifies relation semantics, we were able to apply reasoning on a large scale. Starting from an initial 401 million triples, we inferred about 158 million knowledge statements that allow for a myriad of prospective queries, potentially leading to new hypotheses about for instance gene products, processes, interactions or diseases. Availability: s parul code, a query end point and curated relation types in OBO Format, RDF and OWL 2 DL are freely available at http://www.semantic-systems-biology.org/metarel.

introduction life Sciences researchers become more and more acquainted with ontologies that support the management of knowledge in their research domains. Many initiatives on biomedical knowledge management have evolved into large Knowledge Bases (KB). Some of these consist of an ontology with a rich semantical content, like the Foundational Model of Anatomy (FMA) ()supporting anatomical aspects, SNOMED CT ()for medical and clinical terms, the Gene Ontology (GO) ()containing cellular information for gene description and the NCBI Taxonomy ()holding a classification of living organisms. Other KBs hold a large body of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. similarly formatted knowledge, like UniProt ()collecting valuable information about proteins and the Gene Ontology Annotations (GOA) ()annotating gene products using the cellular information in GO. Public ontology repositories such as the bio portal at n cbo (), the Ontology Lookup Service (OLS) () and bio gateway () make ontologies better accessible for scientists through visualizations, browse menus and search facilities. Biologists are beginning to accept formal languages and ontologies as instruments to reach consensus while modelling the knowledge of their interest (). The large amounts of data that are generated with high throughput methods call for such a framework (). In general, a sound framework consists of a common syntax (the symbols and language constructs used), a common semantics (the meaning of the symbols) and common modelling practices (describing how to use the language). Ontology, a domain in philosophy that has long been trying to describe reality, often with the use of logics, is strongly stimulated by its fusion with computer science. Theories that have been developed for over 2000 years can now be applied in automated systems (). Since the last decade of the previous century, Description Logics (DL) have been developed as decidable fragments of first order logic, and some of them with the purpose of efficient reasoning (). Another important evolution in computer science with respect to ontologies is the emergence of the Semantic Web and the use of Linked Data (). The Semantic Web is viewed as a stack of languages and technologies that make knowledge and data on the internet computer intelligible. This stands in stark contrast to the current World Wide Web, which consists of human readable web sites on the internet. The bottom layer of the Semantic Web stack consists of Internationalized Resource Identifiers (IRI, available at http://www.w3.org/2004/11/uri-iri-pressrelease) that can identify anything, like for instance biomedical concepts. On top of IRIs, there is a layer dealing with the syntax, called XML (Extensible Markup Language, available at http://www.w3.org/XML/), in turn followed by a layer of RDF (Resource Description Framework, available at http://www.w3.org/RDF/), which is useful for querying and inferring graph based representations (the linked data). Most of the KBs mentioned above are also provided in RDF. The top layer consists of the Web Ontology Language (OWL, available at http://www.w3.org/TR/owl-features/), used for expressing the meaning of knowledge and data (). In October 2009, OWL upgraded to OWL 2, which distinguishes several dl based page 1563 15621568

discussion bio ontologies and the Semantic Web are two important evolutions for knowledge management in the Life Sciences. They provide a logical framework, universal identifiers and tools for the integration of knowledge. However, in order to become really useful for Life Sciences researchers, both pillars need to mature further. As the amount of biomedical knowledge keeps growing exponentially, the scalability of Semantic Web tools should be a main concern. Slow queries and memory overflows form a real obstacle for the exploitation of KBs. With this work, we have chosen to enable efficient querying with the most basic semantic features, instead of hampering the query system with advanced, fully automated reasoning. The large and diverse possibilities of querying RDF demands better browsing and visualizing tools to make the technology more accessible to biologists. Some specific tools for browsing bio gateway are under construction (available at http://www.semanticsystems-biology.org/biogateway/sparql-viewer), but parameterizing and reworking the SPARQL code is still the best option for acquiring all the expressivity of the SPARQL query language. However, the direct relations between classes used in bio gateway may help overcome some of the current shortcomings pertaining to reasoning and browsing. On the side of the development of bio ontologies more efforts are required: ontology engineers should reuse other bio ontologies to avoid duplication, create appropriate relations, provide identifiers, synonyms, definitions and cross references. The Semantic Web architecture is perfectly suited for exploiting an orthogonal, crosslinked set of bio ontologies. bio gateway with logical inferences in place, can be used to identify the glitches in OBO ontologies. As a future work, we plan to include more data in bio gateway like biological pathways, and to test the biological usefulness of the inferences with in depth queries on very specific research questions. For example, the inferences on GO and the NCBI Taxonomy will allow to compare gene functions across species and kingdoms.

conclusion many different ontology engineers have collaborated in the coordinated development of more than 80 OBO ontology files. We have brought consistency to the stack of relation types in these files by gathering all the relation types in bio rel and translating them to OWL 2 DL. After merging the OWL translation of bio rel with meta rel in the RDF store bio gateway we could infer 158 million previously hidden knowledge statements from the explicitly asserted knowledge in the OBO ontologies, GOA annotations for about 2000 species, uniprotkb swissprot and the NCBI Taxonomy. The inferred knowledge statements can be used for biological hypothesis generation through querying. The success of our methodology is due to the soundness of OBO ontologies, the use of Semantic Web tools and the semi automated approach of reasoning. Our work shows that a small set of simple rules for bio ontologies results in efficient practices for reasoning and querying. As many researchers are involved in building bio ontologies more restrictive guidelines and principles for building bio ontologies are required in order to obtain more uniformity and reach more convergence for knowledge management in the Life Sciences.
