reb co express implements the approach of Dawson and ken dzi or ski using R, a freely available, open source statistical programming language. The approach identifies differential co-expression (DC) by examining the correlations among gene pairs using an empirical Bayesian approach, producing a false discovery rate controlled list of DC pairs. This interrogation of DC gene pairs complements but is distinct from differential expression analyses, under the general goal of understanding differential regulation across biological conditions. Availability and implementation: reb co express is freely available and hosted on Bioconductor; a source file and vignette may be found at

introduction the freely available R (R Development Core) package reb co express implements the algorithm of, an empirical Bayesian approach for identifying differentially co-expressed (DC) gene pairs. Microarray and related high throughput genomic experiments seek to identify genes that vary across biological conditions. This is often accomplished by identifying genes with changes in mean expression level, so called differentially expressed (DE) genes [for a review, see. Although useful, major biological insights have resulted far less frequently than originally expected (). This is in part because diseases can manifest due to a de or re regulation of genes that does not significantly affect each gene's average expression. Thus, identifying other types of differential regulation may increase our ability to distinguish between groups and provide insight into their distinct etiologies (for a discussion, see de la Fuente, 2010). We focus on DC gene pairs, where 'co-expression' refers to some measure of correlation. Early methods for identifying DC gene pairs conduct pair specific tests for selected pairs within a condition, identify those pairs that are strongly or significantly co-expressed, and declare pairs to be DC if they are co-expressed in one condition but not another (). Unfortunately, these approaches sacrifice considerable power by conducting analyses separately * To whom correspondence should be addressed. within condition and they do not provide probabilistic statements regarding the likelihood that a particular pair is DC. These issues are largely addressed by their extension of the traditional f test to accommodate changes in means and correlations has been shown () to be overly conservative. Also, since their test statistic simultaneously quantifies DE and DC, selection of a pair provides no information about whether the pair is DE, DC or both. The approach implemented in eb co express provides a false discovery rate (FDR) controlled list of significant DC gene pairs without sacrificing power. It is applicable within a single study as well as across multiple studies. For more information on the underlying theory, simulations and an application, please see our original paper in Biometrics. For a fully worked example with details at each step of the analysis, please see the vignette that accompanies the reb co express package.
