Motivation: The ancestor of birds and mammals lived approximately 300 million years ago. Inferring its genome organization is key to understanding the differentiated evolution of these two lineages. However, detecting traces of its chromosomal organization in its extant descendants is difficult due to the accumulation of molecular evolution since birds and mammals lineages diverged. Results: We address several methodological issues for the detection and assembly of ancestral genomic features of ancient vertebrate genomes, which encompass adjacencies, contiguous segments, syn ten ies and double syn ten ies in the context of a whole genome duplication. Using generic, but stringent, methods for all these problems, some of them new, we analyze 15 vertebrate genomes, including 12 amnio tes and 3 teleost fishes, and infer a high resolution genome organization of the amnio te ancestral genome, composed of 39 ancestral linkage groups at a resolution of 100 kb. We extensively discuss the validity and robustness of the method to variations of data and parameters. We introduce a support value for each of the groups, and show that 36 out of 39 have maximum support. Conclusions: Single methodological principle can not currently be used to infer the organization of the amnio te ancestral genome, and we demonstrate that it is possible to gather several principles into a computational paleo genomics pipeline. This strategy offers a solid methodological base for the reconstruction of ancient vertebrate genomes. Availability: Source code, in C++ and Python, is available at

introduction the reconstruction of ancestral karyotypes and gene orders from homologies between extant species contributes to understanding the large scale evolutionary mutations that led to current genomes from their last common ancestor. For example, given ancestral genomes or gene orders, distances and evolutionary scenarios between genomes can be computed along branches of the considered phylogenetic tree () and not only between pairs of extant species. More generally, one can hope to work within an * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 'evolutionary framework combining ancestral and extant genomes in a robust phylogenetic tree' (). The ancestral reconstruction problem has been approached for eukaryotic genomes using cytogenetics techniques pioneered by Dobzhansky and Sturtevant (1938) and recently applied to mammalian genomes (). However, when dealing with older ancestors and larger evolutionary distances, homologies are less visible by cytogenetics methods. It is only with the recent availability of sequenced and assembled genomes that bioinformatics methods can handle the problem of predicting the deep past of metazoan chromosomes [reviews by; muffat o and roest croll i us (2008);. These methods address the problem at a higher resolution than cytogenetics techniques, as they require assembled genomes, either fully or at least in large contigs and scaffolds. The results obtained on mammalian genomes, based on genome rearrangement models () or on physical mapping methods (), slowly converge toward the cytogenetics ones (Ferguson). Prospective methods have attempted the reconstruction of more ancient animal proto genomes amnio tes (), bony fishes (), vertebrates (), chordates () or even eumetazoa (). However, the accuracy of these ad hoc methodologies has not been studied as thoroughly as for more generic methods. The ability of the latter to produce reliable results on mammalian or yeast genomes was evaluated either by comparisons to cytogenetics or manual reconstructions (). The validation of the results is indeed a major issue, since ancient genomes can not be sequenced due to DNA decay. Simulations, although used in a few studies (), face the currently limited understanding of large scale evolutionary processes such as genome rearrangements and gene losses following a Whole Genome Duplication wg d. Cytogenetic results or manual reconstructions are not available for very ancient genomes. The goal of the present work is to propose a general methodology for inferring ancestral genome segments and linkage groups, based on several comparative genomics principles grouped into a physical mapping framework. The framework we describe can be applied to any ancestral species following the speciation from the teleost fishes (tetrapods, sar copter i gian s for example), provided sequenced extant genomes from two branches descending from an ancestor are available. We apply it to the ancestral amnio te genome. We study the validity and robustness of the method and results, and we argue that it is possible to evaluate an ancestral genome reconstruction based on the careful examination of the underlying principles of the method. These principles are: (i) the detection of ancestral features (adjacencies, collinear or contiguous segments, syntenic groups) based on their conservation in the extant genomes; and (ii) the assembly of such features into ancestral chromosomal segments and linkage groups. Hence, we design the reconstruction process as a pipeline decomposed into several phases, each focused on the detection assembly of a specific kind of ancestral genomic feature. This requires to define, for each such phase, an appropriate combinatorial representation of the corresponding assembled ancestral features, including pq trees to represent contiguous ancestral regions as in; Chauve and and graphs to represent ancestral linkage groups (ALGs), as in. The final representation of an ancestral genome is a nested combination of such combinatorial objects. We apply this pipeline to reconstruct the amnio te ancestral genome at a 100 kb resolution, tailoring the method to account for the phylogeny and presence of a whole genome duplication at the base of the teleost lineage (). We obtain 39 ALGs, covering a significant part of the extant amnio te genomes, which is a improvement on the two previous studies of this ancestral genome (). The syntenic associations between extant amnio te chromosomes that we predict confirm three associations found in previous studies, but also include two new ones. We discuss the accuracy of the results produced by our method, and the robustness of the method to variations of data and parameters.

discussion we described a general methodology for inferring ancestral genomes, that relies on a hierarchical process: computing ancestral blocks, computing CARs and computing the as g and ALGs. We implemented this general approach using stringent methods for each phase, tailored to account for the specificity of the evolution of amnio te genomes, and we applied it to infer large ancestral amnio te linkage groups at a 100 kb resolution, from whole genome alignments and gene families. This resulted in the first proposal of an ancestral amnio te genome that covers large parts of its extant descendants proposed significantly more amnio te syntenic associations than we do. One explanation is the stringency of the method we use to detect double ancestral syn ten ies. Indeed, due to the stability of bird genomes and the absence of reptile genomes in the considered dataset, the only syntenic associations that can be detected are supported by double ancestral syn ten ies. We find that the associations 18-27 and Z-22 are the only ones to be supported by a pair of blocks that belong to more than one DCS. This illustrates the fact that combinatorial traces of synteny conservation at a large evolutionary distance are quite degraded and not widespread, even when several amnio te genomes are considered. Even if we can not definitively argue that the syntenic associations described in the previous ancestral genome proposals are wrong, we believe that they rely on a weaker synteny conservation signal as illustrated by the case of the putative syntenic association 17-Z (see discussion below). We even found no evidence that the medaka genome is as stable as claimed by) (for example does not show more conserved DCS signal in the medaka than in the two other teleost fishes we now discuss a few examples of syntenic associations that were reported by both () but not by our method, as they illustrate the interest of methodological discussions to analyze such discrepancies. The association between chicken chromosomes 26 and 32 was out of reach for us as no ancestral block did belong to chicken chromosome 32. The signal we observe for an association between chicken chromosomes 2 and 9 does not support clearly the fact it was present in the amnio te ancestor: it can be related to two ancestral blocks, contiguous in all placental mammalian genomes but not in the opossum genome, and that do not belong to a DCS, which indicates more likely an ancestral bore o eutheria n feature. Finally, the case of the association 17-Z is interesting. We detect a faint signal for it based on three blocks present on a single DCS in the macaca genome and on the same chromosomes in the human, chimpanzee and orangutan genomes, but which does not satisfy the phylogenetic conservation criterion we use to retain edges of the as g. There are also two blocks contiguous in all placental mammalian s and that also belong to a genome segment that shows a DCS signal that does not satisfy the stringent definition we used. So we leave open the possibility that the association 17-Z is present in the amnio te ancestral genome. The signal related to associations 2-9 and 3-14, as well as for associations Z-22 and 1-2, which are specific to our study, is described in Supplementary Material.
