Motivation: More than half of proteins require binding of metal and acid radical ions for their structure and function. Identification of the ion binding locations is important for understanding the biological functions of proteins. Due to the small size and high versatility of the metal and acid radical ions, however, computational prediction of their binding sites remains difficult. Results: We proposed a new ligand specific approach devoted to the binding site prediction of 13 metal ions (Zn 2þ , Cu 2þ , Fe 2þ , Fe 3þ , Ca 2þ , Mg 2þ , Mn 2þ , Na þ , K þ) and acid radical ion ligands (CO3 2À , NO2 À , SO4 2À , PO4 3À) that are most frequently seen in protein databases. A sequence based ab initio model is first trained on sequence profiles, where a modified AdaBoost algorithm is extended to balance binding and non-binding residue samples. A composite method ion com is then developed to combine the ab initio model with multiple threading alignments for further improving the robustness of the binding site predictions. The pipeline was tested using 5-fold cross validations on a comprehensive set of 2,100 non-redundant proteins bound with 3,075 small ion ligands. Significant advantage was demonstrated compared with the state of the art ligand binding methods including COACH and TargetS for high accuracy ion binding site identification. Detailed data analyses show that the major advantage of ion com lies at the integration of complementary ab ini-tio and template based components. i on specific feature design and binding library selection also contribute to the improvement of small ion ligand binding predictions. Availability and Implementation

introduction proteins perform their function by interacting with other ligand molecules. More than half of the proteins are found to have the binding interaction with small acid radical and metal ions to stabilize their structure and regulate the biological functions (). For instance, the binding of phosphate ions (PO4 3 ) with protein enzymes can result in phosphorylation that turns the enzymes on and off and therefore alter their function and activity (). Similarly, the binding of the metal iron ions (Fe 3 ) with hemoglobin is critical for their function for carrying and transferring oxygen through blood, a fundamental life process of all vertebrates (except for the fish family chan nicht hyi dae and some of invertebrates (); the binding of metal Zn 2 ions with nucleases and transcription factors plays a critical structural role in the formation of Zn finger domains for the receptor proteins to recognize DNA and RNA molecules and to up or down-regulate the expression of specific genes (). Therefore, accurate identification of the protein ion binding sites is important for understanding the mechanism of protein function and for new drug discovery. Many computational methods have been proposed in the last two decades for predicting general ligand protein binding sites, which can be roughly grouped into two categories of sequence based () and structure based () approaches. The sequence based methods mostly rely on residue conservation analyses under the assumption that ligand binding residues are functionally important and therefore should be conserved in the evolution. Although the sequence based approaches have the advantage in generating binding site prediction from sequence alone, the precision of the predictions is generally low as many nonbinding residues are often conserved due to the diverse roles such as maintaining a stable structural fold. The structure based approaches are designed to predict the ligand binding sites either from structure alone (e.g. by the identification of 'pocket' or 'cavity' on the surface of protein structure) (), or from structure based template comparison and transferal (). More recently, a consensus based approach, COACH (), was proposed to combine multiple structure based methods, which demonstrated considerable advantage over individual component predictors. Despite the success, most of the above ligand binding modeling methods have been designed for the ligands of medium to large size and are not optimal for small ligand prediction, such as for metal and acid radical ions. Due to their small size, the interactions of the small ions with proteins are often found significantly more versatile and flexible compared with larger size ligands (). In particular, many of the current ligand binding prediction methods were developed using generic training approaches built on all ligands without carefully discriminating different physicochemical characteristics for different types of ligand molecules. Binding sites usually differ chemically and structurally in different categories. The recent community wide ligand binding experiments in CASP have suggested the advantage of evaluation on the basis of chemo type categories of ligand binding (). An optimal training based on ligand specific feature selections should help improve the small ion binding recognitions. In this work, we aim to develop new algorithms devoted specifically to the recognition of small ligand binding sites. ligand specific features will be designed, with a focus on the thirteen metal and acid radical ions that have been most frequently seen in the ligand binding databases and proven to be important to various protein functions. To systematically examine the strengths and weaknesses of the approach, large scale benchmark tests will be conducted on a comprehensive dataset containing all non-redundant ion protein binding interactions from the PDB, which will be compared with the state of the art methods from both generic and ligand specific binding prediction approaches.

conclusion we presented two ligand specific methods for small ligand binding site predictions from metal and acid radical ions. The sequence based ab initio method ion seq uses only sequence information and adopts a modified AdaBoost method that was extended to eliminate the imbalance effect of the data sample that has been dominated by the non-binding residues. The second method, ion com combines the ab initio and template based methods to generate composite ion binding site predictions. The two methods were tested on a non-redundant set of the ion binding proteins extracted from a semi manually curated ligand binding sites database, biol ip (). The experimental results demonstrated the significant improvement of the composite methods over individual component predictors. The detailed data analysis shows that the major contributions for the improvement are due to the complementarity of the component predictors from different prediction principles. Meanwhile, the ligand specific feature selection and the AdaBoost training helped improve accuracy of the sequence based predictors that are critical for modeling the targets that lack close homologous templates. Although the generic predictors with ligand nonspecific features have on average a lower MCC, training with the generic feature sections can improve the binding site accuracy of some proteins that bind with multiple ion ligands. Finally, it is found that the training library selection, with a manually cleaned and biologically relevant binding dataset, has further impact to enhance the binding site prediction, compared with the automated, geometry based binding datasets. Despite the encouraging data results compared with peer methods, the overall accuracy of the current methods is still low for some ions with a high binding variability, such as Na  and K . There are also problems for the approaches to identify specific binding locations when multiple ligands are associated with the same target proteins. Future directions of developments will be to explore more specific feature selections, e.g. integrating physicochemical features of the small ion ligands () to increase the specificity of the binding recognitions. Meanwhile, appropriate selection and refinement of the negative sample (i.e. non-binding residues) should also help to increase the binding specificity and reduce the noise from non-specific ligand binding.
