Motivation: Most methods for reconstructing response networks from high throughput data generate static models which can not distinguish between early and late response stages. Results: We present time path a new method that integrates time series and static datasets to reconstruct dynamic models of host response to stimulus. time path uses an Integer Programming formulation to select a subset of pathways that, together, explain the observed dynamic responses. Applying time path to study human response to HIV-1 led to accurate reconstruction of several known regulatory and signaling pathways and to novel mechanistic insights. We experimentally validated several of time paths predictions highlighting the usefulness of temporal models. Availability and Implementation: Data, Supplementary text and the time path software are available from

introduction high throughput data measuring various aspects of several biological systems is rapidly accumulating. These include rnase q studies (), profiling of microRNAs (), chips eq epigenetics studies (), information about protein interactions within a cell () and information on interactions between host proteins and pathogen environmental factors (). Such datasets provide extensive information about the sets of genes that are activated, their regulation and their interactions both within a cell and between cellular proteins and the environment or pathogen. However, integrating these datasets to reconstruct a unified view of the networks and pathways that are activated in order to identify potential interventions that may lead to a desired response remains a major challenge. Several methods have been proposed to integrate various biological datasets for this task (). However, the vast majority of these methods are aimed at obtaining static networks that do not provide temporal information making it hard to determine the various stages associated with the system being studied (for example, waves of expression changes ()) or the optimal time to apply an intervention. Consider the HIV-1 infection while the development of highly active antiretroviral therapy has made it possible to delay the progression of HIV infection, the persistence of the virus, rapid development of resistance and inability to completely eliminate the virus still pose major challenges for effective HIV-1 management (). HIV-1 infects a host cell by a sequential process involving several temporal events. These start with binding of the viral envelope protein to the host cell receptor followed by reverse transcription and integration of proviral DNA (early infection stage). Next, viral proteins are produced facilitating viral replication (intermediate stage). Finally, new viruses are released (late stage). While several studies have experimentally quantified the large scale changes and host pathogen interactions for HIV-1 infection (), to date no models exist to fully link these high throughput temporal datasets with the underlying dynamic networks that lead to the observed responses. A small number of methods have been proposed for reconstructing dynamic interaction networks from high throughput data. These methods utilize the (relatively small number of) time series datasets to determine temporal information for the (mostly) static interaction datasets either directly (by projecting the time series data on the known interaction networks ()) or indirectly (by looking at targets of transcription factors (TFs) and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.
