Motivation: Recognition models for protein dna interactions, which allow the prediction of specificity for a dna binding domain based only on its sequence or the alteration of specificity through rational design, have long been a goal of computational biology. There has been some progress in constructing useful models, especially for C 2 H 2 zinc finger proteins, but it remains a challenging problem with ample room for improvement. For most families of transcription factors the best available methods utilize k nearest neighbor (KNN) algorithms to make specificity predictions based on the average of the specificities of the k most similar proteins with defined specificities. Homeodomain (HD) proteins are the second most abundant family of transcription factors, after zinc fingers, in most metazoan genomes, and as a consequence an effective recognition model for this family would facilitate predictive models of many transcriptional regulatory networks within these genomes. Results: Using extensive experimental data, we have tested several machine learning approaches and find that both support vector machines and random forests (RFs) can produce recognition models for HD proteins that are significant improvements over knn based methods. cross validation analyses show that the resulting models are capable of predicting specificities with high accuracy. We have produced a web based prediction tool, premo tf (Predicted Motifs for Transcription Factors) (http://stormo.wustl.edu/PreMoTF), for predicting position frequency matrices from protein sequence using a rf based model.

introduction it is a long-standing goal to predict the dna binding specificity of a transcription factor (TF) based only on its protein sequence (). That ability would allow for the inference of regulatory networks from genome sequences alone as well as for the design of TFs with desired recognition sequences. Early hopes for a simple recognition code () were dashed by the structures of the first few protein dna complexes (). As the structures of more dna protein complexes were determined it became apparent that there were definite preferences for interactions between particular amino acids and base pairs, and that those preferences might vary depending on the class of TF. C 2 H 2 Zinc finger proteins, in particular, were heavily studied and a degenerate, qualitative recognition code was shown to be moderately successful at predicting their binding specificities (Choo * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and;;). This general idea of class specific degenerate recognition codes was further developed into a quantitative probabilistic code for zinc finger proteins that was more predictive than previous models but sill less accurate than desired (;). The homeodomain (HD) family is the second most abundant TF family in mammals and most metazoans (). The HD TF family was first discovered in Drosophila where mutations in some HD proteins caused severe 'homeotic' phenotypes (). homeodomain s typically span 60 residues that fold into a stable bundle of three alpha helices (). The c terminal helix, or recognition helix, binds in the major groove and an unstructured n terminal arm binds in the minor groove. This domain provides a favorable family for construction of a predictive recognition model because of similarities in docking geometry for a number of family members () and the characterization of specificity for many members of this family present in the yeast, drosophila and mouse genomes (). Using specificity data for 263 HD proteins, mostly determined using new high throughput methods (), allowed us to test different machine learning approaches and to assess the ability of recognition models to accurately predict the specificity of HD proteins. Using a cross validation methodology we demonstrate that both support vector machines (SVMs) and random forests (RFs) based methods produce recognition models that are significantly better than previously published methods lists the number of HD proteins from each of five species (including 13 variants of fly HD proteins), the experimental method used to determine their specificity and the reference for the datasets. All wild type protein sequences were obtained from unipro be () or fly factor survey (). The hmm search program from the HMMER suite () was used to extract the DBD for every protein using the homeobox Pfam hmm model (Pfam ID: PF00046) (). Protein binding microarray (PBM) data are available for 168 mouse HD proteins, but 14 of these (Dbx1, Hoxb5, Hoxb6, Hoxc6, Irx5, Lhx5, Lhx9, Lmx1b, Obox2, Pax6, Phox2a, Six6, Titf1, Tlx2) were removed from the dataset because their scaled be eml pbm pwm s (position weight matrices; see below) had a total information content (IC) 3 std below the mean IC for the entire combined set of motifs the HD db ds were aligned using maff t (), which gave higher quality alignments, with fewer gaps, than other programs. Perhaps the best studied HD protein is the Drosophila engrailed protein (). For consistency with previous studies, HD positions are numbered with respect to the engrailed HD and all columns in the multiple sequence alignment that contained insertions relative to engrailed were removed. Only a small minority of the proteins in the dataset had short insertions relative to engrailed. The majority of these insertions (26) correspond to the three residue (TALE) insertion between positions 21 and 22 (). Two other types of insertions only occur in the mouse proteins Hdx, Hmbox1, Tcf1 and tcf2 displays a sequence logo for the set of aligned HD proteins used in this study ().

discussion the goal of this study was to find improved recognition models for the HD family of TFs. Although they are a very abundant TF family in nearly all eukaryotic organisms, previous models have focused on simple nearest neighbor type predictions of specificity based on large archives of reference recognition motifs (). These previous models have not been informed by the combination of feature selection derived from mutual information and modeling against reliably aligned recognition motifs, which could limit their predictive power. We had previously published a nearest neighbor approach () for predicting pwm s for new HDs, but we found that an rf based model trained with the same fly B1H Sanger data had better performance on a mouse test set also used a nearest neighbor approach but they only attempted to predict 8mer enrichment scores for novel HD proteins. They compared various machine learning methods but found nothing that was better than nearest neighbors, but their efforts may have been hampered by an inability to align the motifs they used for training and therefore having to rely on 8mer enrichments. Our results demonstrate that with ample high quality and quantitative training data sophisticated machine learning methods are capable of determining very good recognition models for HD proteins. We believe that these models should be broadly applicable to other families of TFs with the caveat that large deviations in domain docking within subgroups could complicate family analysis (;). In support of this view, we have preliminary data demonstrating that this type of approach can provide improved models for DNA recognition by zinc finger proteins even though they have been extensively studied (). In the 10-fold cross validation analysis, the average MSE for this RF model was 0.0085 ().compares the observed and predicted motif logos for 12 different HD db ds that are in the range of the average MSE (0.00800.0091) to illustrate the expected accuracy of the predictions. We have produced a web based prediction tool, premo tf (Predicted Motifs for Transcription Factors) (http://stormo.wustl.edu/PreMoTF), for predicting pf ms
