meta genomic data, which contains sequenced DNA reads of uncultured microbial species from environmental samples, provide a unique opportunity to thoroughly analyze microbial species that have never been identified before. Reconstructing 16S ribosomal RNA, a phylogenetic marker gene, is usually required to analyze the composition of the meta genomic data. However, massive volume of dataset, high sequence similarity between related species, skewed microbial abundance and lack of reference genes make 16S rRNA reconstruction difficult. Generic de novo assembly tools are not optimized for assembling 16S rRNA genes. In this work, we introduce a targeted rRNA assembly tool, re ago (REconstruct 16S ribosomal RNA Genes from meta genomic data). It addresses the above challenges by combining secondary structure aware homology search, z properties of rRNA genes and de novo assembly. Our experimental results show that our tool can correctly recover more rRNA genes than several popular generic meta genomic assembly tools and specially designed rRNA construction tools. Availability and implementation: The source code of re ago is freely available at https://github. com cheng yuan re ago
introduction microbes are ubiquitous species existing in all environments on earth, including extreme conditions (). From the desert to acid wastewater, from pine forest soil to mine drainage, they sustain themselves using various mechanisms (). Human bodies are also habitats of microbes. It is estimated that there are 10 14 bacterial cell inhabiting on our body, which is 10 times more than our own cells (). Human life as well as the entire ecosystem are profoundly affected by microbes. There is a strong need to understand the function of microbial communities and how they interact with their hosts. The function of microbial community is defined by its composition and diversity (). In particular, meta genomic data, which contains sequenced DNA reads of uncultured microbial species from environmental samples, provide a unique opportunity to thoroughly analyze microbial species that have never been identified before. A commonly adopted approach for identifying the microbial species in environmental samples is to conduct comparative analysis of ribosomal RNA sequences (). The use of rRNA for microbial phylogenetic analysis had become such a relied upon methodology that by 2008; 77% of all in sdc () bacterial DNA sequence submissions described an rRNA gene sequence ()! 16S rRNA reads from meta genomic studies provide a source of sequences that are not subject to PCR primer bias and therefore covers tax a that might be missed by existing popular primer sets (). The rRNA genes are a patchwork of hypervariable (rapidly evolving) and universally conserved regions. Unassembled reads in meta genomic data usually lack usable phylogenetic signal. Thus, there is a strong need to recover complete or near complete rRNA genes from the short reads for analyzing microbial composition in the underlying samples. However, the massive data volume, short read length, skewed species abundance and high similarity of 16S rRNA genes all make rRNA recovery in meta genomic data very difficult. The goal of this work is to provide a tool that can efficiently and accurately recover rRNA genes from meta genomic data. Existing pipelines for annotating rRNA genes in meta genomic data can be divided into two groups. The first type of pipelines relies on existing de novo assembly tools to output assembled contigs, which are then used as input to available genome wide rRNA search tools. There are various meta genomic assembly programs (
