Here, we present REDEMPTION (Reduced Dimension Ensemble Modeling and Parameter estimation), a toolbox for parameter estimation and ensemble modeling of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) using time series data. For models with more reactions than measured species, a common scenario in biological modeling, the parameter estimation is formulated as a nested optimization problem based on incremental parameter estimation strategy. REDEMPTION also includes a tool for the identification of an ensemble of parameter combinations that provide satisfactory goodness of fit to the data. The functionalities of REDEMPTION are accessible through a MATLAB user interface (UI), as well as through programming script. For computational speed up REDEMPTION provides a numerical parallelization option using MATLAB Parallel Computing toolbox. Availability and implementation: REDEMPTION can be downloaded from http://www.cabsel.ethz. ch tools redemption
introduction mathematical modeling plays an increasingly important role in understanding and predicting biological phenomena. In this regard, ordinary differential equation (ODE) models are often created to describe the dynamic behavior of biological systems based on mass or molar conservation, as follow: dXt dt  svx t p; X0  X 0 ;where t denotes time, Xt is the species concentration vector, S is the stoichiometric or connectivity matrix, v xt p is the reaction rate or flux equation vector, p denotes the kinetic parameter vector and X 0 denotes the initial concentration vector. The estimation of unknown kinetic parameters from time series data is the most challenging step in the creation of such biological models, due to: (i) high computational cost associated with global optimizations and with integrating ODEs (), and (ii) the lack of parameter identifiability ().The high computational complexity could be addressed by performing the parameter estimation incrementally. Here, time series data are first smoothened and differentiated, and subsequently the dynamic flux values are computed by viewing Equation (1) as an algebraic equation. The parameters are estimated one flux at a time while avoiding ODE integrations (). However, such an approach requires that S has a full column rank, which is often not satisfied in the modeling of biological systems. We recently developed incremental parameter estimation (IPE) and integrated flux parameter estimation if pe to address the limitation related to the matrix S. In IPE if pe we formulated the parameter estimation as a nested optimization, where the outer optimization was performed over a subset of parameters corresponding to the independent (integrated) fluxes, defined such that given their values, the remaining (integrated) fluxes could be estimated from the slope of time series data (). The inner optimizations involved estimating V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
