Motivation: Chromosome rearrangement events are triggered by a typical breaking and rejoining of DNA molecules, which are observed in many cancer related diseases. The detection of rearrangement is typically done by using short reads generated by next generation sequencing (NGS) and combining the reads with knowledge of a reference genome. Because structural variations and genomes differ from one person to another, intermediate comparison via a reference genome may lead to loss of information. Results: In this article, we propose a reference free method for detecting clusters of breakpoints from the chromosomal rearrangements. This is done by directly comparing a set of NGS normal reads with another set that may be rearranged. Our method slide sort bpr (breakpoint reads) is based on a fast algorithm for all against all comparisons of short reads and theoretical analyses of the number of neighboring reads. When applied to a dataset with a sequencing depth of 100Â, it finds $88% of the breakpoints correctly with no false positive reads. Moreover, evaluation on a real prostate cancer dataset shows that the proposed method predicts more fusion transcripts correctly than previous approaches, and yet produces fewer false positive reads. To our knowledge, this is the first method to detect breakpoint reads without using a reference genome. Availability and implementation: The source code of slide sort bpr can be freely downloaded from https://code.

introduction it has been discovered that cancer cells include chromosomal rearrangements, which are large scale modifications of the genome, and those modifications are thought to be responsible, at least in part, for the irregular growth of cancer cells. Although it is known that these chromosomal rearrangements often lead to translocations and fusions of genes (), it has not yet been determined how the somatic genome rearrangement works at the molecular level. A unit of the mosaic structure of a rearrangement is called a breakpoint. A breakpoint can be represented as a pair of genomic locations that do not appear in the reference genome but occur in the rearranged genome. Typical rearrangement events generate single breakpoints, including breakage fusion bridge cycles, nonhomologous end joining and homologous recombination based repair (), whereas complex rearrangement events produce multiple breakpoints (). These rearrangements have been suggested to cause little or no loss of genomic material and are likely to produce functional gene fusions (). next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have enabled the analysis of individual genomes at unprecedented depth with low cost (). However, these NGS technologies have created new difficulties in examining cancer genomes to determine the signatures of breakpoint junctions unambiguously at the sequence level (Onishi). To detect large scale genomic variations, several tools have been developed for detecting chromosomal rearrangements from NGS sequences. These tools include deFuse (), fusion map () and others () for detecting gene fusions, and break dancer (), CREST () and others () for detecting structural variation (SV). The foundation of these methods is locating breakpoints by mapping the NGS reads to a reference genome. The human reference genome, while extraordinarily useful, has inherent shortcomings that may hinder the task of characterizing human cancer because it is still incomplete and, as the 1000 Genomes Project and other studies have revealed, there are significant numbers of genome differences between individuals (). Complexity also emerges from SVs among individuals. SV accounts for a larger fraction of the diversity between persons than any other factor (). This complexity makes it difficult to map short reads to the reference genome, and the resulting m is mapped or unmapped reads can lead to loss of important information (). One possible approach for detecting breakpoints from an NGS dataset without knowledge of a reference genome is to use genome assembly first and then compare two assembled genomes to find breakpoints. Many studies, however, have *To whom correspondence should be addressed. suggested difficulties for genome assembly arising from the variability of genomes (), and few attempts have been made to detect breakpoints after assembling short reads. To overcome the aforementioned limitations, we present a new method, slide sort bpr (breakpoint reads), which detects chromosomal breakpoints by directly comparing two sets of NGS reads from different kinds of cells without mapping them to a reference genome and without assembling reads. slide sort bpr determines the reads associated to the breakpoints by finding the groups of reads that are 'unbalanced' between two sets of samples; this determination is based on a probabilistic model of the number of similar reads (neighborhood reads). One might think that finding neighborhood reads by pairwise comparison is computationally too expensive for a large number of NGS reads. However, we have overcome this difficulty by using an efficient algorithm () that can enumerate all similar pairs within a given edit distance in a computational time linear on the number of reads. As a result, slide sort bpr can efficiently detect the NGS reads associated with breakpoints between samples from normal cells and samples from cancer cells.

conclusion in this work, we have presented slide sort bpr a tool for performing direct comparisons of reads from different samples without using a reference genome. To our knowledge, this is the first method for detecting breakpoint reads without using a reference genome, although a paper was recently published that tries to detect mutations by direct comparison of NGS reads (). Computational experiments indicated that our approach is robust to the presence of repeats in the genome and to a wide range of sequencing errors (up to 4%). In extensive evaluations on simulated and real datasets, we showed that slide sort bpr can predict breakpoint reads with high accuracy.
