Motivation: Structural kinetic modelling (SKM) is a framework to analyse whether a metabolic steady state remains stable under perturbation, without requiring detailed knowledge about individual rate equations. It provides a representation of the systems Jacobian matrix that depends solely on the network structure, steady state measurements, and the elasticities at the steady state. For a measured steady state, stability criteria can be derived by generating a large number of s kms with randomly sampled elasticities and evaluating the resulting Jacobian matrices. The elasticity space can be analysed statistically in order to detect network positions that contribute significantly to the perturbation response. Here, we extend this approach by examining the kinetic feasibility of the elasticity combinations created during Monte Carlo sampling. Results: Using a set of small example systems, we show that the majority of sampled s kms would yield negative kinetic parameters if they were translated back into kinetic models. To overcome this problem, a simple criterion is formulated that mitigates such infeasible models. After evaluating the small example pathways, the methodology was used to study two steady states of the neuronal TCA cycle and the intrinsic mechanisms responsible for their stability or instability. The findings of the statistical elasticity analysis confirm that several elasticities are jointly coordinated to control stability and that the main source for potential instabilities are mutations in the enzyme

introduction metabolic systems tend to exhibit steady states that can be measured in terms of the concentrations and fluxes of the metabolites involved. These measurements can be regarded as a phenotypic representation of all the complex interactions and regulatory mechanisms taking place in the underlying metabolic pathway. Such interactions determine the system's response to external perturbations and are responsible, for example, for its asymptotic stability or for oscillatory trajectories around the steady state. However, determining these perturbation responses in the absence of fully specified kinetic models remains an important challenge of computational systems biology. Structural kinetic modelling (SKM) is a framework to analyse such responses to perturbations, without requiring detailed knowledge about individual rate equations (). It provides a parameterized representation of the system's Jacobian matrix in which the model parameters encode information about the enzyme metabolite interactions. Stability criteria can be derived by generating a large number of structural kinetic models s kms with randomly sampled parameter sets and evaluating the resulting Jacobian matrices. The parameter space can be analysed statistically in a Monte Carlo experiment in order to detect pathway positions that contribute significantly to the perturbation response. Because the sampled parameters are equivalent to the
