ref prot dom provides a set of divergent query domains, originally selected from Pfam, and full length proteins containing their homologous domains, with diverse architectures, for evaluating pair-wise and iterative sequence similarity searches. Pfam homology and domain boundary annotations in the target library were supplemented using local and semi global searches, PSI-BLAST searches, and SCOP and CATH classifications. Availability: ref prot dom is available from http://faculty.virginia.edu/ wr pearson fast a pubs gonzalez 09a Contact:

introduction evaluation and improvement of protein sequence similarity searches, using algorithms such as BLAST or smith waterman s search and more sophisticated searches such as PSI-BLAST or HMMER (), require query sequences and reference sets curated to accurately reflect homology relationships. Because structural similarity is preserved well beyond sequence similarity (), protein structures are often the gold standard for annotating homology relationships. Although both structure based homology annotations and manually annotated protein sequence relationships can very accurately record homology relationships, they do not reflect common practice in protein similarity searching, which is to characterize unknown proteins by searching large, comprehensive protein sets such as RefSeq () and UniProt (). To better characterize similarity searching strategies, in particular, PSI-BLAST performance, against comprehensive protein databases, we identified a set of diverse protein domains from Pfam () v. 21 to use as queries against a set of real proteins containing those domains. Our query domain families are taxonomically broad (to provide 'harder' homology detection cases), and have long models (to better simulate full length protein searches). Although we can not be certain that all homologs have been found, we believe that statistically significant pair-wise alignments are annotated correctly. * To whom correspondence should be addressed were constructed and the members of these sets evaluated further: (i) a challenging query subset (50 hard) with the lowest family coverage with BLAST; and (ii) a randomly sampled representative query set (50 sampled with replacement). Annotation extensions: when the original Pfam v. 21 annotations were used to characterize searches with our hard and sampled queries against the target library, thousands of alignments to very similar UniProt sequences (e.g. E()  10 80 , with 95% identity) were annotated as partial homologs or non homologs. To correct these conservative annotations, we compared the bare domain query sequences to the target library using s search and gl search (a program that produces an alignment that is global in the query sequence but possibly local in the target or library sequence). We identified all the significantly similar sequence regions (E()  0.001) with s search that were either shorter or unannotated in Pfam v. 21 and calculated the boundaries using gl search. We extended annotations on 2106 partial domains and added 24 604 domain homology annotations based on s search alignments, 13 574 of which were included in Pfam v. 24. ref prot dom describes relationships and alignment boundaries between query domains and the target library homologs according to Pfam v. 21, Pfam v. 24 and the s search gl search alignment boundaries. Although s search gl search searches against the target library dramatically reduced the number of apparent false positives with very low e values additional searches with PSI-BLAST using the queries sometimes found 'unrelated' UniProt sequences with significant (E()  10 40 ) scores. We analyzed all significant (E()  10 4 ) 'nonhomologous' alignments found in the first three iterations of PSI-BLAST for the 100 queries (94 distinct families). Non-homologous alignments to regions with no annotated Pfam domains were used as queries in reciprocal PSI-BLAST searches for three iterations. Reciprocal searches that recovered at least 25% of a domain family were annotated as homologous, yielding 375 additional homology annotations across 33/94 families. Structures of significant non homologs that mapped to unrelated Pfam families were examined in SCOP and CATH; if they shared the same SCOP fold or CATH topology they were annotated as homologs. For example, Pfam annotates a
