Motivation: Modeling regulatory networks using expression data observed in a differentiation process may help identify context specific interactions. The outcome of the current algorithms highly depends on the quality and quantity of a single time course dataset, and the performance may be compromised for datasets with a limited number of samples. Results: In this work, we report a multi-layer graphical model that is capable of leveraging many publicly available time course datasets, as well as a cell lineage specific data with small sample size, to model regulatory networks specific to a differentiation process. First, a collection of network inference methods are used to predict the regulatory relationships in individual public datasets. Then, the inferred directional relationships are weighted and integrated together by evaluating against the cell lineage specific dataset. To test the accuracy of this algorithm, we collected a time course rnase q dataset during human erythropoiesis to infer regulatory relationships specific to this differentiation process. The resulting erythroid specific regulatory network reveals novel regulatory relationships activated in erythropoiesis, which were further validated by genome wide TR4 binding studies using chips eq. These erythropoiesis specific regulatory relationships were not identifiable by single dataset based methods or context independent integrations. Analysis of the predicted targets reveals that they are all closely associated with hematopoietic lineage differentiation. Availability and implementation: The predicted erythroid regulatory network is available at

introduction in the past decades, significant research efforts have been devoted to infer gene regulatory networks grn s in the bioinformatics field (). The challenge lies in that inferring regulatory network is an ill posed problem, because the number of interactions to be inferred exceeds the number of independent experiments. Today, the standard solution to these p  n problems (p is the number of parameters and n is the number of training samples) is different regularization techniques, adopting or modifying the method Tikhonov developed almost 80 years ago. When pn, i.e. an extremely limited set of experimental observations are available, it is often challenging to find a stable solution. In this article, we show a method to utilize both small, context specific expression data, and large, non-specific datasets to infer regulatory networks. The essence of this method is to intrinsically increase the p by giving a weight to non-specific datasets according to their relevance to the context specific dataset and accuracy. This technique has been used in non directional networks, but hasn't been applied to regulatory networks with time course data. Current methods () for modeling regulatory networks based on expression data can be divided into two categories. The first category utilizes a single time course dataset over a development process or under certain environmental perturbations. Methods in this category focus on predicting regulatory networks corresponding to the same context of input data, which includes context likelihood of relatedness (CLR) (), dynamic Bayesian network (DBN) (), smoothing spline clustering (SSC) () and Learning Module Networks lemon e () and semi supervised regulatory network discoverer ser end (). Intensive research efforts have been devoted to these methods, with community based assessments (e.g. the Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods challenges) identifying several well performed algorithms (), including ours. Numerous great methods have been derived from these crowd sourcing efforts (). This category of methods may capture the cell lineage specific and other context specific information. However, the accuracy of these algorithms is expected to be heavily affected by the input time course data and subject to fluctuation due to experimental observation errors. Methods in the second category generate regulatory networks by integrating multiple genomic datasets, such as supervised inference of regulatory networks (SIRENE) (), multilevel integrated inference and analysis of regulatory networks (), combinatorial algorithm for expression and sequence based cluster extraction system (COALESCE) () and simultaneous genome wide inference of multiple types of interactions including regulatory ones (). By leveraging multiple datasets, these algorithms are expected to be more accurate in predicting a global, non-specific network (). However, the context specificity of such integrative methods is limited, due to the lack of context specific input data. The complementary nature of the two categories motivated us to develop dif mine a novel multi-layer graphical model that leverages multiple non-specific time course expression datasets, as well as a single context specific yet small scale dataset to infer regulatory networks that are specific to a differentiation process. In this multi-layer model, the regulatory networks of individual non-specific genomic datasets are inferred using network inference algorithms developed for a single dataset. For this step, we tested state of the art algorithms identified in previous community based blind assessments (). Next, the relevance of these non-specific networks against the context specific dataset is evaluated using Bayesian rules, and integrated into a single network. The resulting network intends to reveal the context specific regulatory relationships on the whole genomic scale. In contrast to other state of the art regulatory network prediction methods, our approach benefits from both the large number of publicly available functional genomic datasets and the small scale cell lineage specific dataset that defines the context. We applied our algorithm to a cell lineage specific expression rnase q dataset of human erythropoiesis. We demonstrated that we could significantly improve the performance of the network inference based on a single, limited dataset, compared with one of the most cited, the state of the art single data set methods such as CLR () and DBN. Additionally, we compared the performance of our algorithm against context insensitive integration without the information from the cell lineage specific dataset and found that the former successfully identifies regulatory relationships activated during erythropoiesis. Finally, we used a recently generated chips eq data for TR4, an important transcription factor involved into erythropoiesis (), and validated our prediction of regulatory relationships using this data.
