Motivation: The prediction and annotation of the genomic regions involved in gene expression has been largely explored. Most of the energy has been devoted to the development of approaches that detect transcription start sites, leaving the identification of regulatory regions and their functional transcription factor binding sites tfbs s largely unexplored and with important quantitative and qualitative methodological gaps. Results: We have developed ReLA (for REgulatory region Local Alignment tool), a unique tool optimized with the smith waterman algorithm that allows local searches of conserved TFBS clusters and the detection of regulatory regions proximal to genes and enhancer regions. re las performance shows specificities of 81 and 50% when tested on experimentally validated proximal regulatory regions and enhancers, respectively. Availability: The source code of re las is freely available and can be remotely used through our web server under http://www.bsc.es/ cg rela
introduction the identification of the genomic regions that control the transcription of genes still remains a challenge despite the recent and continuous development of new experimental and computational methodologies (). Multiple automatic approaches have been proposed, ranging from those that search for phylogenetic conservation of sequence or transcription factor binding motifs in non transcribed DNA regions () to the analysis of DNA physical properties characteristic of regions expected to bind transcription factors * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors.(). However, the incorporation of novel biological knowledge into these programs is not necessarily improving the quality of their predictions, which still contain a substantial fraction of false positives. Currently, methods that de novo detect and characterize proximal regulatory regions show specificity levels 50% (Van). Even though phylogenetic footprinting using pre aligned homologous regulatory regions offers promising results in the identification of Conserved Regulatory Modules (CRMs) of transcription factor binding sites tfbs s (), they can not define the regulatory region itself in most real scenarios because they are based on global alignment strategies and require that all matching binding sites across all compared sequences are located in the same (or similar) position within each sequence, i.e. they require predefined and pre aligned regulatory regions. As a result, in spite of the existing methodologies, still the most common and reliable way to identify proximal regulatory regions in genomes is the analysis of a few nucleotides (typically up to 1000) immediately upstream of annotated transcription start sites tss s which likely constitutes the proximal promoter. But the annotation of gene starts is still unsolved, particularly for non-human species. For example, a simple search in the ENSEMBL database () identified substantial fractions of vertebrate genes without annotated 5 UTR (from 17% in mouse to 91% in opossum, 42% for human). This result is even more dramatic within invertebrates. Other problems that constitute a barrier for the automatic inference of promoters (even in human or mouse) are the abundance and over prediction of alternative transcripts. Taken together, most computational methods that detect or align promoters strongly depend on or are coupled with the annotation of untranslated gene regions, which is generally insufficient for this purpose (). On the other hand, the computational identification of enhancers is even more complex. These regulatory regions that work in cooperation with promoters throughout multiple structural constraints are, apparently, delocalized relative to the genes that are controlling (). Therefore, their identification through computational methods requires strategies

discussion taking into account the available methods to in silico recognize gene regulatory regions, a substantial improvement is necessary to accurately annotate genes and promoter sequences in most genomes. Here we report the development of ReLA, a computational tool to identify such regulatory regions using genome wide comparisons. ReLA is distributed as a standalone program and as a web server. Our approach is mostly based in an adaptation of the popular Smith Waterman algorithm that is able to rapidly identify coincidences of tfbs s between two sequences (conceptually similar to traditional protein protein comparisons). ReLA is able to efficiently process long sequences in standard computational platforms (e.g. less than a minute to obtain the results shown in). We have evaluated the accuracy of ReLA, first in a dataset of experimentally validated human and mouse promoters, on an extensive collection of validated TSS from the Eukaryotic Promoter Database, as well as on an experimentally validated collection of r vista enhancers. We have reached maximums of 0.81 of recall and precision levels on ABS sequences On the other hand, and surprisingly, re las performance results lower when using EPD TSS entries. A possible explanation for this observation could be that ReLA performs better on certain types of promoter regions. But, after we classified all ABS and EPD entries into different promoter types according to their composition and evaluated their associated performance obtained with all the methods used here for the validation, we observed that re las accuracy is similar among most of the identified promoter types. We can not discard though that other uncontrolled biases present either inside the underlying search methodology of each of the protocols used here or in the used databases could actually explain the different behaviour observed. It is worth noticing that overall, tfbs based prediction methods perform better on the tfbs based ABS database than on the tss based EPD, where TSS predictors are doing better. In any case, the levels of precision and recall obtained with ReLA are sufficient to provide reliable predictions that guide posterior experimental validation. This study also demonstrates the benefits of using the smith waterman algorithm to directly search for conserved binding sites, as it outperforms other methods like r vista and TFM, that are based on pre aligned DNA and global search strategies. See the example in, which can not be solved using global alignment approaches. Please note that other methods based on similar strategies could not be included in the comparison, as they did not provide results on our benchmark set because of limitations in the size m meta and on the number of sequences. Furthermore, we also show that ReLA is able of predicting alternative promoters and even enhancer regions, dealing with multiple suboptimal solutions in most cases. Our approach is suitable for integrating a computational annotation pipeline in which other predictive methods such as homology searches (e.g. BLAST against protein databases) can assist in the improvement of the final predictions. In summary, we believe that the development of ReLA constitutes a significant step forward in the field of the prediction of regulatory regions, as it shows the highest predictive power reported so far. ReLA is able to locally compare multiple large genomic regions and identify non align able conservation events across different genomes. This is relevant if we consider that the limited information regarding regulatory regions in eukaryotes is restricted to human Page: 769 763770. Snapshot of the ReLA web server output. Graphical representation of the putative promoters and alignments of tfbs s of the human E2F1 gene, as well as the lists of predicted regions and conserved binding motifs. See Sections 2 and 3 for a complete interpretation of each of the results provided. and mouse, e.g. from 2540 vertebrate entries in the Eukaryotic Promoter Database (), 2067 (81%) belong to these two species. Thus, with this tool in hand we can now, not only fill missing gaps in the annotation of the genomes of model organisms, mostly with the identification of enhancers and alternative promoters, but also to start a reliable and consistent annotation of conserved promoters throughout the rest of genomes that have little or no information regarding 5 UTRs and often first coding exons (). Beyond the current performance of ReLA and, as we are planning a genome wide search of regulatory regions across sequenced vertebrate genomes, we are actively searching for ways of improving further its predictive power by, for example, applying more sophisticated scoring systems and accepting even larger DNA regions with low additional computational costs.
