Motivation: Integral poly topic membrane proteins contain only two types of folds in their transmembrane domains helix bundles and b barrels. The increasing number of available crystal structures of these proteins permits an initial estimation of how sequence variability affects the structure conservation in their transmembrane domains. We, thus, aim to determine the pairwise sequence identity necessary to maintain the transmembrane molecular architectures compatible with the hydrophobic nature of the lipid bilayer. Results: root mean square deviation (rmsd) and sequence identity were calculated from the structural alignments of pairs of homologous poly topic membrane proteins sharing the same fold. Analysis of these data reveals that transmembrane segment pairs with sequence identity in the so called twilight zone (20–35%) display high structural similarity (rmsd51.5 A ˚). Moreover, a large group of b barrel pairs with low sequence identity (520%) still maintain a close structural similarity (rmsd52.5 A ˚). Thus, we conclude that fold preservation in transmembrane regions requires less sequence conservation than for globular proteins. These findings have direct implications in homology modeling of evolutionary related membrane proteins.

introduction integral poly topic membrane proteins mediate the interaction of the cell with its surroundings, being involved in multiple cellular processes, as selective molecular transport, signaling, respiration and motility. Because of their relevance to cellular physiology and their accessibility from the extracellular environment, membrane proteins represent a significant portion of therapeutic drug targets (). Particularly G protein coupled receptors, transport proteins and ion channels are among the most prominent target families for the pharmaceutical industry. Although membrane proteins represent $2030% of all proteins in sequenced genomes (), only 2% of crystal structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank are membrane proteins (), mainly because of the difficulty of their overexpression, purification and crystallization (). Thus, because of the limited high resolution structural information on membrane proteins, computational techniques to predict their three dimensional (3D) structure from the amino acid sequence are a valuable tool (). Recently, de novo techniques using evolutionary constraints have been applied to predict 3D structures for transmembrane (TM) proteins (). Homology models of proteins with unknown experimental structure can also be built from homologous proteins of known structure and similar sequence (templates). This method is based on the fact that in homologous proteins, structure is more conserved than sequence. In general, homologous proteins with a sequence identity 435% have a similar 3D structure. This similarity is less common in pairs of homologous proteins with sequence identity in the 'twilight zone' (threshold of 2035%) (). Although these conclusions were achieved from the analysis of crystal structures of soluble proteins, homology modeling methods are also appropriate for membrane proteins, obtaining rmsd52 A  relative to the native structure in the TM region for sequence identities of !30% (). However, because of the relative scarcity of reference structures, these methods are frequently applied using templates with sequence identity below the 'twilight zone', with reasonable results (see, for instance,). This is particularly true for the core of the TM regions and has inspired new template based coordinate generation protocols for membrane proteins (). This apparent difference between membrane and globular proteins probably arises because of their different environment. The lipid bilayer imposes a physical constraint that limits the number of folds that polypeptide chains can adopt when inserted in a membrane. These include helix bundles in bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic cells and b barrels in the outer membrane of bacteria, mitochondria and chloroplasts (). These two folds contain secondary structure elements that maximize the hydrogen bond interactions among backbone atoms, whereas hydrophobic side chains are preferentially oriented toward the membrane lipids. As a consequence, many TM proteins share similar structural arrangements, even with marginal sequence identities (), suggesting that relatively few conserved residues are sufficient to determine the molecular architecture of a particular TM fold the present study aims to test the hypothesis that computational structural biologists have been implicitly using when building homology models of membrane proteins using templates of low sequence identity: the fold in membrane proteins is less dependent on sequence variability than in globular proteins. By analyzing the relationship between structure and sequence in a database of membrane protein crystal structures, we show that fold preservation in the TM region of membrane proteins requires a lower degree of sequence conservation than in globular proteins.
