Motivation: The prediction of receptor ligand pairings is an important area of research as intercellular communications are mediated by the successful interaction of these key proteins. As the exhaustive as saying of receptor ligand pairs is impractical, a computational approach to predict pairings is necessary. We propose a workflow to carry out this interaction prediction task, using a text mining approach in conjunction with a state of the art prediction method, as well as a widely accessible and comprehensive dataset. Among several modern classifiers, random forests have been found to be the best at this prediction task. The training of this classifier was carried out using an experimentally validated dataset of Database of ligand receptor Partners dlr p receptor ligand pairs. New examples, co cited with the training receptors and ligands, are then classified using the trained classifier. After applying our method, we find that we are able to successfully predict receptor ligand pairs within the GPCR family with a balanced accuracy of 0.96. Upon further inspection, we find several supported interactions that were not present in the Database of Interacting Proteins dip database. We have measured the balanced accuracy of our method resulting in high quality predictions stored in the available database ReLiance.

introduction the 'omics' era has presented tremendous opportunities for high throughput investigations into important questions facing the research community. Many investigative strategies of implementing data mining techniques in combination with high throughput experiments have accomplished much. Several of these high throughput experimental methods, yeast two hybrid systems y2h (), pull down assays (), tandem affinity purification (), mass spectrometry (Gavin * To whom correspondence should be addressed), microarrays () and phage display (), have all generated enormous datasets, yet they are incomplete and are composed of many false positives and false negatives. Several databases exist to store information about validated or predicted protein protein interactions (PPI). They include the Munich Information Center for Protein sequences mips database (), the Molecular interactions mint database () the IntAct database (), the Database of Interacting proteins dip (), the Biomolecular Interaction Network database bind () and the bio grid database (). Some, like the Yeast Proteome Database () contain interactions which are derived from wet lab results, as well as those curated from literary sources. Currently, there exists thousands of candidate receptors and ligands and potentially hundreds of thousands of interactions. As the exhaustive as saying of every possible receptor ligand pairs is impractical, a computational approach to the prediction task is necessary. For example created a receptor ligand matching algorithm for the chemokine and tgf families. Later, we more aptly matched the tgf family with kernels () with an increase in recall of 0.76 over the 0.44 obtained from the results of following this, we have benchmarked several machine learning techniques, and assayed several parameters, on the receptor ligand interaction prediction task (submitted for publication). The results of this work show that we can obtain a balanced accuracy of 0.84 in this prediction task. Having used a 'golden standard' () to determine which is the best machine learning technique to apply to this problem, we now seek to make in silico predictions. The starting point of this novel course of research is the widely applied and powerful field of text mining. In this article, we present a strategy that takes into account text mining information in conjunction with a popular machine learning algorithm, the random forest (), which integrates several data sources such as domain, expression and phylogenetic based evidence. We build our new candidate list by searching for genes that are co cited with the receptors and ligands from the dlr p database (). We then make predictions using our trained classifier and evaluate the results in terms of known pairs, as well as in terms of distribution of the co citations in our ranked list of predictions the new examples where mapped to Gene Ontology and a search was performed for classifications containing the term 'receptor' with more than five members. The three classifications resulting from this search criteria were 'Peptide Receptor Activity, g protein Coupled', 'Transmembrane Receptor Tyrosine Kinase Activity' and 'Cytokine Receptor Activity'. We then used the DIP database as a baseline for calculations of sensitivity, specificity and balanced accuracy for each classification
