high throughput omics datasets often contain technical replicates included to account for technical sources of noise in the measurement process. Although summarizing these replicate measurements by using robust averages may help to reduce the influence of noise on downstream data analysis, the information on the variance across the replicate measurements is lost in the averaging process and therefore typically disregarded in subsequent statistical analyses. We introduce rep explore a web service dedicated to exploit the information captured in the technical replicate variance to provide more reliable and informative differential expression and abundance statistics for omics datasets. The software builds on previously published statistical methods, which have been applied successfully to biomedical omics data but are difficult to use without prior experience in programming or scripting. rep explore facilitates the analysis by providing a fully automated data processing and interactive ranking tables, whisker plot, heat map and principal component analysis visualizations to interpret omics data and derived statistics.

introduction technical noise is a common limitation in many high throughput biological experiments. Both mass spectrometry devices for proteomics and metabolomics profiling as well as gene and protein microarray platforms can only provide a limited reproducibility (). In combination with the biological variance observed across different omics samples under the same condition, the technical variability can significantly aggravate the statistical analysis of the data, increasing the risk for spurious and misinterpreted results. A common approach to reduce the influence of noise on the statistical analysis of omics data is to use technical replicate measurements, e.g. for mass spectrometry data collecting three technical replicates per biological sample is a typical setting. During data preprocessing the replicate measurements are summarized to average values, by determining the mean, median or a trimmed mean, to reduce the influence of noise in downstream data analysis. However, the variance across replicate measurements often differs significantly between the biological samples and this data on measurement uncertainty is not retained by the summarization and consequently not considered in following statistical analyses. Approaches to exploit technical variance information to improve robustness and sensitivity in downstream data analyses have been developed in recent years for differential expression analysis (), principal component analysis pc a and differential pathway analysis (). To enable users with limited or no programming experience to benefit from these new techniques to propagate variance information to downstream analyses, we have developed rep explore a web service to analyze proteomics and metabolomics data with V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
