Motivation: Repetitive DNA makes up large portions of plant and animal nuclear genomes, yet it remains the least characterized genome component in most species studied so far. Although the recent availability of high throughput sequencing data provides necessary resources for in depth investigation of genomic repeats, its utility is hampered by the lack of specialized bioinformatics tools and appropriate computational resources that would enable large scale repeat analysis to be run by biologically oriented researchers. Results: Here we present repeat explorer a collection of software tools for characterization of repetitive elements, which is accessible via web interface. A key component of the server is the computational pipeline using a graph based sequence clustering algorithm to facilitate de novo repeat identification without the need for reference databases of known elements. Because the algorithm uses short sequences randomly sampled from the genome as input, it is ideal for analyzing next generation sequence reads. Additional tools are provided to aid in classification of identified repeats, investigate phylo-genetic relationships of retro elements and perform comparative analysis of repeat composition between multiple species. The server allows to analyze several million sequence reads, which typically results in identification of most high and medium copy repeats in higher plant genomes. Implementation and availability: repeat explorer was implemented within the Galaxy environment and set up on a public server at

introduction in spite of the recent progress in genome sequencing technologies, accurate quantification and sequence characterization of repetitive DNA in complex plant and animal genomes remains a challenging task. Most of the existing bioinformatics tools either require completed genome assemblies for repeat identification or rely on similarity searches to databases of known repetitive elements. However, the number of fully assembled genomes is still small, and many exhibit poor assembly quality across repetitive regions where highly repetitive elements are mostly omitted. On the other hand, database scanning enables repeat identification in any type of sequence data, but it in principle does not allow detection of novel repetitive elements that lack similarity to the database. Consequently, both of these methods work well for extensively investigated groups of model species but their application to a broader range of diverse tax a is limited. A principally different approach for global repeat analysis that allows for de novo repeat identification and is suitable for utilizing unassembled reads was developed by. It is based on finding and quantifying similarities between individual sequence reads typically obtained by next generation sequencing of randomly sheared genomic DNA. These similarities are used to construct a graph in which the vertices correspond to sequence reads, overlapping reads are connected with edges and their similarity scores are expressed as edge weights. Graph topology is then analyzed to identify and separate clusters of frequently connected reads that represent individual families of repetitive elements. This strategy proved to be efficient in analyzing repeat composition of both plant () and animal () genomes. Here we report on the development of a computational pipeline implementing an improved version of graph based clustering and a number of additional tools for downstream analysis of the identified repeats. All tools were adapted to run under the online data analysis platform Galaxy (), which provides a user friendly web interface and facilitates easy execution, documentation and sharing of analysis protocols and results.
