Epigenetics, the study of heritable somatic phenotypic changes not related to DNA sequence, has emerged as a critical component of the landscape of gene regulation. The epigenetic layers, such as DNA methylation, histone modifications and nuclear architecture are now being extensively studied in many cell types and disease settings. Few software tools exist to summarize and interpret these datasets. We have created a toolbox of procedures to interrogate and visualize epi genomic data (both array and sequencing based and make available a software package for the cross platform R language. Availability: The package is freely available under LGPL from the r forge web site (http://repitools.r-forge.r-project.org/) Contact:

introduction epigenetics is the study of the phenotypic changes unrelated to DNA sequence. epi genomics is the large scale study of epigenetics, with various genome wide assays having been introduced in the past few years and with many epi genome mapping projects on the horizon (). DNA methylation is one of the best studied epigenetic marks and can be assayed genome wide using restriction enzyme, bi sulphite or enrichment based approaches (reviewed in). Another significant class of epigenetic regulators is histone modifications, typically studied using chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) in combination with microarrays chip chip or next generation sequencing chips eq. There are limited general tools available for the exploratory analysis and summarization of enrichment based epi genomics data see of Laird, 2010). We present rep i tools a software package for the R environment that is focused on the analysis of enrichment based epi genomic data. Examples are shown to illustrate the diversity of tools within the package; many further examples can be found in the comprehensive user's guide. The routines have been tested on Affymetrix and nimble gen tiling microarrays and Illumina Genome Analyzer sequencing data; generic data types are used so that other platforms can be easily supported. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

discussion there are relatively few tools currently available for the analysis of epi genomic data. We have developed rep i tools a software package for the R environment; it contains many useful functions for quality assessment, visualization, summarization and statistical analysis of epi genomics experiments. The package makes use of aroma affymetrix and several Bioconductor packages for various preprocessing steps () and may require an intermediate understanding of R for some features. A comprehensive user manual is available and examples can be run using supplied data. The analysis of large Affymetrix tiling array datasets is facilitated through the memory efficiency afforded by the aroma affymetrix package ().
