Amino acid replacement rate matrices are an essential basis of protein studies (e.g. in phylogenetics and alignment). A number of general purpose matrices have been proposed (e.g. JTT, WAG, LG) since the seminal work of Margaret Dayhoff and co-workers. However, it has been shown that matrices specific to certain protein groups (e.g. mitochondrial) or life domains (e.g. viruses) differ significantly from general average matrices, and thus perform better when applied to the data to which they are dedicated. This Web server implements the maximum likelihood estimation procedure that was used to estimate LG, and provides a number of tools and facilities. Users upload a set of multiple protein alignments from their domain of interest and receive the resulting matrix by email, along with statistics and comparisons with other matrices. A non-parametric bootstrap is performed optionally to assess the variability of replacement rate estimates. maximum likelihood trees, inferred using the estimated rate matrix, are also computed optionally for each input alignment. Finely tuned procedures and up-to-date ML software phy ml 3.0, x rate are combined to perform all these heavy calculations on our clusters.

introduction amino acid replacement matrices contain estimates of the instantaneous substitution rates from any amino acid to another. These rates reflect the biological, chemical and physical properties of amino acids. For example, we usually observe a high substitution rate between lysine (positively charged) and arginine (also positively charged) and a low substitution rate between lysine and aspartate (negatively charged). Amino acid replacement matrices are an essential basis of protein phylogenetics. They are used to compute substitution probabilities along phylogeny branches, and thus the likelihood of the data. They are also closely related to score matrices, which are essential for aligning proteins and computing alignment scores. Several general replacement matrices have been proposed, such as PAM (), JTT (), WAG () and LG (). These matrices were estimated from large and diverse sets of protein alignments. They tend to be robust and perform well in many cases. However, the performance of replacement matrices depends on life domains and protein groups (). Replacement matrices have thus been estimated for specific domains [e.g. for HIV,, and influenza,] and protein groups [e.g. mitochondrial proteins,. It has been shown that specific replacement matrices often differ significantly from general matrices, and thus perform better when applied to the data to which they are dedicated [e.g.;. Since the seminal work of, a number of methods have been designed to estimate amino acid replacement matrices from protein alignments. These methods belong to either counting (e.g.) or maximum likelihood (ML) approaches (e.g.). The former are limited to pairwise protein alignments, while the latter fully benefit from the information contained in multiple alignments and the corresponding phylogenies. Recently, we improved the ML method proposed by by incorporating the variability of evolutionary rates across sites into the matrix estimation process (). This procedure was successfully applied to estimate the LG matrix from 3912 alignments of the Pfam database, the FLU matrix from 992 influenza protein alignments and a number of matrices corresponding to various structural configurations of the residues (). The demand to estimate amino acid replacement matrices for particular data is rising quickly because of the rapidly growing volume of sequence data and a desire to better understand the evolution and relationships of specific protein groups and species. However, up-to-date replacement matrix estimation procedures are complex and highly demanding in computational terms. Our method () involves complex data processing and alternates tree building using phy ml () and matrix estimation using x rate (). It thus requires a huge amount of work to estimate a matrix from raw datasets. Here, we describe an implementation of this method in a Web server. Users upload their alignments and receive the output matrix by email along with a number of additional statistics and comparisons. Optionally, the server performs a non-parametric
