It is common for computational analyses to generate large amounts of complex data that are difficult to process and share with collaborators. Standard methods are needed to transform such data into a more useful and intuitive format. We present reporting tools a Bioconductor package, that automatically recognizes and transforms the output of many common Bioconductor packages into rich, interactive , html based reports. Reports are not generic, but have been individually designed to reflect content specific to the result type detected. Tabular output included in reports is sortable, filterable and searchable and contains context relevant hyperlinks to external databases. Additionally, in-line graphics have been developed for specific analysis types and are embedded by default within table rows, providing a useful visual summary of underlying raw data. reporting tools is highly flexible and reports can be easily customized for specific applications using the well defined API. Availability: The reporting tools package is implemented in R and available from Bioconductor (version 2.11) at the URL: http:// bioconductor org packages release bioc html reporting tools html. Installation instructions and usage documentation can also be found at the above URL.

introduction computational analyses often generate large and complex datasets that need to be shared with collaborators. As such, methods are needed to produce standardized reports that summarize analysis results and can be easily and interactively explored. reporting tools performs this role by providing methods that automatically detect output from many common Bioconductor packages () and transforms the content into intuitively designed rich HTML documents. Although the use of HTML to present data is not novel (), the development of software to recognize result types from common Bioconductor packages and generate specific summary reports based on the result type is new, and provides a powerful tool for analyzing data. reporting tools automatically detects the output of many genomic analysis packages and produces an HTML report reflecting specific scientific content from the analysis. Packages for which outputs are automatically detected include limma for analysis of microarray expression data, g seal m for gene set analysis, GOstats for ontology analyses and edgeR, de seq DESeq2, dex seq for rnase q based analyses (). Additional analysis packages can be easily accommodated by extending the reporting tools code base. reporting tools provides a common programmatic interface to process and generate reports from many standard computational analyses. A single method call is needed to detect and process results from known analysis types, and two additional lines of code are needed to generate the interactive HTML report that can be shared with collaborators. Finally, for added flexibility in presenting output, reporting tools has been integrated with knit r and shiny (). reporting tools provides important functionality for users generating highly customized analysis reports, or for core facilities that regularly present standardized automated output to collaborators.

conclusion reporting tools offers numerous advantages for analysis workflows. First, reporting tools automatically detects the R object classes produced by many common Bioconductor packages, reducing the overhead needed to extract, process and present the data in a standardized analysis specific manner. This encourages and facilitates reproducible research () by reducing the amount of manual intervention and one off coding to go from raw data to consumable report. Second, the inclusion of in-line graphics provides a highly effective way to summarize underlying raw data. Third, it is straightforward to extend the code with the flexible low level interface to support additional result types. Reports can also be highly customized by overriding package defaults and further customized using the lower level interfaces we make available to the users. Fourth, the integration of reporting tools with knit r and shiny provides many additional and useful options for presenting results. Reports generated by reporting tools are easily reproduced and provide a consistent point of entry to the results of computational analyses. This facilitates data sharing and enables analysts and collaborators to spend more of their effort inspecting and exploring analysis results.. reporting tools dispatches on results from upstream analyses and automatically prepares analysis specific graphics, cross-links, annotations, statistics and data for presentation. The final report presents the analysis results and related data in an HTML or knit r document with additional search, filter and sort functionality. For more examples, including fully interactive reports, see http://research-pub.gene.com/ reporting tools
