Motivation: Metabolic modeling depends on accurately representing the cellular locations of enzyme -catalyzed and transport reactions. We sought to develop a representation of cellular compart-mentation that would accurately capture cellular location information. We further sought a representation that would support automated inference of the cellular compartments present in newly sequenced organisms to speed model development, and that would enable representing the cellular compartments present in multiple cell types within a multicellular organism. Results: We define the cellular architecture of a unicellular organism, or of a cell type from a multi-cellular organism, as the collection of cellular components it contains plus the topological relationships among those components. We developed a tool for inferring cellular architectures across many domains of life and extended our Cell Component Ontology to enable representation of the inferred architectures. We provide software for visualizing cellular architectures to verify their cor-rectness and software for editing cellular architectures to modify or correct them. We also developed a representation that records the cellular compartment assignments of reactions with minimal duplication of information. Availability and implementation: The Cell Component Ontology is freely available. The Pathway Tools software is freely available for academic research and is available for a fee for commercial use.

introduction accurate representation of the compartmentation of the cell is an important issue in metabolic modeling. In our quest to streamline the processes of developing metabolic models, and of exchanging models between different research groups, a number of issues related to cellular compartmentation arise. What is the essential information about cellular compartmentation that should be captured, and how can it be effectively represented? How can we automatically infer the cellular compartments of an organism when creating a new metabolic model? When that automatic inference fails, how can we facilitate manual adjustment of compartmentation by a user a Cell Component Ontology (CCO) should be able to represent the universal set of cellular components from which all known cells are built, as well as the particular cellular components from which a specific type of cell is built. For multicellular organisms, the CCO should be able to represent, within one database, the cellular components of the multiple cell types present in that organism. Cell types in multicellular organisms sometimes have different cellular architectures, e.g. red blood cells lack nuclei. CCO should capture the information needed to support the inference of the cellular architecture of different organisms, such as by describing the typical organization of cellular components in different types of organisms (e.g. the cellular architecture of a typical plant versus a typical bacterium) in a way that can be instantiated in a particular organism. Finally, CCO should enable inferences about the spatial organization of cellular compartments (e.g. if a transporter is assigned to a given membrane within a cell, a program should be able to infer that the transporter transports metabolites from the cellular space surrounding that membrane to the cellular space surrounded by that membrane). Accurate metabolic models must define the different sets of reactions that occur within different cellular compartments of a given cell type, and the exchange reactions that translocate metabolites across cellular membranes. Consider the problem of modeling a large community of interacting organisms by combining metabolic models created by different research groups for individual organisms. For example, imagine that we wanted to combine a human intestinal epithelial cell metabolic model derived from recon2 with models of bacteria from the gut microbiota shoa ie and Nielsen (2014). If the individual models do not identify their common extracellular space using a single shared identifier, it will not be possible for the metabolites secreted by one organism to be taken up by another organism. Furthermore, for consistency and understandability it is desirable for different models to use the same controlled vocabulary terms to refer to the same cellular components, such as the bacterial inner membrane. Standardization of the cellular compartments used in individual metabolic models would clearly facilitate our ability to combine organism models created by different research groups in a plug and play fashion. Currently, the models produced by different research groups use a wide array of ad hoc and incompatible compartment identifiers, e.g. 'golgi apparatus'] versus 'golgi', 'extra cellular space' (Recon 2) versus 'extracellular' (Yeast 7), versus extra organism. An overview of our approach to these problems is as follows. We have updated our cco http://bioinformatics.ai. sri com cco to enable the concurrent description of multiple cell types within a single database and to permit development of metabolic reconstructions that span multiple (e.g. human) cell types. The CCO describes 'surrounds' relationships among compartments (e.g. the cytosol surrounds the mitochondrion). Proteins, metabolites and reactions within a pathway genome Database p gdb can be annotated with one or more CCO terms to define their cellular location(s). Further, each CCO cellular component is labeled with the National Center for Biotechnology Information (NCBI) Taxonomy identifiers of the taxonomic groups in which that component is expected to appear. This information enables inferring the cellular components present in an organism, given its NCBI Taxonomy identifier, by the metabolic reconstruction module (PathoLogic) of our Pathway Tools [overview:; summary of recent enhancements:] software. We refer to the set of cellular components present in a unicellular organism, or in a type of cell from a multicellular organism, plus the topological relationships among those cellular components, as the cellular architecture. When a user finds the cellular architecture of an organism to be in error, they can use the new Cellular Architecture Editor within Pathway Tools to revise the cellular architecture. The meta flux metabolic modeling module within Pathway Tools uses the CCO terms attached to metabolic and transport reactions to assign those reactions to appropriate cellular compartments within a metabolic model. We have defined a mapping between CCO terms and Gene Ontology (GO) Gene Ontology Consortium (2015) terms to maximize the standardization of CCO while enabling it to be extended independently of GO when necessary.

discussion the representations described herein are used to describe cellular architectures in all of the organisms listed in
