Motivation: Clustering methods can be useful for automatically grouping documents into meaningful clusters, improving human comprehension of a document collection. Although there are clustering algorithms that can achieve the goal for relatively large document collections, they do not always work well for small and homogenous datasets. Methods: In this article, we present retro a novel clustering algorithm that extracts meaningful clusters along with concise and descriptive titles from small and homogenous document collections. Unlike common clustering approaches, our algorithm predicts cluster titles before clustering. It relies on the hypergeometric distribution model to discover key phrases, and generates candidate clusters by assigning documents to these phrases. Further, the statistical significance of candidate clusters is tested using supervised learning methods, and a multiple testing correction technique is used to control the overall quality of clustering. Results: We test our system on five disease datasets from OMIM V R and evaluate the results based on MeSH V R term assignments. We further compare our method with several baseline and state of the art methods, including k means expectation maximization, latent Dirichlet allocation based clustering, Lingo, optim src and adapted gk means. The experimental results on the 20 newsgroup and ODP-239 collections demonstrate that our method is successful at extracting significant clusters and is superior to existing methods in terms of quality of clusters. Finally, we apply our system to a collection of 6248 topical sets from the HomoloGene V R database, a resource in PubMed V R. Empirical evaluation confirms the method is useful for small homogenous datasets in producing meaningful clusters with descriptive titles. Availability and implementation: A web based demonstration of the algorithm applied to a collection of sets from the HomoloGene database is available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/CBBresearch/Wilbur/ iret clustering homologene index html
introduction text clustering algorithms group a set of documents into meaningful clusters and can be useful in many settings. Although a vast collection of clustering methods exists, most of them work best for relatively large sets of documents. However, we frequently encounter topics that are discussed in a limited number of documents. One such example is ncbi s HomoloGene resource available through PubMed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih. gov homologene which is a system for automated detection of homologs among the annotated genes of several completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes. The resource provides the list of articles associated with every entry, and most of these sets are small and homogenous. When applied to such document collections, traditional clustering approaches often fail to produce useful results, suggesting that more sensitive methods are needed for the task. There are two ways to fail at clustering small document collections. First, the algorithm could place all documents in a single cluster. A second way in which an algorithm may fail is to produce weak clusters that represent noise. For example, many clustering algorithms produce different results depending on the cluster initialization, which suggests some of the clusters are unstable or weak. The more homogenous the data, the more severe both of these problems are. Another issue that motivated this research is that most existing algorithms produce clusters that are not self descriptive and one has to further sort through the documents to decipher the subject of the cluster. However, presenting visual cues, such as cluster titles, can significantly improve the user perception of clustering results. We emphasize the importance of cluster titles and provide clusters along with meaningful titles. In this article, we develop a robust clustering algorithm that addresses these issues and produces meaningful clusters along with concise and descriptive titles for small document collections. Our algorithm, which we named Retro, predicts cluster titles prior to clustering. It first identifies central phrases using p values based on a hypergeometric test. Each such phrase is then evaluated as a potential cluster title using supervised learning techniques. The evaluation hinges on the hypothesis that a phrase represents a useful cluster title if it has discriminative power. Thus, a cluster is formed around the phrase by collecting the documents that contain that phrase in the title and is enriched with documents that are closely related to those. Then, a machine learning method is used to measure how strongly that cluster stands out from the rest of the documents in the set. Clusters are then sorted based on that measure, and a multiple testing correction technique is used to control the number of top scoring clusters to retain. Document titles in the resultant clusters are then used to extend the initial phrase into a more descriptive cluster title. Our approach can be characterized as a soft clustering algorithm, which allows a document to be *To whom correspondence should be addressed. assigned into more than one cluster and does not force every document into a cluster. It produces a flat structure, works on homogenous datasets and does not require any initialization or control parameters except for a desired confidence level of the output for multiple testing correction. In Section 2, we review related literature. Section 3 describes in detail our clustering framework. Section 4 presents the datasets used for experiments and clustering results. In Section 5, we present an application of our system and also discuss our clustering approach and draw conclusions.

application we applied our algorithm to HomoloGene, a reference database and a system for automated detection of homologs among the annotated genes of several completely sequenced eukaryotic genomes. It provides information on genes, proteins, conserved domains and protein alignments. The resource also provides the list of articles associated with genes and sequences for every homology group automatically retrieved from PubMed. The list of linked PubMed records is often relatively small in size compared with the datasets that are generally used for document clustering. The HomoloGene collection consists of 6248 gene records selected from the HomoloGene resource. Of these 6248 sets, 3263 contain 40100 documents, 2827 contain 1011000 documents and 369 sets contain 41000 records, with the largest set containing 8282 records (tumor protein p53 the bar graph represents the average number of clusters in each bin, and the line graph represents the total number of datasets in the bin. Overall, we compute at least one cluster for 6210 of the 6248 HomoloGene datasets. On average, we identify 8.1 significant clusters for small sets containing 100 or fewer documents. That group constitutes over half of all datasets and, thus, is important. The average size of clusters over the whole collection is 7 documents per cluster, and for the sets containing 100 or fewer documents it is 5.6 documents. A few examples of small HomoloGene datasets along with computed clusters are presented in Supplementary Appendix B in the Supplementary Materials. Clustering results of the full collection are made publicly available at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/IRET/ HomoloGene.
