Motivation: The identification of potential drug target proteins in bacteria is important in pharmaceutical research for the development of new antibiotics to combat bacterial agents that cause diseases. Results: A new model that combines the singular value decomposition (SVD) technique with biological filters composed of a set of protein properties associated with bacterial drug targets and similarity to protein coding essential genes of Escherichia coli (strain K12) has been created to predict potential antibiotic drug targets in the Enterobacteriaceae family. This model identified 99 potential drug target proteins in the studied family, which exhibit eight different functions and are protein coding essential genes or similar to protein coding essential genes of E.coli (strain K12), indicating that the disruption of the activities of these proteins is critical for cells. Proteins from bacteria with described drug resistance were found among the retrieved candidates. These candidates have no similarity to the human proteome, therefore exhibiting the advantage of causing no adverse effects or at least no known adverse effects on humans. Contact:

introduction members of the Enterobacteriaceae family are globally ubiquitous organisms found in soil, water and vegetation and are part of the normal gut microbiota of many animals, including humans. These gram negative bacteria include a large number of genera (e.g. Klebsiella, Proteus, Serratia, Enterobacter and Escherichia), are among the most abundant commensal microorganisms in humans, are the most frequent cause of invasive diseases in patients of all ages and acquire drug resistance at a concerning rate (). Their ubiquity and frequent acquisition of mobile genetic elements that give them a selective advantage drives human hosts to be regularly exposed to new bacteria strains with novel genetic repertoires including antibiotic resistance. Resistant gram negative bacteria are responsible for many nosocomial infections and healthy non hospitalized patient infections and are a major concern due to the severity of the infections they cause, the ease of developing multi resistance and the absence of new therapeutic agents active against this group of pathogens (). The development of antibiotic resistance in bacteria is a growing phenomenon in the twenty first century and is one of the world's most pressing public health concerns (). Recent reports have described the spread of carb a pen em resistant or car bap enemas e producing Enterobacteriaceae as being associated with high mortality rates and having the potential to spread widely. The first report of a carb a pen em resistant strain of Klebsiella pneumoniae was in 2001 in the United States; in Europe, the first case of infection, which was of US origin, was reported in 2005 in France, and in 2006, a case was first reported in Colombia and then in Brazil and V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com Argentina (). New antibiotics are needed as drug resistance continues to grow, but little progress has been observed in the development of new antibiotics to combat bacterial infections, mainly because many pharmaceutical companies are withdrawing from antibacterial research and development likely due to the scientific challenges associated with manufacturing a novel antibacterial drug, the low return on investment that currently affects most pharmaceuticals and the difficulties associated with the discovery of new drug targets in bacteria (). Typically, a drug target is a molecular structure, such as a protein or a nucleic acid, through which a drug modulates its therapeutic activity, and it can be a molecule in the human body that causes disease for some reason or a molecule from a disease causing microorganism (). In this study, we will focus only on drug targets that are proteins from species of the Enterobacteriaceae family. Different approaches can be applied for selection of a good candidate to therapeutic target like models based on sequence to function (), comparative genomics (), metabolic pathways (), structure to function () and data mining (). The most common approach to assist new drug target identification has been based on the determination of high sequence similarity using the BLAST algorithm which is a good initial starting point, but structure similarities are also important along with other explicit or hidden correlations even for proteins with low sequence similarities (). New drug targets can also be identified by establishing correlations between known protein signatures with contiguous patterns of 10 to 50 residue long amino acids associated with a particular structure or function in proteins (), as annotated on public resources such as InterPro (). The model that we are proposing here in one of the only few methods that is able to predict the existence of potential drug targets based on the biological function, the domain and functional sites of a protein ().identified 130 InterPro entries to be sufficient for the prediction of all of the human drug gable proteome. Herein, we propose a model to identify potential antibiotic drug targets of the Enterobacteriaceae family by exploring semantic similarities across InterPro entries annotated to known Enterobacteriaceae drug targets. In this model, we first specified a drug target vector space model (VSM) using the known Enterobacteriaceae drug targets and their associated InterPro entries and applied the singular value decomposition (SVD) technique to this dataset to create a reduced drug target space that reveals latent correlations between the known drug targets that are impossible to perceive by strictly direct queries onto relational databases. Through the projection of the Enterobacteriaceae proteome vectors onto the reduced drug target space and the application of the cosine metric to the vectors' angles, we were able to retrieve a set of potential antibiotic drug targets that incorporate the latent structural and functional correlations between the known drug targets. The final set of enterobacteriaceae specific antibiotic drug target candidates was defined by filtering some of the protein properties associated with bacterial drug targets and determining the similarity to protein coding essential genes of Escherichia coli (strain K12) and with the human proteome.
