Motivation: The inference of regulatory networks from large scale expression data holds great promise because of the potentially causal interpretation of these networks. However, due to the difficulty to establish reliable methods based on observational data there is so far only incomplete knowledge about possibilities and limitations of such inference methods in this context. Results: In this article, we conduct a statistical analysis investigating differences and similarities of four network inference algorithms, ar acne CLR, mr net and RN, with respect to local network based measures. We employ ensemble methods allowing to assess the infer ability down to the level of individual edges. Our analysis reveals the bias of these inference methods with respect to the inference of various network components and, hence, provides guidance in the interpretation of inferred regulatory networks from expression data. Further, as application we predict the total number of regulatory interactions in human B cells and hypothesize about the role of Myc and its targets regarding molecular information processing.

introduction the orchestral behavior of genes is coordinated by different types of gene networks, e.g. the transcriptional regulatory, signaling or protein network and interactions among them (). As these networks represent biochemical interactions among gene products, they form causal () instead of merely association networks (). For this reason the reconstruction of gene networks from experimental data on a genomic scale is considered as one of the most important goals in systems biology. A reflection of this importance can be seen in the establishment of the DREAM (Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods) project and its conference series that is devoted to all aspects of this endeavor providing a forum for the community (). If expression data from DNA microarray experiments are used, the inferred networks are called gene regulatory networks grn s because a large portion of estimated interactions may come from * To whom correspondence should be addressed. transcription regulation directly, but not only (Emmert). In general, GRN inference grn i is important for a better understanding of normal cell physiology and for the explanation of pathological phenotypes (). The difficulty of the problem () stems from the fact that expression data are noisy, sample size is small relative to the number of covariates and the type of data is frequently limited to observational data only, e.g. because of ethical reasons. Recently, several mutual information (MI;) based methods for the inference of genome scale regulatory networks have been suggested to approach this problem. Four of these methods are ar acne (), CLR (), mr net () and Relevance Networks (RN;). These methods have been investigated using global performance measures such as the f score () or area under the receiver operator curve a uroc (). Further, such studies are frequently based on an individual dataset rather than an ensemble of datasets drawn under the same condition. In this article, we analyze network inference methods statistically employing local network based measures to assess their performance, as proposed in Emmert, in combination with ensemble data. This introduces a graph theoretical perspective () on the problem that allows to study arbitrary network components instead of the entire network only.

discussion in this article, we compared four different network inference algorithms ar acne CLR, mr net and rn with respect to their performance. For this comparison, we used several local Page: 1743 17381744

conclusion despite the wealth of literature already existing studying network inference algorithms, our study is the first comparing such algorithms with respect to local network based measures in combination with ensemble methods. By emphasizing network based and ensemble, we want to point out, first, measures should be problem specific, in contrast to general measures such as the f score allowing to gain domain specific insights in the underlying problem. Second, the overall problem of network inference should be put in the context of statistical inference to gain reliable information about the performance and especially errors of such methods under well defined conditions.
