Thanks to its free licensing and the development of initiatives like Bioconductor, R has become an essential part of the bio-informatics toolbox in the past years and is more and more confronted with genomic ally located data. While separate solutions are available to manipulate and visualize such data, no R package currently offers the efficiency required for computationally intensive tasks such as interactive genome browsing. The package proposed here fulfills this specific need, providing a multilevel interface suitable for most needs, from a completely interfaced genome browser to low level classes and methods. Its time and memory efficiency have been challenged in a human dataset, where it outperformed existing solutions by several orders of magnitude. Availability and implementation: R sources and packages are freely available at the CRAN repository and dedicated Web site: http://bio-informatics.ovsa.fr/Rgb. Distributed under the GPL 3 license, compatible with most operating systems (Windows, Linux, Mac OS) and architectures. Contact:

introduction the growing demand from the biology community for statistically robust approaches has made the R statistics oriented scripting language an essential part of the bioinformatics toolbox. Its graphical capabilities make it a valuable tool to produce publication grade complex figures, whereas its computational efficiency allows it to handle huge datasets, as currently required in fields like transcript omics or next generation sequencing. These qualities come with an open source licensing and various operating system ports that make it available virtually everywhere. Thanks to the Bioconductor initiative (), large amount of software is freely available as R packages for tasks as diverse as microarray processing (), feature annotation () or sequence analysis (). Much of this software generates genomic data, i.e. lists of chromosome regions defined by starting and ending coordinates. Such data are usually subset using chromosomal coordinates rather than row indexes, a paradigm R was not developed to deal with. Bioconductor historically addressed this issue with the ranged data class from the i ranges package, handling genomic regions as ranges of integers (base positions). Its flexibility and efficiency were extended a few years later by the genomic ranges package, making direct use of i ranges components for the subsetting. For visualization, Bioconductor provides two solutions: r track layer and g viz. The former sends data to visualize to the UCSC web genome browser (), a model that implies frequent comings and goings between programs and consequent network burden. The latter is more integrated within Bioconductor and produces static graphics from the classes described above, in delays incompatible with user interactivity and intensive computing. The package described here reconciles these two aspects in a coherent way, thus offering an interactive interface responsive enough for comfortable browsing and atomic operations suitable for computer intensive algorithms.
