co crystallization experiments of proteins with nucleic acids do not guarantee that both components are present in the crystal. We have previously developed di ber to predict crystal content when protein and DNA are present in the crystallization mix. Here, we present RIBER, which should be used when protein and RNA are in the crystallization drop. The combined riber di ber suite builds on machine learning techniques to make reliable, quantitative predictions of crystal content for non expert users and high throughput crystallography. Availability: The program source code, Linux binaries and a web server are available at http://diber.iimcb.gov.pl/ riber di ber requires diffraction data to at least 3.0 Å resolution in MTZ or CIF (web server only) format.

introduction protein crystallogr a phers who work on protein nucleic acid complexes routinely face the problem that crystals that grow in a co crystallization experiment do not necessarily contain all components present in the solution. The crystal content can be clarified by spectroscopic methods, but the equipment for such measurements is not commonly available. Alternatively, crystals can be washed, dissolved and analyzed by gel electrophoresis with appropriate staining, but this method is labor intensive, destructive and does not always provide a clear cut answer. In this work, we present the new program RIBER for detecting the presence of RNA stems in macromolecular crystals based on diffraction data alone. RIBER complements the previously developed program di ber () intended to search for double stranded B-DNA and not double stranded A-RNA (). The two programs are implemented as a stand-alone software suite and a web server riber di ber providing an easy way to judge nucleic acid content of a crystal based on a diffraction dataset, before the crystal structure is solved. * To whom correspondence should be addressed the method may help to avoid a laborious phasing procedure when the component or the complex of interest is not present in the crystal.
