ribo switches are non-coding RNA located in the 5 0 untranslated regions where they bind a target metabolite used to specify the ribo switch class and control the expression of associated genes. Accurate identification of ribo switches is the first step towards understanding their regulatory and functional roles in the cell. In this article, we describe a new web application named ribo switch Scanner which provides an automated pipeline for p hmm based detection of ribo switches in partial as well as complete genomic sequences rapidly, with high sensitivity and specificity. Availability and implementation: ribo switch Scanner can be freely accessed on the web at

introduction ribo switches are cis regulatory genomic segments that control the expression of downstream genes by undergoing conformational changes on ligand binding (). They are mainly found in bacteria but have also been detected in a few eukaryotes (). ribo switches are categorized into different classes according to the type of ligand and secondary structure. High sequence level conservation and structural similarity are found in the aptamer domain of the ribo switches belonging to the same class (). ribo switches control the expression of genes that are involved in biosynthesis and transport of the ligands as well as transcription factors (). In view of their important regulatory role in bacteria and a few eukaryotes, it is essential to develop tools for accurate identification of different classes of ribo switches. Several approaches have been developed for computational identifications of ribo switches. An influential and one of the earliest programs adapted for ribo switch search is Infernal () based on the covariance model (CM). rf am databases () are dependent on CMs for annotation of nc rnas. But, construction of CMs is computationally expensive and accuracy of CM is sensitive to the quality of input multiple sequence alignment () and no user friendly ribo switch specific web servers are available for this method. rib ex (Abreu) is a web based tool capable of detecting ribo switches based on sequence motifs that are unique to a specific class. It is less sensitive for ribo switch classes that are characterized by short length and simple sequence motifs. The ribo sw web server () is able to identify 12 classes of ribo switches based on the structural conformations and sequence conservation within the functional region. But, TPP and Cobalamin ribo switches are difficult to detect with their method. Limitation of all these web tools is that they impose upper bounds on the length of the input sequences and none of these tools are capable of detecting ribo switch from whole genome sequences. The Denison ribo switch Detector (DRD) web server () was developed to predict 13 classes of ribo switches from DNA sequences based on a dynamic programming algorithm. The DRD algorithm considers mismatches which are likely to yield more false positives (). Recently, a ribo switch identification method was proposed (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 2015b) that combines the accuracy of structure based predictions with the speed of sequence based methods by exploiting an inverse RNA folding problem solver. In this application note, we describe a new web based tool for accurate detection of ribo switches using a method () based on profile Hidden Markov Models p hmm. These are appropriate for modeling sequence profiles and searching databases for remotely homologous sequences (). By exploiting the high level of sequence conservation s of the aptamer domain in every class of ribo switches we had previously demonstrated that p hmm methods are able to identify potential ribo switches in whole genome sequences accurately and much faster than Infernal CMs search. The latest Infernal 1.1 package () currently available which uses accelerated p hmm and hmm banded CM alignment methods and has reduced CM search times compared with older Infernal versions with little cost to detection sensitivity. However, if for searching sequences with CMs, the e-value calibration step is needed, the computing time of CM models increases substantially. Construction of ribo switch models to search of sequence databases require less computing time with ph mms. With this motivation we developed a p hmm based web application named ribo switch Scanner for predicting putative ribo switches along with their locations in genomic sequences for 24 classes of ribo switches. Moreover, users can also search new ribo switch classes. ribo switch Scanner detects the putative ribo switches with higher accuracy than other available web based tools for ribo switch discovery. Therefore, the ribo switch Scanner provides more efficient alternative ribo switch detection tool that assist in the development of automated genome annotations.
