We consider the problem of similarity queries in biological network databases. Given a database of networks, similarity query returns all the database networks whose similarity (i.e. alignment score) to a given query network is at least a specified similarity cut off value. Alignment of two networks is a very costly operation, which makes exhaustive comparison of all the database networks with a query impractical. To tackle this problem, we develop a novel indexing method, named rin q reference based Indexing for Biological Network Queries). Our method uses a set of reference networks to eliminate a large portion of the database quickly for each query. A reference network is a small biological network. We precompute and store the alignments of all the references with all the database networks. When our database is queried, we align the query network with all the reference networks. Using these alignments, we calculate a lower bound and an approximate upper bound to the alignment score of each database network with the query network. With the help of upper and lower bounds, we eliminate the majority of the database networks without aligning them to the query network. We also quickly identify a small portion of these as guaranteed to be similar to the query. We perform pairwise alignment only for the remaining networks. We also propose a supervised method to pick references that have a large chance of filtering the unpromising database networks. Extensive experimental evaluation suggests that (i) our method reduced the running time of a single query on a database of around 300 networks from over 2 days to only 8 h; (ii) our method outperformed the state of the art method Closure Tree and SAGA by a factor of three or more; and (iii) our method successfully identified statistically and biologically significant relationships across networks and organisms. Contact:

introduction with the advances in biotechnology and high throughput computing, the amount of data describing the interactions among molecules has increased greatly in recent years. Depending on the types of interactions, these data are expressed through various models such as metabolic (), gene regulatory () or protein interaction () networks. The term pathway is also used in the literature to describe a part of them. In this article, we will use the term biological network to describe a collection of these interactions. Understanding biological networks has been one of the main goals of biological sciences as they contain key information regarding * To whom correspondence should be addressed. how organisms work. To achieve this goal, biological networks are analyzed in a number of ways. One of them, comparison based analysis, identifies similar parts of two biological networks by aligning them. Such analysis has been successfully used for finding functional annotations (), identifying drug targets (), reconstructing metabolic networks from newly sequenced genome () and building phylogenetic trees (). Aligning two biological networks is a computationally challenging problem. Existing methods often map this problem to subgraph isomorphism problem. For this problem, there are no known polynomial time algorithms which guarantee to produce the optimal alignment. A number of methods aim to find approximate () or heuristic () results in practical time. However, they still require a significant amount of time. Computational difficulty of biological network alignment becomes apparent when we need to align a query network with a database of biological networks. To test this, we downloaded 297 networks from KEGG (). These networks had 16120 genes (i.e. nodes) and 17165 edges. We aligned the networks in the dataset with a set of 50 query networks using the QNet algorithm (). Each of these query networks had seven nodes. Average processing time for a single query network was over 2 days on a single processor. The same experiment for eight node queries took more than a week for a single query network. In this article, we aim to align a query network with a database of networks efficiently. Formal definition of our problem is as follows: Problem definition: Assume that we have a database of n biological). However, there has been a limited number of studies on similarity searches in network databases (). Although these methods work well for specific types of network databases, they are not well suited for biological network databases which is the problem considered in this article. This is mainly because they often use an overly simplified similarity measure for network alignment. When used with costly biological network alignment tools, the time complexity of these indexing methods become impractical. We elaborate on previous works in Section 2.
