Motivation: Understanding transcriptional gene regulation is essential for studying cellular systems. Identifying genome wide targets of transcription factors (TFs) provides the basis to discover the involvement of TFs and TF cooperative ness in cellular systems and pathogenesis. Results: We present the regulatory interaction predictor (RIP), a machine learning approach that inferred 73 923 regulatory interactions (RIs) for 301 human TFs and 11 263 target genes with considerably good quality and 4516 RIs with very high quality. The inference of RIs is independent of any specific condition. Our approach employs support vector machines (SVMs) trained on a set of experimentally proven RIs from a public repository (TRANSFAC). Features of RIs for the learning process are based on a correlation meta analysis of 4064 gene expression profiles from 76 studies, in silico predictions of transcription factor binding sites tfbs s and combinations of these employing knowledge about co regulation of genes by a common TF tf module. The trained SVMs were applied to infer new RIs for a large set of TFs and genes. In a case study, we employed the inferred RIs to analyze an independent microarray dataset. We identified key TFs regulating the transcriptional response upon interferon alpha stimulation of monocytes, most prominently interferon stimulated gene factor 3 (ISGF3). Furthermore, predicted tf modules were highly associated to their functionally related pathways. Conclusion: Descriptors of gene expression, TFBS predictions, experimentally verified binding information and statistical combination of this enabled inferring RIs on a genome wide scale for human genes with considerably good precision serving as a good basis for expression profiling studies. Contact

introduction human gene regulation involves numerous mechanisms comprising protein protein interaction, DNA binding and transcription, epigenetic DNA modifications, RNA interference and translation. * To whom correspondence should be addressed central to this is the specific binding of transcription factors (TFs) to promoters of genes to regulate their transcription, and the discovery of such regulatory interactions (RIs) to reconstruct large scale regulatory networks is a main focus of systems biology research. So far, several hundreds of TFs have been identified for many species (). Some TFs bind exclusively to distinct DNA sequence motifs at specific conditions, whereas others are ubiquitously active (). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assays have been used to infer TF binding to the promoter of the investigated gene. This was scaled up by chip on chip technology to obtain the location of specific TF binding genome wide. However, results from such investigations strongly depend on the studied cellular system and treatment. Besides this, computational methods were developed and applied to predict transcription factor binding sites tfbs s independent from the samples under study (). These predictions were mainly based on motif searches with position weight matrices pwm s. pwm s are probabilistic representations of a frequency distribution of nucleotides at each position of a binding site. In contrast to chip on chip assays, genome wide PWM searches detect potential tfbs s for any TF (for which a PWM has been assembled from experimentally discovered binding sites) independent of conditional restrictions and thus provide information about tfbs s in an unbiased manner. Predictions with pwm s have been effectively applied to identify the relevant TFs and their sets of regulated genes in gene expression data (). However, TFBS predictions are rather unspecific and therefore come along with high false positive rates (). Several methods have been developed to construct large scale regulatory networks using gene expression data, genome wide ChIP profiles, pwm scans and a combination of these (). The availability of abundant experimental data for various model organisms enabled to infer regulatory networks for microorganisms explaining and predicting gene expression, e.g. for Escherichia coli (), Saccharomyces cerevisiae () and the Halobacterium nrc i (). Furthermore, methods were designed to infer significant RIs between TFs and genes using Pearson's correlation and mutual information of gene expression, e.g. the Algorithm for the Reconstruction of Accurate Cellular Networks ar acne and the Context Likelihood of Relatedness (CLR;). ar acne and CLR were jointly applied to identify target genes for Nrf2 (nuclear factor page 2240 22392247
