Motivation: rip chip is a high throughput method to identify mRNAs that are targeted by rna binding proteins. The protein of interest is immunoprecipitated, and the identity and relative amount of mRNA associated with it is measured on microarrays. Even if a variety of methods is available to analyse microarray data, e.g. to detect differentially regulated genes, the additional experimental steps in rip chip require specialized methods. Here, we focus on two aspects of rip chip data: First, the efficiency of the immunoprecipitation step performed in the rip chip protocol varies in between different experiments introducing bias not existing in standard microarray experiments. This requires an additional normalization step to compare different samples and even technical replicates. Second, in contrast to standard differential gene expression experiments, the distribution of measurements is not normal. We exploit this fact to define a set of biologically relevant genes in a statistically meaningful way. Results: Here, we propose two methods to analyse rip chip data: We model the measurement distribution as a gaussian mixture distribution , which allows us to compute false discovery rates f drs for any cut off. Thus, cutoffs can be chosen for any desired FDR. Furthermore, we use principal component analysis to determine the normalization factors necessary to remove immunoprecipitation bias. Both methods are evaluated on a large rip chip dataset measuring targets of Ago2, the major component of the microRNA guided rna induced silencing complex (RISC). Using published hits clip experiments performed with the same cell line as used for rip chip we show that the mixture modelling approach is a necessary step to remove background, which computed f drs are valid, and that the additional normalization is a necessary step to make experiments comparable.

introduction gene expression is a highly complex process that is controlled on multiple levels by various proteins and RNAs. Various experimental protocols have been established to measure expression levels of mRNAs or proteins, targets of transcription factors or post-transcriptional regulators and many other parameters of gene expression in a genome wide manner. Each step of such a high throughput experiment may introduce systematic errors (bias) or random variation (noise) into the generated data, and specialized methods are necessary to deal with particular kind of bias and noise and to answer specific questions using high throughput data. The most widely used high throughput experiments are based on microarrays or next generation sequencing (NGS) and are designed to measure the amount of all mRNAs in one or multiple conditions (). Based on the raw intensities from a microarray experiment or the sequencing reads from an NGS experiment, several analytical steps are taken, including normalization, summarization and statistical evaluation (). There is a vast amount of literature describing various methods fulfilling these steps to identify differentially regulated genes (). Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by microarray analysis or NGS chip chip chips eq can determine the targets of dna binding proteins and has successfully been applied to a wide range of transcription factors and cell types (). In addition to the above mentioned analysis methods necessary for microarray and NGS data, it has been recognized that additional methods are necessary to successfully determine target sites on the genome, and thus a variety of methods is described in the literature (). In recent years, it has become apparent that transcriptional regulation is only one part of the machinery carrying out gene regulation. rna binding proteins r bps and rna binding ribonucleoproteins (RNPs) play important roles and are responsible for splicing, RNA editing, regulation of translation and RNA degradation (). These processes are highly regulated by sequence specific binding of r bps or RNPs to the mRNA. MicroRNAs are small 2024 nt long RNA molecules, which have emerged in recent years as important post-transcriptional regulators involved in all known multicellular organisms. They play important roles in development, tumorigenesis and viral infection. They act by guiding the rna induced silencing complex (RISC) to mRNAs by binding to their 3 0 untranslated region (3 0-UTR) in a sequence specific manner, which leads to inhibition of translation or RNA degradation (). A powerful experimental high throughput technique to detect targets of r bps or ribonucleoproteins, such as RISC, is based on immunoprecipitation (IP) of the RBP or RNP with associated *To whom correspondence should be addressed. mRNAs followed by microarray or NGS measurement rip chip rip seq (). Targets of the rb prnp are enriched in the RIP experiment in comparison with a control measurement using an unspecific antibody or total RNA. Novel techniques including hits clip i clip and par clip also include cross-linking of the protein to the mRNA followed by digestion of the unprotected mRNA to determine the precise location of the target site (). The main question in a rip chip experiment is to determine the set of target genes of the immunoprecipitated protein. A basic answer is a sorted list of enrichment values that can be computed for each gene by dividing the intensity value in the IP fraction microarray by the intensity in the control microarray. This is very similar to standard differential gene expression (DE) experiments: Here, differentially regulated genes can be determined by a sorted list of fold changes computed for each gene by dividing the intensity in condition A by the intensity in condition B. Consequently, rip chip data are often analysed using standard methods borrowed from the DE setup such as fold changes (), t statistics () or moderated t statistics (). However, as indicated above, additional experimental steps may introduce additional bias: In contrast to log fold change distributions of DE experiments, log enrichment distributions of rip chip experiments are not normal but typically have heavier right tails (, see also). This is an indication that rip chip is able to separate true targets from the background very efficiently. Here, we exploit these skewed distributions to estimate the biological significance of genes. This is different from the statistical significance usually computed for DE experiments, where p values are related to the reproducibility of the measurements and not to biological relevance. The above mentioned question about the set of target genes in a rip chip experiment only considers a single condition, in contrast to a DE experiment. However, especially for risc ip experiments, an additional question is to determine differential microRNA targets between two or several conditions. For instance, if these conditions are control and transfected microRNA (), differential targets would be targets of the transfected microRNA, and if there are uninfected and virus infected cells, differential targets would include targets of viral microRNAs (). The answer to this question can be given by genes that are more enriched in condition A than in condition B, either by choosing two cut-offs on the corresponding enrichment values (i.e. at least x fold enriched in A and at most y fold enriched in B) (), by computing differential enrichment values as the ratio of the two enrichment values () or by a mixture of both approaches (). All answers to this question necessarily have to compare enrichment values (i.e. ratios of intensities) of the conditions. However, IP efficiencies may vary between independent experiments, and it is important to account for this bias when comparing enrichment values. Obviously, the same problem exists for the summarization of replicate measurements (see Figs 1 and 4). Here, we develop a suite of methods to properly analyse rip chip datasets, which take care of the unique properties of such data introduced by the IP: First, we use a Gaussian mixture model approach to find statistically meaningful cut-offs for enrichment values. We show that this approach can be used to filter unexpressed genes, that it allows to compute false discovery rates f drs for sets of biological significant genes and that it is in fact a necessary step to make experiments comparable with each other. We also address the problem of differing IP efficiencies by introducing a principal component analysis pc a based method to normalize enrichment distributions in a data dependent manner. We use publicly available hits clip data measured for the same cell lines () as standard of truth for evaluation and show that the proposed methods provide significant improvements for the analysis of rip chip data.

discussion a similar approach to our Gaussian mixture modelling (GMM) has already been used in (); however, GMM was applied to summarized enrichment values, and log odds ratios (LOD scores) were computed as the ratio of the two scaled mixture components. LOD scores were then used in two different ways: First, they were directly subjected to gene set enrichment analysis (), where they have no advantage over directly using enrichment values (as the weighted kolmogorov smirnov statistic used for gene set enrichment analysis is non-parametric and only sensitive to the ranking of the genes). Second, the authors used a cut off of LOD 40 to define a set of targets. However, choosing a cut off based on the LOD is still arbitrary and not statistically meaningful in contrast to our f drs. If we used the LOD to define a cut off we would get f drs ranging from 5 to 15% in our experimental dataset. We could show that our refined mixture modelling approach has several advantages: First, it allows us to filter unexpressed genes. When comparing two conditions (e.g. virus infected cells expressing viral microRNAs versus non-infected cells), expression of a gene targeted by cellular microRNAs below the detection limit of the microarray in one, but not the other cell line, would result in the misinterpretation of this to be a target of the viral microRNAs. Second, for experiments with poor IP efficiency, we observed extremely poor distance and asymmetry scores over the whole intensity range and could remove these bad replicates from further analyses. Third, it helps to compare experiments with each other (see) and finally, we can compute valid f drs. Furthermore, the comparison of the rip chip f drs to hits clip data revealed important properties of both the rip chip and hits clip techniques: Both are designed to identify microRNA targets, and, naturally, they agree significantly (P52.2  10 16 , kolmogorov smirnov test), a fact that is also reflected in the negative slope of the linear fit to the FDR against sites per gene plot. However, the agreement is not perfect, and we estimate an average number of %0.8 hits clip target sites per rip chip target gene and of %0.2 per rip chip non-target gene. Even if hits clip target sites may be erroneous, and the CLIP techniques may implicate additional bias (), we expect that not all of the %0.2 sites per background gene are true errors: Such inconsistencies may be due to differing experimental steps (e.g. different antibodies used for IP) or due to differences the ji joye cell cultures have accumulated in the two laboratories since the cell line has been established. Also, as hits clip does not control for target mRNA abundance, it may find several weak sites on highly expressed genes that are biologically irrelevant (i.e. not contributing significantly to regulation of its expression). Such a gene should not be enriched in a rip chip experiment and could explain many cases of hits clip sites on background genes. Thus, even if CLIP techniques have several advantages (e.g. they are able to identify target sites instead of target genes), rip chip is still a useful complementary method. The second, novel method introduced in this article is to use principal components to normalize for different IP efficiencies. Evaluation using hits clip data or the differential expression of target genes shows that the normalization improves results significantly. The normalization proposed can only account for linear bias between experiments. This very lenient normalization appears to be sufficient, as affine offsets are already removed by the mixture model approach, and non-linear effects are not recognizable in a visual inspection. Our proposed methods do not include a way to compute statistical significance, e.g. like a t test for standard DE experiment. However, this can be accomplished in a straight-forward way, as all available tests could directly be used after our linear normalization has been applied to a dataset.. Differing IP efficiencies require normalization before computing differential targets. The second principal component in a is able to discover the experimental structure. Its loadings can be used as weights to compute a differential enrichment value that is normalized for different IP efficiencies, in contrast to the standard way of subtracting the mean log enrichment in DG75-eGFP from the mean log enrichment in ji joye (corresponding to weights indicated in red). The difference distribution of the normalized differential enrichment values and the un-normalized ones is shown in b. Differential targets are expected to be downregulated, and indeed, the difference is significantly greater than background for downregulated genes. As illustrated in c, this effect is more pronounced the higher the downregulation is fer hard et al.

conclusion in this article, we presented methods we developed to analyse rip chip data. In comparison with standard DE experiments, the additional IP step introduces special requirements for the data analyis. First, we use GMM to determine biologically significant target genes; second, we use a linear normalization technique based on pc a to remove bias introduced by the IP. The evaluation of both methods using independent data showed a significant improvement in comparison with standard approaches: The background of not enriched genes can be removed, valid f drs can be calculated and the comparability of both replicates and differential experiments is improved.
