RIPPER is a framework for mass spectrometry based label free relative quantification for proteomics and metabolomics studies. RIPPER combines a series of previously described algorithms for pre-processing, analyte quantification, retention time alignment, and analyte grouping across runs. It is also the first software framework to implement proximity based intensity normal-ization. RIPPER produces lists of analyte signals with their unnormalized and normalized intensities that can serve as input to statistical and directed mass spectrometry (MS) methods for detecting quantitative differences between biological samples using MS.

introduction biological studies using liquid chromatography (LC) and high resolution mass spectrometry (MS) have the potential to aid the investigation of molecular mechanisms by discovering biological markers. Two important 'omics research areas utilizing LC-MS are metabolomics and proteomics; both face similar challenges in producing repeatable and reproducible data (). To address these challenges, we recently introduced proximity based intensity normalization (PIN) (). To implement PIN, we created a new quantitative framework, RIPPER, for label free quantification lf q. RIPPER has since become a valuable in house tool for new ms based quantitative method development. Because RIPPER does not rely on analyte identification before quantification, users can process ms1 only data for proteomic ms based studies and generate an inclusion list for directed ms based identification. By simply adjusting properties through a graphical user interface, users can also use RIPPER to extract analyte information for meta bolo mic studies, statistically analyze the results, and conduct further fragmentation experiments on metabolites of interest. Here, we describe RIPPER, a java based framework that takes in mz xml files, extracts analyte features from MS1 spectral data and reports validated analyte signal intensities. Because it allows user specified options and is written in Java, RIPPER accommodates a wide array of users on various platforms (OSX, Window and Linux). Finally, we compare RIPPER to other freely available software, namely max quant (), x cms () and mz mine (). max quant couples lf q to identified peptides and proteins and is therefore not suitable to process ms1 only data. Furthermore, max quant can not process meta bolo mic data. x cms is an online service for meta bolo mic data and is not well suited for proteomic data. mz mine can process both proteomic and meta bolo mic data and does not rely on identification prior to quantification. We therefore chose mz mine as a benchmark for RIPPER. We benchmarked RIPPER versus mz mine 2.18.1 using high resolution meta bolo mic data and found that RIPPER identified six times as many analytes six times faster (see Supplementary Materials).

conclusion ripper is the first framework implementing PIN and enabling the proportionality paradigm for LC-MS compositional lf q workflows. Also, RIPPER is extensible and, therefore, easily maintained and updated. Finally, we have used RIPPER for numerous LC-MS 'omics experiments, most notably, differential proteomics (directed MS) and metabolomics (tracer analysis) with success. In sum, RIPPER's introduction is an important step in advancing lf q workflows for investigating molecular machinery and biomarker discovery.
