The integrative analysis of multiple high throughput data sources that are available for a common sample set is an increasingly common goal in biomedical research. Joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) is a tool for exploratory dimension reduction that decomposes a multi-source dataset into three terms: a low rank approximation capturing joint variation across sources, low rank approximations for structured variation individual to each source and residual noise. JIVE has been used to explore multi-source data for a variety of application areas but its accessibility was previously limited. We introduce r jive an intuitive R package to perform JIVE and visualize the results. We discuss several improvements and extensions of the JIVE methodology that are included. We illustrate the package with an application to multi-source breast tumor data from

introduction in biomedical research, a growing number of platforms and technologies are used to assess diverse but related information. This has motivated a number of methods for the integrative analysis of multisource data, wherein multiple different sources of 'omics' data are available for a common sample set. A good guiding principle for analyzing multi-source data is to simultaneously model features that are shared across multiple sources and features that are specific to a particular source. A number of recent methods have adopted this strategy, extending well established techniques such as partial least squares (L fst edt and), canonical correlation analysis (, non-parametric Bayesian modeling (), non-negative factorization () and simultaneous components analysis (). The joint and individual variation explained (JIVE) method () was developed as a multi-source extension of principal components analysis pc a. JIVE quantifies the amount of joint (shared) variation between data sources, reduces dimensionality and allows for visual exploration of joint and individual source specific structure. JIVE can also be used as a processing step prior to the application of other methods, such as clustering techniques (). JIVE was designed for the analysis of biomedical data from multiple technologies but has been used for other diverse applications, such as the analysis of data that were processed using different computational pipelines () and the analysis of rail commute patterns at different times of day (). Previously, only spartan Matlab code was available to perform JIVE. In this note, we introduce the r jive package, for which our intentions are 3-fold: (i) to improve the accessibility of this method among the bioinformatics community, (ii) to implement important extensions and improvements of the JIVE method and (iii) to allow for quick and flexible visualization of JIVE results.
