Motivation: r knots is a flexible R package providing tools for the detection and characterization of topological knots in biological polymers. The package is well documented and provides a simple syntax for data import and preprocessing, structure reduction, topological analyses and 2D and 3D visualization. Remarkably, r knots is not limited to protein knots and allows researchers from interdisciplinary fields to analyze different topological structures and to develop simple yet fully custom pipelines. Availability: r knots is distributed under the GPL-2 license and is available from the CRAN (the Comprehensive R Archive network) at http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/Rknots

introduction the topological study of knotted biological polymers is an active interdisciplinary field of research (). In polymers, knots influence both material properties and polymer chain dynamics (). Informally, knots are closed curves in 3D and links are collections of non intersecting knots. Hence, knot theory deals with closed structures (see Supplementary Material for an informal introduction to the subject). However, the vast majority of biological or synthetic polymers are open chains. In this context, the definition of knot is relaxed and transferred to open curves. A chain is knotted if it does not disentangle after being pulled from both ends. Nature tends to avoid knots. Knotted protein backbones are rare () and the physical mechanisms governing their formation is largely unknown. Intriguing experimental results unraveling protein knots properties have recently been reported () and in certain viral capsids there are evidences of mechanisms preventing knotted DNA formation (). In order to understand structural properties of knotted polymers, rigorous yet simply to use, generalized computational methods are required. Web servers for protein knots analysis () nicely accomplished this for proteins. However, the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. underlying framework can not be generalized to cope with more complex structures and it can not be customized. In this note we present r knots an R package combining a generalized framework for the topological analysis of knotted biopolymers with the benefits of R programming. Different structures can be analyzed with a simple syntax and methods have been implemented accounting for modularity. r knots requires a standard R installation and depends on bio3d (and rsympyrSymPy: R interface to symp y computer algebra system. R package version 0.2-1. In the following we will provide an overview of the available methods. A case study on a knotted protein will be used as an example. Additional examples can be found in the package manual and vignette at http://cran. r project org web packages r knots
application the following example illustrates a typical r knots session for the analysis of a protein of interest. A monomeric left handed trefoil knotted protein (PDB ID 2k0a) has been selected for this case study. First, the protein is imported with the function load protein. Gaps finding is performed with default parameter cut off = 7): library r knots pdb load protein pdbid = "2K0A", cut off = 7) Second, a Knot object is created simply by providing the protein coordinates of the single polypeptide chain to new knot chain new knot pdb a Third, the open chain is closed and projected using the close and project function. The knot diagram can then be visualized with plot: chain close and project chain plot chain lwd = 1.5) Then, the knot type is determined by computing a polynomial invariant with the compute invariant function. By setting invariant = "HOMFLY", the HOMFLY polynomial is returned: compute invariant chain invariant = homfly finally further information on the knot type can be obtained with the function get knot type (see the package vignette for details).

conclusion r knots is the first package providing generalized tools for the study of knotted biopolymers. The modularity of the package allows integration in custom pipelines. We encourage contributions from other members of the research community.
