Chromatin immunoprecipitation combined with DNA microarrays chip chip has evolved as a popular technique to study dna protein binding or post-translational chromatin histone modifications at the genomic level. However, the raw microarray intensities generate a massive amount of data, creating a need for efficient analysis algorithms and statistical methods to identify enriched regions. Results: We present a fast, free and powerful, open source R package, rm at that allows the identification of regions enriched for transcription factor binding sites in chip chip experiments on Affymetrix tiling arrays. Availability: The r package rm at is available from the Bioconductor web site at http://bioconductor.org and runs on Linux, MAC OS and MS-Windows. rm at is distributed under the terms of the Artistic Licence 2.0.

introduction chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) has become an important assay for the genome wide study of protein dna interactions and gene regulation. In a typical ChIP experiment, protein complexes on contrast with DNA are cross-linked to their binding sites, the chromatin is sheared into short fragments and the specific DNA fraction interacting with the protein of interest is isolated by immunoprecipitation. A genome wide readout of the binding sites is produced by hybridization of the DNA pool to a tilling array chip chip (). One problem in the analysis of chip chip and microarrays in general, is that the fluorescence intensity values obtained from microarray hybridization are not directly comparable because of systematic probe biases due to non-specific binding affinity. If not accounted for, such biases can severely deteriorate any subsequent results. The statistical method of normalization aims at making the probe measurements more comparable by reducing these biases. Once the data have been normalized, probe measurements can be processed and enriched regions detected. Several tools and methods have already been proposed for analyzing chip chip data. * To whom correspondence should be addressed introduced the first normalization method for Affymetrix chip chip arrays based on nucleotide composition have proposed Ringo, an open source R package that facilitates the analysis of nimble gen and Agilent chip chip experiments. tile probe is a recent extension of MAT which uses publicly available datasets to improve upon MAT's original normalization (). The authors have shown that tile probe can perform better than MAT but it requires a large number of independent arrays to estimate the probe effect. In this article, we present an open source R package rm at which is based on the popular MAT software. rm at has been written in C and R and provides an efficient implementation of the functionality of MAT as well novel statistical normalization techniques not available in the original MAT. We show that these model refinements can improve normalization and increase power when detecting enriched regions. In addition, rm at is well integrated with other Bioconductor packages (), which makes it easy for users to construct sophisticated analysis approaches that also leverage other r bioconductor functionally; see Supplementary Material.
