multi parent crosses of recombinant inbred lines provide opportunity to map markers and quantitative trait loci (QTL) with much greater resolution than is possible in bi parental crosses. Realizing the full potential of these crosses requires computational tools capable of handling the increased statistical complexity of the analyses. rmp map provides a flexible and extensible environment, which interfaces easily with other packages to satisfy this demand. Functions in the package encompass simulation, marker map construction, haplotype reconstruction and QTL mapping. We demonstrate the easy to use features of mp map through a simulated data example.

introduction multi parent recombinant inbred line (RIL) crosses are a new type of experimental design. Already, they are being implemented in mice (), Arabidopsis (), rice and wheat. Their growing popularity stems from their potential for increased mapping resolution and their ability to capture a wide range of genetic and phenotypic diversity from a breeding population. As yet, however, there are few computational tools for the analysis of these data. Existing analysis software for bi parental crosses can not be applied directly or extended easily to these new designs. Analysis software for bi parental crosses relies on being able to unambiguously infer the parental origin of allelic information from the observed marker data. Since this does not hold for multi parent crosses, analysis software for multi parent crosses must contend with all patterns of allelic segregation, which are consistent with the observed marker data and their associated probabilities. Two software packages have been developed for the analysis of data from multi parent RIL crosses r qtl () and r happy (). Both packages focus primarily on quantitative trait loci (QTL) mapping. In contrast, we have developed mp map as a comprehensive suite of functions for multi parent designs in close consultation with plant breeders and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. geneticists. In addition to native functions, mp map interfaces with both r qtl and r happy and is easily extensible. This versatile software helps meet the urgent need for analysis tools capable of handling the complexities associated with multi parent inbred line crosses.

discussion in this article, we have described an exciting new computer package for the analysis of marker and trait data from complex multi parent RIL crosses. With mp map users are now in a position to simulate data, construct marker maps, examine the genomic structure of individuals and perform QTL mapping on these cutting edge experimental designs. Our package differs from existing R packages mainly in the extensive facility for map construction. In addition, mp map unifies some of the functionality currently available in other packages and adds new approaches and visualization functions. It thus equips breeders and geneticists with a wide variety of practical tools to dissect the genetics of complex traits. We do recognize that for large 2 n crosses computation will be demanding. Estimating recombination fractions scales linearly with lines and founders, but quadratically with markers. We are currently working to parallelize the analysis process through the use of machines with Graphics Processing Units. Preliminary results indicate that we can reduce computation time by two orders of magnitude.
