The advent of high throughput sequencers (HTS) introduced the need of new tools in order to analyse the large amount of data that those machines are able to produce. The mandatory first step for a wide range of analyses is the alignment of the sequences against a reference genome. We present a major update to our rNA (randomized Numerical Aligner) tool. The main feature of rNA is the fact that it achieves an accuracy greater than the majority of other tools in a feasible amount of time. rNA executables and source codes are freely downloadable at http://iga-rna.sourceforge.net/.

introduction state of the art high throughput sequencers (HTS) are able to produce up to 200 million reads of length between 30 and 400 bp, in a single run. In almost every usage of such data notably single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) calling and copy number variation (CNV) identification the first analysis step consists in aligning these huge datasets against a reference genome. Recently a significant number of tools able to align the hts short reads have been proposed (). The main efforts in the design of such tools are on improving speed and correctness. On the one, we need fast tools in order to keep the pace with data production, and on the other hand, we need to maximize the number of correctly placed reads and to be sure to align them in every possible location. Usually tools sacrifice correctness over speed allowing only few mismatches between reads and reference. To maximize such trade-off, tools like BOWTIE () and BWA () make use of the seed and extend heuristic: in order to align a read r, an almost exact match of the first l  |r| bases of the read is a necessary condition. b fast () moves towards favouring correctness over speed, allowing alignments with a high number of mismatches and insertions deletions (indels), but is one order of magnitude slower than previous tools. In this work, we present a major update to rNA (randomized Numerical Aligner) () able to align in a * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors. reasonable amount of time the multitude of reads produced by HTS. With regard to the previous implementation, the present one supports fast a and fast q input formats as well as the samba m output format. Moreover, it supports the alignment of single and paired end reads, and it can run on both parallel and distributed architectures. Finally, a graphical user interface (GUI) allows an easy interaction with the various components of the tool. rNA is a highly accurate tool able to align reads in the presence of extensive polymorphisms, high error rates and small indels. As a further contribution, we introduce a new alignment classification designed to better align reads belonging to repetitive regions. rNA is mainly designed for Illumina data, but it can also be used with Solid (together with a suitable conversion from color space or 454 data.
