Tests for differential gene expression with rnase q data have a tendency to identify certain types of transcripts as significant, e.g. longer and highly expressed transcripts. This tendency has been shown to bias gene set enrichment (GSE) testing, which is used to find over or under-represented biological functions in the data. Yet, there remains a surprising lack of tools for GSE testing specific for rnase q. We present a new GSE method for rnase q data, rna enrich that accounts for the above tendency empirically by adjusting for average read count per gene. rna enrich is a quick, flexible method and web based tool, with 16 available gene annotation databases. It does not require a p value cut off to define differential expression, and works well even with small sample sized experiments. We show that adjusting for read counts per gene improves both the type I error rate and detection power of the test. Availability and implementation: rna enrich is available at http://lrpath.ncibi.org or from supplemental material as R code.

introduction functional enrichment testing is one of the most common downstream analyses for transcript omics experiments, facilitating a deeper interpretation of results. Examples of gene set databases used for testing are Gene Ontology (GO) which includes biological processes, cellular components and molecular functions, and the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes which places genes in metabolic and other pathways. Most current gene set enrichment (GSE) methods, such as DAVID (), were developed for microarray data. These methods often only make use of differential expression (DE) p values or ranks, or simply a list of significant genes. With rnase q which uses whole transcriptome sequencing to quantify gene expression, tests for DE often exhibit a relationship between read count and likelihood of detecting DE. For example, when power is greater to detect longer and or higher expressed genes, gene sets that have long genes or that are highly expressed are more likely to be detected as significant, violating common test assumptions. Thus, accounting for read count per gene may improve standard GSE methods, which may otherwise not be appropriate for rnase q data. rnase q achieves a very high dynamic range, with gene read counts often varying across six or more orders of magnitude. read count based methods such as those using a negative binomial model (e.g. edgeR and DEseq2) can be more likely to identify longer and highly expressed transcripts as significant. Methods that can account for this bias in GSE testing are go seq () which requires a p value cut off and gsa a seq sp () and seq g sea (), which require permutations and moderate to large sample sizes to obtain a sufficient number of unique permutations of phenotype labels. We have developed rna enrich a GSE method that empirically adjusts for average read count per gene, and does not require a cut off to define differentially expressed genes (DEGs), time consuming permutations or regression models. similar cut off free methods for microarray data have shown improved ability to detect gene sets enriched with either a few very strong DEGs or many only moderate DEGs ().
