Motivation: rnase q is a method for profiling transcription using high throughput sequencing and is an important component of many research projects that wish to study transcript isoforms, condition specific expression and transcriptional structure. The methods, tools and technologies used to perform rnase q analysis continue to change, creating a bioinformatics challenge for researchers who wish to exploit these data. Resources that bring together genomic data, analysis tools, educational material and computational infrastructure can minimize the overhead required of life science researchers. Results: rna rocket is a free service that provides access to rnase q and chips eq analysis tools for studying infectious diseases. The site makes available thousands of pre indexed genomes, their annotations and the ability to stream results to the bioinformatics resources vector base eu path db and PATRIC. The site also provides a combination of experimental data and metadata, examples of pre-computed analysis, step by step guides and a user interface designed to enable both novice and experienced users of rnase q data. Availability and implementation: rna rocket is available at rnase q pathogen portal org. Source code for this project can be found at githubcomcidvbi pathogen portal
introduction transcript omic analysis using high throughput sequencing continues to increase in popularity due to low sequencing costs, its sensitivity, reproducibility and its ability to sample the entire transcriptome (). As an active area of research, there are many variations of rnase q protocols, data types and tools that continue to evolve. As a result, there is no 'one size fits all' solution for doing rnase q analysis. The range of considerations facing life scientists who want to leverage this technology can demand significant investment of time and resources. For this reason, we have created rna rocket an rnase q analysis service that enables infectious disease research for prokaryotic and eukaryotic pathogens as well as vectors and host genomes. rna rocket is built on Galaxy (), with modifications to help simplify the process for routine use and provide a guided user experience. rna rocket integrates data from the PATRIC, eu path db and vector base Bioinformatics Resource Centers b rcs and is provided by Pathogen Portal pathogen portal org a resource linking all b rcs funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). The rna rocket service leverages multiple open source software tools to provide a free resource where users can upload their rnase q data, align them against a genome and generate quantitative transcript profiles. This service also provides streaming of alignment and annotation results back to the appropriate BRC so that users can view results in the relevant BRC, using annotations and tools provided in support of transcript omic analysis. The patho systems Resource Integration Center (PATRIC) is the all bacteria Bioinformatics Resource Center patric brc org (). PATRIC provides researchers with an online resource that stores and integrates a variety of data types (e.g. genomics, transcript omics protein protein interactions, 3-D protein structures and sequence typing data) along with any associated metadata. The eukaryotic pathogen databases eu path db eu path d borg provide access to a variety of data types from important human and veterinary parasites such as Plasmodium (malaria), Cryptosporidium (cryptosporidiosis) and kinetoplast ida (i.e. Trypanosoma brucei and Leishmania species.) (). vector base vector base org is a bioinformatics resource for invertebrate vectors of human parasites and pathogens (). It currently hosts the genomes of 35 organisms including mosquitoes (20 of which are Anopheles species), tsetse flies, ticks, lice, kissing bugs and sandflies.
