Gene targeting is a protocol for introducing a mutation to a specific gene in an organism. Because of the importance of in vivo assessment of gene function and modeling of human diseases, this technique has been widely adopted to generate a large number of mutant mouse models. Due to the recent breakthroughs in high throughput sequencing technologies, rnase q experiments have been performed on many of these mouse models, leading to hundreds of publicly available datasets. To facilitate the reuse of these datasets, we collected the associated metadata and organized them in a database called rnase q meta db. The metadata were manually curated to ensure annotation consistency. We developed a web server to allow easy database navigation and data querying. Users can search the database using multiple parameters like genes, diseases, tissue types, keywords and associated publications in order to find datasets that match their interests. Summary statistics of the metadata are also presented on the web server showing interesting global patterns of rnase q studies. Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web at http://rnaseqmetadb.

introduction gene targeting (), a powerful technique used to manipulate a specific locus in the genome of an organism, is an indispensable tool for assessing in vivo functions of specific gene products. This technique provides great flexibility in manipulating the genome of an organism as it can be used to delete a gene or an exon, to introduce an exogenous gene, or to create point mutations. Moreover, gene targeting not only can introduce permanent mutations, but can also conditionally change targeted genes. Thousands of genetically engineered mice have been generated using this technique. They provide valuble models for studying mechanisms of human diseases. rnase q (), a high throughput sequencing (HTS) method for transcriptome analysis, has been successfully used on many of these mouse models, enabling global analyses of specific genomic alterations at a high sequencing depth with a resonable accuracy. As rnase q becomes increasingly popular, hundreds of rnase q datasets have been generated and have been released to the public. These data are currently available from online repositories, such as gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (), array express (), Sequence Read Archive () and European Nucleotide Archive en a (), whose primary purposes are to store raw and processed HTS data from a wide variety of organisms. However, a data submitter typically provides only limited metadata for each dataset sufficient to get the dataset accepted into the public repository. There is currently no stringent and uniform quality check of submitted metadata. This results in inconsistency and ambiguity in dataset annotation. For example, non official gene symbols are used in some of the datasets. Other public databases such as in silico DB () also suffer from the same problems, making searching for datasets in these databases inefficient. The recent HTS data explosion has motivated researchers to create several metadata databases. However, these databases, e.g. cist rome map (), focus primarily on chips eq data. To fill the gap for rnase q data, we collected rnase q metadata from all the publicly available datasets that were generated using mouse models mostly with targeted mutations and curated a database called rnase q meta db recently suggested that measuring transcription factor binding might not be the best way to decipher transcriptional regulatory networks. Instead, their work showed that gene expression data could be of greater value in revealing functional gene regulatory relations. Therefore, rnase q meta db may be a helpful resource for researchers trying to build gene regulatory networks. We developed a web server to provide a user friendly query interface for locating relevant rnase q datasets based on targeted gene names, disease names, tissue types, keywords, publications and accession IDs, etc. An ontological search function is also offered that allows users to find the datasets related to, but not necessarily annotated to, the exact search term. This helps ensure search sensitivity (e.g. see the help page on the website). This database can help biomedical scientists navigate the complex landscape of mouse genetic experiments and can provide rich contexts for these datasets. Using this database, users will be able to find related datasets for further analyses easily. For example, rnase q data can be used to infer splicing isoform functions () and information extracted from existing rnase q data can be used as prior knowledge for causal reasoning on biological networks (). Moreover, rnase q data can be integrated with sequence and structure binding preferences of rna binding proteins learned with computational methods such as graph prot (), which can increase our understanding of the mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation.
