Motivation: next generation sequencing technology enables an entirely new perspective for clinical research and will speed up personalized medicine. In contrast to microarray based approaches, rnase q analysis provides a much more comprehensive and unbiased view of gene expression. Although the perspective is clear and the long term success of this new technology obvious, bioinformatics resources making these data easily available especially to the biomedical research community are still evolving. Results: We have generated rnase q Atlas, a web based repository of rnase q gene expression profiles and query tools. The website offers open and easy access to rnase q gene expression profiles and tools to both compare tissues and find genes with specific expression patterns. To enlarge the scope of the rnase q Atlas, the data were linked to common functional and genetic databases, in particular offering information on the respective gene, signaling pathway analysis and evaluation of biological functions by means of gene ontologies. Additionally, data were linked to several microarray gene profiles, including bio gps normal tissue profiles and NCI60 cancer cell line expression data. Our data search interface allows an integrative detailed comparison between our rnase q data and the microarray information. This is the first database providing data mining tools and open access to large scale rnase q expression profiles. Its applications will be versatile, as it will be beneficial in identifying tissue specific genes and expression profiles, comparison of gene expression profiles among diverse tissues, but also systems biology approaches linking tissue function to gene expression changes. Availability and implementation: http://medicalgenomics.org/rna seq atlas Contact

introduction over the next years, the availability of next generation sequencing (NGS) data will offer an entirely new perspective for clinical research and help usher in personalized medicine. So far, several databases offer storage or download of NGS data (). However, to access the valuable information of this promising new technique, the user has to manually download the data and be familiar with their analysis to extract the valuable information. This is currently not the case for most biomedical researchers. We therefore created the rnase q Atlas, a database and user interface (UI) providing easy access to NGS data. Currently, rnase q Atlas holds gene expression profiles on eleven human, healthy tissues and can be accessed over an intuitive web interface. To further increase the utility of the rnase q Atlas, the data were linked to multiple microarray gene profiles representing normal and pathological states. Furthermore, various query tools were designed to offer a great variability of individual analysis.

conclusion in this work, we present rnase q Atlas, an easily accessible database and UI, offering access to NGS gene expression profiles. Furthermore, to enhance the bioinformatics integration, the data is linked to a wide variety of commonly used and established databases and knowledge repositories. To further enlarge the very broad scope of rnase q Atlas and to facilitate the analysis of gene expression profiles of several pathological conditions, the data were linked to cancer cell line expression profiles. Finally, the implementation of a wide variety of querying tools allows the user to start individual analysis, enabling for both bioinformatic ians and experimental researchers.
