With the advances of RNA sequencing technologies, scientists need new tools to analyze transcriptome data. We introduce rnase q viewer a new visualization tool dedicated to rnase q data. The program offers innovative ways to represent transcriptome data for single or multiple samples. It is a handy tool for scientists who use rnase q data to compare multiple transcriptome s for example, to compare gene expression and alternative splicing of cancer samples or of different development stages.

introduction the development of next generation sequencing allows large scale transcriptome studies, using massively parallel sequencing of complementary DNA reverse transcribed from RNA rnase q technologies (). Scientists now face the challenge of analyzing the unprecedented amount of available sequencing data. In addition to the use of automated tools, such analysis needs human review and interpretation of the data to gain insight into them, verify consistency of programs' results, understand intricate cases and structures and reveal underlying patterns. As data files generated by automated tools for rnase q analysis are formatted for computational treatments and can exceed gigabytes, they are improper for easy direct human reading. This calls for effective visualization tools, capable of displaying big datasets in intuitive ways. Genomic visualization software can be divided into two categories: web based genome browsers like those from UCSC and Ensembl () and standalone software including the Integrative Genomics Viewer and Savant (). Only the latter category is adapted to the visualization of the large locally stored datasets usually manipulated in rnase q analysis, as web upload is prohibitive. However, existing solutions are limited to a few tracks visualized simultaneously, and it is not possible to compare the multiple samples of medium or large rnase q experiments here we introduce rnase q viewer a desktop program to visualize the data from the rnase q analyzing process, for single or multiple samples. By focusing on expression of genes and transcript isoforms, the program offers innovative ways to present the transcriptome data in a quantitative and interactive manner.
