Motivation: Small nucleolar RNAs are an abundant class of non-coding RNAs that guide chemical modifications of rRNAs, snRNAs and some mRNAs. In the case of many orphan snoRNAs, the targeted nucleotides remain unknown, however. The box H/ACA subclass determines uridine residues that are to be converted into pseudouridine s via specific complementary binding in a well defined secondary structure configuration that is outside the scope of common RNA co folding algorithms. Results: rna snoop implements a dynamic programming algorithm that computes thermodynamically optimal ha carna interactions in an efficient scanning variant. Complemented by an support vector machine svm based machine learning approach to distinguish true binding sites from spurious solutions and a system to evaluate comparative information, it presents an efficient and reliable tool for the prediction of H/ACA snoRNA target sites. We apply rna snoop to identify the snoRNAs that are responsible for several of the remaining orphan pseudouridine modifications in human rRNAs, and we assign a target to one of the five orphan H/ACA snoRNAs in Drosophila. Availability: The C source code of rna snoop is freely available at

introduction box H/ACA snoRNA facilitates the conversion of Uracil to pseudo uracil () in a specific sequence context (). The specificity for a particular target site is the consequence of the hybridization of snoRNA and target RNA, in most cases a ribosomal RNA. The target U is positioned by two specific interactions of the flanking target RNA sequence with the complementary sequence of the recognition loop of the snoRNA (), see. The 'correct' secondary * To whom correspondence should be addressed. structures of snoRNAs are typically hard to predict. Thus, the exact structure of the interior loop, and hence the sequence motifs complementary to the binding site, are unknown. We employ here the idea of Thermodynamic Matchers () to determine the energetically optimal structure of an H/ACA snoRNA that is bound to a given putative target sequence. The implementation of Thermodynamic Matchers () is not directly applicable, however, since the snorna target interaction corresponds to a complex pseudoknot (in the conceptual concatenation of snoRNA and mRNA) that is beyond the scope of existing RNA folding software. The prediction of putative snoRNA target sites is an integral part of two programs sno gps () and Fisher ()] that attempt to detect H/ACA snoRNAs in genomic DNA. Both programs search for sequence complementarities between a list of possible target sites and the binding region of the snoRNA candidate. In these models, mismatches between the target and the snoRNA are not allowed. Furthermore, neither program provides information on the energetics of the interaction or the stability of the stems, two factors that were recently shown to be important for correctly predicting snorna target interactions (). We present here a dynamic programming algorithm named rna snoop that specifically captures the structure of the snoRNA target interaction and is optimized for scanning speed. The thermodynamic considerations are combined with a machine learning component to increase the specificity of target predictions, which can be improved even further by including comparative information.

discussion we presented here rna snoop a tool specifically designed to predict complex H/ACA snorna rna interactions that are outside the scope of conventional rna rna prediction tools. In contrast with previous tools, it uses a dynamic programming approach coupled with a nearest neighbor energy model to identify putative targets. This allows rna snoop to capture structural and energetic features essential for correctly predicting snorna target interactions (). Coupled with a SVM classification, SNOOPY achieves good performance ranking first 11 out of 12 confirmed snorna mrna interactions in human and excluding all experimentally rejected interactions. These good results should, however, not be overestimated as both the training and test datasets are small and were extracted from only two species. The run time of rna snoop is comparable with that of sno gps and scales linearly with the length of the target sequence. Together with the improved accuracy, this makes rna snoop not only suitable for target search in rRNA and snRNA sequences or in specific putative mRNA candidates, but also for large scale genome wide surveys. Funding: European Union under the auspices of the FP-6 syn let and the FP-7 quantom ics project (in part); the Austrian GENAU project 'Regulatory Noncoding RNA' (in part).
