rnase q the application of next generation sequencing to RNA, provides transcriptome wide characterization of cellular activity. Assessment of sequencing performance and library quality is critical to the interpretation of rnase q data, yet few tools exist to address this issue. We introduce rnase qc a program which provides key measures of data quality. These metrics include yield, alignment and duplication rates; GC bias, rRNA content, regions of alignment (exon, intron and intragenic), continuity of coverage, 3 /5 bias and count of detectable transcripts, among others. The software provides multi-sample evaluation of library construction protocols, input materials and other experimental parameters. The modularity of the software enables pipeline integration and the routine monitoring of key measures of data quality such as the number of align able reads, duplication rates and rRNA contamination. rnase qc allows investigators to make informed decisions about sample inclusion in downstream analysis. In summary, rnase qc provides quality control measures critical to experiment design, process optimization and downstream computational analysis. Availability and implementation: See www gene pattern org to run online, or www broad institute org rnase qc for a command line tool.

introduction rnase q is a highly parallelized sequencing technology that allows for comprehensive transcriptome characterization and quantification (). As with all forms of parallelized sequencing, significant computational processing is required to unlock transcript abundance levels and other measures for biological interpretation (). However, prior to the calculation of biologically relevant data such as transcript abundance, presence of novel isoforms and genotype identity, it is necessary to evaluate the performance of the rnase q experiment itself. Summary statistics and quality control scores provide insight into inherently complex data prior to downstream analysis. Here we present rnase qc a metrics tool with application to two domains: experiment design and process optimization; and quality control prior to computational analysis. Metrics such * To whom correspondence should be addressed a rnase qc will work with one or more input samples to produce both a comparative summary across samples as well as a more detailed report for each sample. (b) The comparative summary report includes an extensive range of metrics (in addition to those shown) as well as coverage plots. (c) For each sample, additional reports quantify the coverage profile (variation, gaps, etc.) for individual transcripts as duplication rate, rRNA abundance, alignment rates, coverage continuity and correlation to reference expression profiles are highly informative during selection of experiment conditions and library construction methods (). rnase qcs multisample input feature allows for direct comparison across samples (). Additionally, a single sample mode can be used to monitor samples on an ongoing basis to rapidly assess the quality of a particular sequencing run, and to monitor and optimize these measures in production over time and prior to downstream analysis. rnase qc provides a suite of experiment quality measures, many of which are currently not provided by other available tools (Supplementary Material).
