Motivation: Network component analysis (NCA) is an efficient method of reconstructing the transcription factor activity (TFA), which makes use of the gene expression data and prior information available about transcription factor tf gene regulations. Most of the contemporary algorithms either exhibit the drawback of inconsistency and poor reliability, or suffer from prohibitive computational complexity. In addition , the existing algorithms do not possess the ability to counteract the presence of outliers in the microarray data. Hence, robust and computationally efficient algorithms are needed to enable practical applications. Results: We propose ROBust Network Component Analysis rob nca a novel iterative algorithm that explicitly models the possible outliers in the microarray data. An attractive feature of the rob nca algorithm is the derivation of a closed form solution for estimating the connectivity matrix, which was not available in prior contributions. The rob nca algorithm is compared with fast nca and the non iterative NCA n inca. rob nca estimates the TF activity profiles as well as the tf gene control strength matrix with a much higher degree of accuracy than fast nca and n inca irrespective of varying noise, correlation and or amount of outliers in case of synthetic data. The rob nca algorithm is also tested on Saccharo-myces cerevisiae data and Escherichia coli data, and it is observed to outperform the existing algorithms. The run time of the rob nca algorithm is comparable with that of fast nca and is hundreds of times faster than n inca
introduction recent advances in technology have enabled monitoring of cellular activities using more sophisticated techniques, and have provided a deluge of biological data. Using these data to unravel the underlying phenomena that regulate various activities in a living organism offers the potential to reap numerous benefits. One of the key biological processes is transcriptional regulation, which controls the gene expression and amount of RNA produced. This process is regulated by transcription factors (TFs), which are specialized proteins causing the genes to express by binding onto the gene promoters. A thorough understanding of this complex transcriptional regulation and tf gene interaction will potentially aid in predicting the biological processes and designing control strategies to cure and or avoid the diseased conditions (LahdesmakiLahdesma). Microarray technologies are able to measure the level of gene expressions and quantify them in the form of gene expression data. Such data are widely used in the inference of gene gene interactions. Transcription factor activity (TFA), which is defined as the concentration of its subpopulation with DNA binding ability, controls the transcriptional regulation (). The correlation between tf as and TF expression level is modified at the posttranscriptional and post-translational stage. It is, therefore, much harder to measure TFA profiles experimentally, and scientists have resorted to computational methods for their estimation (). Several statistical techniques including principal component analysis pc a () and independent component analysis (ICA) () have been used to deduce useful information from sets of biological data. However, the successful application of these algorithms hinges on the assumptions of orthogonality and independence between the signals, which do not hold for biological signals in practice (). In fact, some prior information is usually available for many systems, and it should be incorporated in the system model, e.g. chip chip data indicates which TFs and genes are known to interact. The gene regulatory network can be modelled linearly as follows ()where Y is the N  K gene expression data matrix, A is the N  M control strength or connectivity matrix and S is the M  K matrix denoting the tf as. The uncertainties in the observation data are assumed to be Gaussian (), and are represented by the entries of the noise matrix !. Genes and TFs are known to interact in a dynamic and non-linear manner; however, a log linear relationship provides a good approximation. Because a particular TF regulates only a few other genes, the connectivity matrix A is expected to be sparse. The problem then boils down to estimating S and *To whom correspondence should be addressed. A, where Y is available and some a priori information about the matrix A is known. Network component analysis (NCA), proposed by, provides a more accurate model for tf gene regulation and makes use of the related prior information available. It was shown that provided certain conditions are met, the NCA algorithm produces a unique solution of the aforementioned estimation problem in the absence of noise. The NCA criteria require that: (i) the matrix A is full column rank (ii) if a row is removed from S as well as the output elements connected to it, the updated control strength matrix should still be of full column rank (iii) the TFA matrix S should have a full row rank. These criteria guarantee that the solution obtained is unique up to a scale ambiguity (). When the NCA criteria are satisfied, the optimization problem reduces to where k:k F denotes the Frobenius norm and I is the set of all indices where the entries of matrix A are known to be zero. The algorithm in () allows the recovery of source signals when the microarray data consist of fewer data points and () formulates the incorporation of regulatory knockout constraints as well. The NCA problem in (2) was first solved by using alternate least squares (ALS) for both A and S (). However, because the ALS solution requires solving a high dimensional matrix optimization problem at each iteration, it entails prohibitive computational complexity for large datasets, which often need to be handled in gene networks. fast nca provides a closed form solution for A, which uses singular value decomposition (SVD) (), and is several tens of times faster than the ALS algorithm. The authors in () propose a non iterative version of NCA, herein referred to as n inca which offers greater consistency in terms of TFA estimation at the cost of much higher computational complexity than fast nca. However, because the decomposition techniques used to derive these algorithms are susceptible even to the presence of small amount of outliers (), their performance is expected to deteriorate significantly when data points are corrupted by outliers. It is commonly known that the microarray data are noisy and are corrupted with outliers because of erroneous measurements and or abnormal response of genes, and robust algorithms are required for gene network inference (). Therefore, it is imperative to develop an NCA algorithm that has an inherent ability to mitigate the effect of outliers, and also entails low computational costs and provides good consistency and accuracy. It is precisely this avenue which is the focus of our current work. The main contributions of this article can be summarized as follows 1 A novel algorithm, ROBust Network Component Analysis rob nca is proposed which has the inherent ability to counteract the presence of outliers in the data Y by explicitly modelling the outliers as an additional sparse matrix. The iterative algorithm estimates each of the parameters efficiently at each iteration, and delivers superior consistency and greater accuracy for TFA estimation 2 A particularly attractive feature of the rob nca algorithm is the derivation of a closed form solution for the estimation of the connectivity matrix A, a major source of high computational complexity in contemporary algorithms. To further lower the computational burden, a still faster closed form solution is derived that requires matrix inversion of much smaller size. The resulting algorithm is comparable with fast nca in terms of computational complexity, and is hundreds of times faster than NI-NCA.(3) The performance of rob nca is tested on Haemoglobin test data from () for both low and highly correlated source signals. rob nca is seen to outperform the state of the art algorithms for estimating both A and S in terms of mean square error (MSE). In addition, rob nca is applied to yeast cell cycle data () and Escherichia coli data (), and by plotting the standard deviation of estimates, it is observed that rob nca offers better consistency than fast nca and n inca
