Motivation: time series observations from reporter gene experiments are commonly used for inferring and analyzing dynamical models of regulatory networks. The robust estimation of promoter activities and protein concentrations from primary data is a difficult problem due to measurement noise and the indirect relation between the measurements and quantities of biological interest. Results: We propose a general approach based on regularized linear inversion to solve a range of estimation problems in the analysis of reporter gene data, notably the inference of growth rate, promoter activity, and protein concentration profiles. We evaluate the validity of the approach using in silico simulation studies, and observe that the methods are more robust and less biased than indirect approaches usually encountered in the experimental literature based on smoothing and subsequent processing of the primary data. We apply the methods to the analysis of fluorescent reporter gene data acquired in kinetic experiments with Escherichia coli. The methods are capable of reliably reconstructing time course profiles of growth rate, promoter activity and protein concentration from weak and noisy signals at low population volumes. Moreover, they capture critical features of those profiles, notably rapid changes in gene expression during growth transitions. Availability and implementation: The methods described in this article are made available as a Python package (LGPL license) and also accessible through a web interface. For more information, see https://team.inria.fr/ibis/wellinverter.

introduction over the past decade, a variety of new experimental technologies have become available for measuring gene expression over time. They provide valuable information for the construction and validation of models of gene regulatory networks, involving tasks like parameter estimation, hypothesis testing and model selection (). A critical step in the exploitation of the experimental data is the estimation of biologically relevant quantities, in particular promoter activities (the rate of transcription of a gene as a fraction of the maximum rate), mRNA concentrations and protein concentrations, from the primary data provided by the measurement instruments. This requires data analysis procedures that are unbiased and robust to measurement noise. Fluorescent reporter genes have become widely used for monitoring gene expression in bacteria at high temporal resolution in a nonintrusive way (). The underlying principle is the fusion of a gene of interest and or the promoter region driving its expression with a gene encoding a fluorescent protein (). A bacterial strain carrying the resulting reporter gene, on the chromosome or on a plasmid, emits a fluorescence signal proportional to the amount of reporter protein in the cell when reporter strains are grown in a microplate, the fluorescence and the absorbance (optical density) of the culture can be automatically measured every few minutes in a highly parallelized way. The resulting data contain information on population level gene expression that is highly valuable for such applications as the inference and analysis of regulatory networks in bacterial cells (). The extraction of useful information from reporter gene data is not easy to achieve though, since it is often buried in noise, especially at low population densities. Moreover, the fluorescence and absorbance measurements are only indirectly related to promoter activities and protein concentrations, requiring dynamical models of the expression of reporter genes for their interpretation. Several methods have been proposed to process the fluorescence and absorbance signals and estimate time varying promoter activities and protein concentrations from the data (). The methods differ in the scope of the estimation problems considered, some being restricted to the inference of promoter activities and others also considering mRNA and protein concentrations. In addition, the approaches used to estimate these quantities from the primary data are quite different. Some methods are indirect, in the sense that they smoothen the data first and reconstruct the profiles of interest via the measurement model only in a second step. This results in a propagation of estimation errors that is difficult to control. Other methods state a regularized data fitting problem directly in terms of the quantities of interest, thus, proceeding in a single and better controlled optimization step. In this article, we propose a general, comprehensive approach toward the reconstruction of gene expression profiles from reporter gene data and solve the estimation problems it comprises in a mathematically sound and practical manner. We formulate the estimation problems in the classical framework of regularized linear inversion (), which gives access to a range of powerful tools for robust estimation. Contrary to the related work of, we consider not only the inference of promoter activities, but also of growth rates and protein concentrations. Moreover, no restrictions are imposed that limit the practical applicability of the approach. We propose efficient procedures for the implementation of the methods and show by means of an in silico simulation study under realistic conditions that they perform better than the indirect approaches usually encountered in the experimental literature. The algorithms have been implemented in a Python package and are also accessible through a web application. Our linear inversion methods have been tested on fluorescent reporter gene data acquired in experiments with the model bacterium Escherichia coli. These experiments aim at quantifying the dynamics of gene expression during growth transitions induced by carbon upshift or depletion. We show that linear inversion succeeds in robustly reconstructing growth rate, promoter activity and protein concentration over the entire duration of the experiment, in particular in the beginning when the population density and thus the signal to noise ratio are low. Moreover, we show that our methods reliably capture rapid changes in gene expression during growth transitions, when promoter activities may change 10 to 100-fold within a dozen of minutes (). Reconstructing these transient gene expression profiles from the data is highly important for increasing our understanding of the functioning of the underlying regulatory networks, but is difficult to achieve. To the best of our knowledge, the methods and computer tools presented in this paper provide the most comprehensive solution for analyzing reporter gene data available to date. Although the application has focused on fluorescent reporter gene data, the methods are directly applicable to the analysis of luminescent reporter gene data or other time series gene expression datasets. In addition, the gene expression models underlying the methods are valid not only for bacteria but also for higher organisms.

discussion the inference of meaningful gene expression profiles from indirect experimental data is a key step in the analysis of dynamical models in systems biology. As reporter genes tend to become ubiquitous, it is important to develop reliable methods for the automated Robust reconstruction of gene expression profiles i77
