Motivation: Over the past decade, several bi clustering approaches have been published in the field of gene expression data analysis. Despite of huge diversity regarding the mathematical concepts of the different bi clustering methods, many of them can be related to the singular value decomposition (SVD). Recently, a sparse SVD approach s svd has been proposed to reveal bi clusters in gene expression data. In this article, we propose to incorporate stability selection to improve this method. Stability selection is a subsampling based variable selection that allows to control Type I error rates. The here proposed S4VD algorithm incorporates this subsampling approach to find stable bi clusters and to estimate the selection probabilities of genes and samples to belong to the bi clusters. Results: So far, the S4VD method is the first bi clustering approach that takes the cluster stability regarding perturbations of the data into account. Application of the S4VD algorithm to a lung cancer microarray dataset revealed bi clusters that correspond to co regulated genes associated with cancer subtypes. Marker genes for different lung cancer subtypes showed high selection probabilities to belong to the corresponding bi clusters. Moreover, the genes associated with the bi clusters belong to significantly enriched cancer related Gene Ontology categories. In a simulation study, the S4VD algorithm outperformed the s svd algorithm and two other svd related bi clustering methods in recovering artificial bi clusters and in being robust to noisy data. Availability: r code of the S4VD algorithm as well as a documentation can be found at http://s4vd.r-forge.r-project.org/. Contact: ms ill dkfz de
introduction clustering methods belong to the most commonly used statistical tools in the analysis of high dimensional datasets. If additional information about the sample class labels is lacking, other types of analysis like supervised classification methods or testing for differentially expressed genes can not be performed. In this case, unsupervised clustering allows to reveal unknown structures that are * To whom correspondence should be addressed. possibly hidden in the gene expression data matrix. These structures may be characterized by groups of genes that are co regulated by a common transcription factor and thus belong to the same pathway or samples that share a similar gene expression pattern. One disadvantage of commonly used clustering algorithms like hierarchical clustering or k means clustering is that the cluster assignment of objects are based on the complete feature space, e.g. in case of clustering the samples, the resulting clusters are derived with respect to all genes. But groups of genes may only be co regulated within a subset of the samples and samples may share a common gene expression pattern only for a subset of genes. Such clusters that exist only in a subspace of the feature space can hardly be detected by these classical one way clustering algorithms. To find such clusters, other clustering concepts are needed. In the past decade, the concept of bi clustering has emerged in the field of gene expression analysis. bi clustering which is also known as co clustering or two way clustering describes the simultaneous clustering of the rows and the columns of a data matrix. The first bi clustering algorithm, the so called Block Clustering, has been developed by. Cheng and proposed the first bi clustering algorithm for the analysis of high dimensional gene expression data. Since then, many different bi clustering algorithms have been developed. Currently, there exists a diverse spectrum of bi clustering tools that follow different strategies and algorithmic concepts. Among others, popular algorithms are the Coupled two way Clustering ctw c by, Order Preserving Sub Matrix (OPSM) algorithm by, the Iterative Signature Algorithm is a by, the Plaid Model by and the improved Plaid Model (), SAMBA by, bi clustering by non-smooth non-negative matrix factorization by, the bi correlation clustering algorithm (BCCA) by Bhattacharya and De (2009) and factor analysis for bi cluster acquisition fabia developed a fast divide and conquer algorithm bi max and conducted a systematic comparison of different bi clustering algorithms published an article on validation indices for the evaluation of bi clustering results and the comparison for bi clustering algorithms. Comprehensive reviews about the concept of bi clustering and the different bi clustering approaches have been written by and Van. In a more theoretical review emphasized the mathematical concepts behind several bi clustering algorithms and pointed out that the SVD represents a capable tool for finding bi clusters. Furthermore, most existing bi clustering algorithms use the SVD directly or have a strong association with it. To keep track of the huge diversity, regarding the mathematical properties of the existing bi clustering algorithms suggest to relate new and existing bi clustering algorithms to the SVD. A major drawback of many bi clustering methods is that they rely on random starting seeds and thus are inconsistent and results may vary even when the algorithm is applied to the same dataset. As often in unsupervised clustering it is difficult to judge the bi clustering results regarding their stability. For one way clustering, several resampling approaches to validate the stability of the clustering results are known, e.g. multiscale bootstrap hierarchical clustering () and consensus clustering (). In case of bi clustering similar methods that take the stability of the results into account are not yet available. recently proposed a sparse SVD s svd method to find bi clusters in gene expression data. Singular vectors of an SVD are interpreted as regression coefficients of a linear regression model. The s svd algorithm alternately fits penalized regression models to the singular vector pair to obtain a sparse matrix decomposition. The sparseness of the resulting singular vectors strongly depends on the choice of the penalization parameter. In this article, we propose to choose the penalization parameters by stability selection (), which is a subsampling procedure that can be applied to penalized regression models to select stable variables. In addition, stability selection offers the possibility to control Type I error rates (), e.g. the per family error rate p fer or the per comparison wise error rate pc er. Applying the new combined algorithm, the sparse SVD algorithm with nested stability selection (S4VD) to a lung cancer gene expression dataset reveals bi clusters that represent lung cancer subtypes characterized by relevant sets of co regulated genes. In a simulation study, we compare the S4VD with the s svd algorithm as well as the improved Plaid Model () and the is a ().
