Motivation: Identification of transcriptional regulatory networks (TRNs) is of significant importance in computational biology for cancer research, providing a critical building block to unravel disease pathways. However, existing methods for TRN identification suffer from the inclusion of excessive noise in microarray data and false positives in binding data, especially when applied to human tumor derived cell line studies. More robust methods that can counteract the imperfection of data sources are therefore needed for reliable identification of TRNs in this context. Results: In this article, we propose to establish a link between the quality of one target gene to represent its regulator and the uncertainty of its expression to represent other target genes. Specifically, an outlier sum statistic was used to measure the aggregated evidence for regulation events between target genes and their corresponding transcription factors. A Gibbs sampling method was then developed to estimate the marginal distribution of the outlier sum statistic, hence, to uncover underlying regulatory relationships. To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we compared its performance with that of an existing sampling based method using both simulation data and yeast cell cycle data. The experimental results show that our method consistently outperforms the competing method in different settings of signal to noise ratio and network topology, indicating its robustness for biological applications. Finally, we applied our method to breast cancer cell line data and demonstrated its ability to extract biologically meaningful regulatory modules related to estrogen signaling and action in breast cancer. Availability and implementation: The Gibbs sampler MATLAB package is freely available at

introduction identification of transcriptional regulatory networks (TRNs) is essential to understanding the functional roles of molecules and the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. mechanisms of complicated biological processes. In cancer research, those identified regulatory networks, also referred to as regulatory modules, can give insight into important biological pathways that drive the development of disease, based on which novel drugs or therapies may be developed. In addition to high throughput microarray techniques that profile the entire transcriptome of cells, more specific information about regulation can be obtained from protein dna interaction data derived from DNA motif sequence analyses or chip on chip experiments. Binding motif is also called transcription factor binding site, a segment of DNA regulatory sequence, to which a specific regulatory protein binds preferentially. chip on chip experiments can provide whole genome analysis of binding site locations of all regulatory proteins. Both binding motif data and chip on chip data provide an initial structure of the unknown network topology. The availability of the above techniques has promoted extensive researches on regulatory networks in the last decade and some of which are quite successful in applications such as yeast studies. Early exploration in gene modules depends heavily on statistical methods such as principle component analysis () and independent component analysis (). These statistical methods have strong assumptions that the components are mutually orthogonal or statistically independent, which can hardly be satisfied in real biological systems. Other statistical approaches include dynamic Bayesian networks (), probabilistic Boolean networks () and similarity based methods (). In particular has performed a comparative analysis using 21 different measures and 6 scoring schemes, investigating their ability in reconstructing gene regulatory networks. Many of the earlier mentioned methods either utilize information from gene expression data alone (i.e. do not utilize prior network knowledge from protein dna binding data) or are infeasible for learning large network structures (). On the recent integrated use of gene expression data and binding data such as chip on chip data proposed a computational method called network component analysis (NCA), which is based on a log linear model of the relationship between mRNA abundance and transcription factor activity. Subjected to some mild identifiability conditions referred to as NCA criteria, the NCA method can be used to effectively estimate hidden transcription factor activities later developed a fast version of the NCA method with a closed form solution by using matrix factorization techniques.

discussion identification of transcriptional regulatory modules plays a key role in understanding the mechanism of cancer progression. However, intrinsic defects of microarray data and chip on chip binding motif that caused by noise and the discrepancy between gene profiles and prior binding knowledge make it challenging to correctly recover hidden regulation patterns. The cn based sampling method proposed by is endeavored to filter out the 'background genes' with no regulation patterns but are falsely introduced by binding data. The CN is defined as the ratio of the largest eigenvalue to the smallest eigenvalue, which may be affected by noise because the smallest eigenvalue typically represents the noise power while the larger eigenvalues represent the signal. Hence, as SNR decreases, the algorithm suffers from increasingly large performance degradation. On the other hand, the CN of a gene profile matrix measures the linear independency of gene expression levels regardless of which specific genes having linear dependency. Thus, the evaluation of the seed gene for a given TF may be impaired by highly correlated seeds for other TFs. For more robust identification of gene regulatory modules including both target genes and transcription factors, we propose a Gibbs sampler based on OS of regression t statistic. The robustness of the new statistic against experimental noise in microarray data is inherited from that the regression t statistic maintains a reasonable statistic power when the data are relatively noisy. In real biological applications such as breast cancer cell line study, we are fully aware of the fact that a considerable number of genes may be co-expressed through some unknown mechanism while only a small portion of them should be the true drivers of cancer progression under certain condition. By using a significance test on OS, we are able to identify the TFs that have the maximum consistency between its binding knowledge and the target genes' expression pattern. We generate different null distributions associated with different target gene pool sizes to prevent the algorithm from being biased to TFs with more candidate genes. However, we are also aware of one limitation of gibbs os for its relying on a hard threshold to screen binding data for an initial pool of target genes. Therefore, the proposed Gibbs sampling framework is only aimed to address the problem of false positive connections, not the one of false negative connections.

conclusion we proposed a Gibbs sampler to identify condition specific transcriptional regulatory modules based on the OS of regression t statistic. By utilizing a Gibbs strategy, we are able to estimate the marginal distribution of the OS statistic for each transcription factor and evaluate the significance of the corresponding regulatory module. Our proposed method is aimed to extract the true target genes through the integration of both microarray gene expression data and chip on chip binding motif data. The simulation experiments demonstrated the robustness of the method against noise and network structures, while we further validated its efficacy on yeast cell cycle data. Moreover, we showed that our method could successfully identify important regulatory modules related to estrogen signaling and action in breast cancer.
