Motivation: It is well known that data deficiencies, such as coding rounding errors, outliers or missing values, may lead to misleading results for many statistical methods. Robust statistical methods are designed to accommodate certain types of those deficiencies, allowing for reliable results under various conditions. We analyze the case of statistical tests to detect associations between genomic individual variations (SNP) and quantitative traits when deviations from the normality assumption are observed. We consider the classical analysis of variance tests for the parameters of the appropriate linear model and a robust version of those tests based on m regression. We then compare their empirical power and level using simulated data with several degrees of contamination. Results: Data normality is nothing but a mathematical convenience. In practice, experiments usually yield data with non-conforming observations. In the presence of this type of data, classical least squares statistical methods perform poorly, giving biased estimates, raising the number of spurious associations and often failing to detect true ones. We show through a simulation study and a real data example, that the robust methodology can be more powerful and thus more adequate for association studies than the classical approach. Availability: The code of the robust ified version of function l mek in from the R package kinship is provided as Supplementary Material.

introduction genetic association studies aim to identify genetic polymorphisms that cause phenotypic variation for a trait of interest, or that are in linkage disequilibrium with the causative genetic variant. We focus our analysis on bi allelic genetic variants, such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). In this case, the unit of analysis can be regarded as a three category variable. For instance, a SNP with alleles A (adenine) and G (guanine) has categories AA, AG and GG. We are interested in using a number of genotyped SNPs in a gene, or region, to detect the genetic factors underlying a quantitative * To whom correspondence should be addressed. trait of interest that does not follow simple Mendelian patterns of inheritance. The most straightforward and still more favoured approach in association studies, though raising multiple testing problems (), is to perform a single SNP test for every genotyped SNP via regression or analysis of variance (ANOVA) methods [, used a linear model to test the association between SNPs in eight candidate genes and age specific growth rate in the Artic charr;, used mixed linear models to test for association between 57 SNPs from 20 candidate genes and some wood properties in Pinus taeda;) used a mixed random effects linear model to test for the association between a collection of SNPs and some Teosinte traits;, used a linear model to test for the association between 151 SNPs from 57 candidate genes and several traits of boar). Though the single SNP approach may be considered if we are looking for a single causal variant, it is not very efficient when the SNPs have limited LD with that causal variant, meaning smaller power. Moreover, quantitative traits are usually controlled by several and sometimes many genes. Thus, a joint analysis of SNPs may be more adequate, being much more informative than singles np analysis (). However, it also may lose power due to the usually large number of degrees of freedom involved. Ideally, one should make use of the information provided by multiple SNPs, capturing as much of the genetic variance as possible, without raising the degrees of freedom too much () and thus not compromising power. Note that the joint analysis of SNPs multiple snp approach) can only be applied to situations where the number of explanatory variables is much smaller than the number of individuals, therefore implying that in a genome wide association study context a preliminary step of dimension reduction is necessary. There is an extensive literature on how two specific data problems ld and population structure ps may affect both the power to detect true associations as well as the number of false positives, therefore distorting the conclusions when testing for association between a quantitative trait and a set of candidate SNPs in a population based study (). We also find in literature many methods for overcoming these problems (). Another frequent data problem, which may have the same sort of undesirable effects, is non normality and or presence of outliers in the phenotypic data. This problem is far less studied

discussion in Sections 3 and 4, we compared the performance of classic, robust and non-parametric methodologies in association studies in a particular simulation frame. We showed that under the null, without contamination, the four methods considered have control of the f wer at the desired level. We acknowledged not only the tendency of both the classic and Wilcoxon approaches towards inflated type I error rates, but also that the robust approach proposed (Huber m regression plus wald type tests to assess association) is not as sensitive to outlier contamination as the classical approach and is more powerful than the rank transform approach to detect snp trait associations. Despite the fact that the Wilcoxon approach kept close to the robust methodology in terms of power, its tendency to inflated type I error rates and computational issues indicate that for an association study involving a small number of independent SNPs to be tested (as in the simulation study), the robust multiple SNP linear model is preferable over the remaining approaches. In Section 5, we applied the classic and robust methodologies to a published real dataset. This dataset was not in the conditions of the simulation study and was therefore treated accordingly (). Results showed the presence of outliers and therefore the non normality of
