The wound healing assay (or scratch assay) is a technique frequently used to quantify the dependence of cell motility a central process in tissue repair and evolution of disease subject to various treatments conditions. However processing the resulting data is a laborious task due its high throughput and variability across images. This Robust Quantitative Scratch Assay algorithm introduced statistical outputs where migration rates are estimated, cellular behaviour is distinguished and outliers are identified among groups of unique experimental conditions. Furthermore, the rqs a decreased measurement errors and increased accuracy in the wound boundary at comparable processing times compared to previously developed method t scratch. Availability and implementation: The rqs a is freely available at: http://ophid.utoronto.ca/RQSA/ rqs a scripts zip. The image sets used for training and validation and results are available at:

introduction since cell migration is significant in repair processes and disease advancement such as metastasis and cancer angiogenesis, it can be used as a parameter to describe the state of health of various cell lines (). Furthermore, quantification of cell migration can be used to measure the effect of drug treatments on the same cell line. The Wound Healing Assay (WHA) is used to quantify motility by monitoring the evolution of a wounded monolayer of cells. The experimental set-up consists of growing a confluent monolayer of cells under specific conditions (i.e. treated or not treated with a drug), then creating a wound or scratch on each layer well and then imaging all wounds multiple times over a period of time. Since the rate how wounds close may depend on conditions used, measuring wound areas from individual images are used to estimate migration rates, and thus quantify condition specific cell motility. () provide extensive insight on experimental design considerations and workflow of the WHA measurements. In order to obtain reliable results, it is necessary to measure wound areas across multiple replicates of the same cell condition, and record multiple frames per replicate to determine whether changes are statistically significant. To make this task feasible, an automated system is required to process the high volumes of data and make measurements independent of image artefacts such as uneven illuminations, smudges or scratches on the well plate lid, in addition to some variation of initial wound width and shape. Sample images of wound areas are shown in Supplementary Material.
