Motivation: high throughput molecular data provide a wealth of information that can be integrated into network analysis. Several approaches exist that identify functional modules in the context of integrated biological networks. The objective of this study is 2-fold: first, to assess the accuracy and variability of identified modules and second, to develop an algorithm for deriving highly robust and accurate solutions. Results: In a comparative simulation study accuracy and robustness of the proposed and established methodologies are validated, considering various sources of variation in the data. To assess this variation, we propose a jackknife resampling procedure resulting in an ensemble of optimal modules. A consensus approach summarizes the ensemble into one final module containing maximally robust nodes and edges. The resulting consensus module identifies and visualizes robust and variable regions by assigning support values to nodes and edges. Finally, the proposed approach is exemplified on two large gene expression studies: diffuse large b cell lymphoma and acute lymphoblastic

introduction multiple genome scale datasets nowadays allow to model the cell as an intricate network of molecular interactions. Research in systems biology has changed accordingly, now focusing on network analysis of high throughput genome-, transcriptome and proteome data. Reaching beyond the analysis of mere topological questions, integrated network analysis incorporates additional molecular data into a network. For gene expression data integrated approaches are used to search for pathways, functional modules or gene signatures containing differentially expressed genes in the context of gene networks or protein protein interaction (PPI) networks (). Given the integrated gene expression data, the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. objective is to find the maximal significantly deregulated (i.e. differentially expressed) set of interconnected genes in the cellular network. We refer to the resulting connected subnetwork as a functional module, which is also denoted as active or perturbed module (). Please note that this is in contrast to other fields in biology (e.g. proteomics), where functional modules denote protein complexes (). Various methods have been proposed to identify functional modules in an integrated network. In this study we focus on the popular approaches proposed by, ulit sky and Shamir (2007) and. Although these algorithms differ in many important aspects, conceptually they all aim at identifying connected subnetworks that contain significantly deregulated genes introduced the problem and proposed a simulated annealing approach to identify subnetworks. Due to the heuristic nature of such sampling approaches, the resulting modules are not optimal in general. In an alternative approach propose the algorithm DEGAS (DysrEgulated Gene set Analysis via Subnetworks), based on a greedy approximation to identify subnetworks of dysregulated genes. In contrast to the above mentioned approaches, the algorithm of identifies optimally scoring subnetworks using an exact algorithm based on integer linear programming (ILP). Besides the accuracy of a module identification method, the robustness of obtained solutions is of particular importance. A natural question is: How variable are the provided solutions (given the method)? A highly variable method produces largely differing solutions in different runs or on slightly perturbed input data and is thus less reliable. Clearly, well designed algorithms should ideally show both: high accuracy as well as high robustness. Here we investigate the accuracy and robustness of the three prominent module detection algorithms regarding (i) the integrated gene expression data and (ii) the network structure of the PPI network itself. As a consequence of the investigation we propose a novel method to calculate accurate as well as robust modules in which robust parts are indicated by support values, introducing the new concept of consensus modules. In phylogeny, Felsenstein (1985) introduced resampling approaches (e.g. bootstrap and jackknife) to define a confidence measure for splits in a phylogenetic tree and to calculate consensus trees. Similarly, resampling procedures can be used to assess the robustness of functional modules in integrated network analysis. We use the delete half jackknife (

discussion here we have presented a novel method for the identification of highly robust and accurate modules. We suggest a consensus approach, based on jack knifing to calculate a resulting functional module, whose inner structure is characterized and highlighted by support values on nodes and edges. In an extensive simulation study we compare our approach to well established heuristic module identification methods in terms of accuracy and robustness. Particularly, we distinguish between different sources of noise that affect the obtained solutions: (i) the variability of the integrated data (e.g. gene expression data), (ii) the variability of the underlying network (e.g. PPI network) and (iii) the intrinsic methodological variability for heuristic module identification methods. In general, the exact algorithm clearly outperforms the other validated heuristics not only in terms of accuracy but also in terms of robustness. In particular, the simulation of perturbed networks reveals that the performance of heuristic module detection methods declines faster and more pronounced with increasing level of perturbations in contrast to the exact approach. Interestingly, our simulation results indicate that even the inclusion of a large number of false positive edges has only a limited influence on the accuracy of functional module identification, whereas the deletion of edges has a much stronger effect. This holds true for all algorithms examined in this study. These simulation results have also implications for the analysis of real PPI data: in the context of integrated network analysis low confidence interaction networks [e.g. in the STRING database ()] could perform similarly good or better than high confidence PPI networks based on a high quality threshold which may lack a large number of true positive edges. Analyses on the PINA and HPRD network, comprising large differences in the number of interactions, show that on biological networks the results are almost identical. On the algorithmic side we have extended an existing exact approach () in two directions: (i) by the incorporation of edge scores and (ii) by the calculation of optimal modules of a given size. On the biological side we have applied both algorithms, the original exact method as well as the new proposed consensus method, to two well known microarray datasets (ALL, DLBCL). These datasets differ in their signal content, which is directly reflected by the support values of the consensus module. In the case of a high signal content, the results for the original module and the consensus module agree in most parts, whereas). The most robust central nodes in the yellow shaded submodule are the genes ABL1 and BCR, which are directly affected by the translocation t(9;22). These central genes are not present in both modules found by the heuristic methods j active modules and Matisse (see Supplementary)
