Motivation: Biological networks are robust to a wide variety of internal and external perturbations, yet fragile or sensitive to a small minority of perturbations. Due to this rare sensitivity of networks to certain perturbations, it is unclear how precisely biochemical parameters must be experimentally measured in order to accurately predict network function. Results: Here, we examined a model of cardiac β-adrenergic signaling and found that its robustness portrait, a global measure of steady state network function, was well conserved even when all parameters were rounded to their nearest 1–2 orders of magnitude. In contrast, β-adrenergic network kinetics were more sensitive to parameter precision. This analysis was then extended to 10 additional networks, including Escherichia coli chemotaxis, stem cell differentiation and cytokine signaling, of which nine exhibited conserved robustness portraits despite the order of magnitude approximation of their biochemical parameters. Thus, both fragile and robust aspects of diverse biological networks are largely shaped by network topology and can be predicted despite order of magnitude uncertainty in biochemical parameters. These findings suggest an iterative strategy where order of magnitude models are used to prioritize experiments toward the fragile network elements that require precise measurements, efficiently driving model revision.

introduction robustness is a key emergent property of many biological systems (). Systems are considered robust if they are able to retain core functionality in the face of external (e.g. temperature, ligand concentration) and internal (e.g. gene or protein expression) perturbations. Robustness despite variations in biochemical parameters has been observed in a number of computational and experimental studies, including bacterial chemotaxis (), segment polarity in insect development (), NFB oscillations () and osmoregulation (). Network robustness leads to the hypothesis that proper network function * To whom correspondence should be addressed. does not require fine tuning of biochemical parameters (). However, many of these studies have also shown that the same network can be highly sensitive to certain perturbations, leading to the qualification that complex networks are 'robust, yet fragile' (). A fundamental challenge presented by this alternate view is that, without having measured all biochemical parameters with high precision a priori, it is uncertain whether one could accurately predict to which perturbations a network is 'fragile' or 'robust'. In this study we asked, 'What is the quantitative precision of biochemical parameters required to accurately predict the 'robust yet fragile' nature of a biological network?' Starting with a well validated model of cardiac -adrenergic signaling (), we systematically characterized this network's steady state functional relationships, or robustness portrait, with both the original, fine tuned model and a model in with each parameter was rounded to its nearest order of magnitude. The order of magnitude parameter approximation introduced here is analogous to techniques widely used in physics and engineering. Robustness portraits of the original and approximate models were well correlated, even when parameters were approximated to their nearest two orders of magnitude. order of magnitude approximate models also outperformed randomized models of equivalent parameter variance. We then applied the order of magnitude analysis to 10 additional biological networks and found that most networks were similarly insensitive to order of magnitude parameter estimates. This indicates that quantitative functional relationships are largely shaped by network topology. The ability to predict the 'robust yet fragile' nature of biological networks despite order of magnitude parameter uncertainty suggests a strategy where order of magnitude models are used to identify the experiments that reveal the most fragile, information rich aspects of a biological network, efficiently guiding model refinement.

discussion in this study, we computationally explored conservation of global functional relationships in biological signaling networks in the face parameter imprecision. Starting with a biochemically detailed computational model of cardiac -adrenergic signaling (), order of magnitude analysis revealed that this network shows a steady state 'robustness portrait' that is insensitive to parameter precision within two orders of magnitude. However, predictive capability was lost when parameter approximations became very rough (n OOM  3) or when parameters were randomly assigned, suggesting that this network's function depends on both network topology and biochemical parameter precision within 12 orders of magnitude. We then extended this analysis to 10 additional signaling networks, finding that key properties of these networks were also generally preserved when order of magnitude approximations were applied. Thus, the steady state robustness portrait of a signaling network can be predicted even when parameter data are imprecise. This systems insight suggests a rational approach for prioritizing experiments towards the most fragile elements of a network, driving subsequent model revision and quantitative understanding.
