Many cell lines can be reprogrammed to other cell lines by forced expression of a few transcription factors or by specifically designed culture methods, which have attracted a great interest in the field of regenerative medicine and stem cell research. Plenty of cell lines have been used to generate induced pluripotent stem cells i pscs by expressing a group of genes and microRNAs. These i pscs can differentiate into somatic cells to promote tissue regeneration. Similarly, many somatic cells can be directly reprogrammed to other cells without a stem cell state. All these findings are helpful in searching for new reprogramming methods and understanding the biological mechanism inside. However, to the best of our knowledge, there is still no database dedicated to integrating the reprogramming records. We built r pdb (cellular reprogramming database) to collect cellular reprogramming information and make it easy to access. All entries in r pdb are manually extracted from more than 2000 published articles, which is helpful for researchers in regenerative medicine and cell biology. Availability and Implementation: r pdb is freely available on the web at http://bioinformatics.ustc. educ nr pdb with all major browsers supported.

introduction cellular reprogramming is a process in which one cell type transforms into another cell type by expressing a group of genes and microRNAs, adding chemical molecules or changing cell culture environment (). Cellular reprogramming technology, which mainly includes induced pluripotent stem cell (IPSC) generation, IPSC differentiation and direct reprogramming, is considered one of the most important advances in tissue replacement therapies (). Somatic cells can be re programed to a stem cell like state, which can differentiate to functional somatic cells. Multiple somatic cells, including blood cells (), fibroblasts () and hair follicle dermal papilla cells () have been successfully reprogrammed to i pscs. There are also many functional somatic cells that have been generated from i pscs such as dopaminergic neurons () and retinal cells (). Multiple strategies have been used to achieve these goals, including chemical inducible systems (), virus free transfection, recombinant proteins and microRNAs (). Using similar strategies, various somatic cells have been directly converted into other cell types, which are named direct reprogramming or trans differentiation. Although there are several stem cell focused databases, such as system cell () and stem cell db (), to the best of our knowledge, there is no database that focuses on comprehensively collecting and analyzing cellular reprogramming V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
