Motivation: rnase q has been extensively used for transcriptome study. Quality control (QC) is critical to ensure that rnase q data are of high quality and suitable for subsequent analyses. However, QC is a time consuming and complex task, due to the massive size and versatile nature of rnase q data. Therefore, a convenient and comprehensive QC tool to assess rnase q quality is sorely needed. Results: We developed the rse qc package to comprehensively evaluate different aspects of rnase q experiments, such as sequence quality, GC bias, polymerase chain reaction bias, nucleotide composition bias, sequencing depth, strand specificity, coverage uniformity and read distribution over the genome structure. rse qc takes both SAM and BAM files as input, which can be produced by most rnase q mapping tools as well as BED files, which are widely used for gene models. Most modules in rse qc take advantage of R scripts for visualization, and they are notably efficient in dealing with large bams am files containing hundreds of millions of alignments. Availability and implementation: rse qc is written in Python and C. Source code and a comprehensive users manual are freely available at

introduction deep transcriptome sequencing rnase q provides massive and valuable information concerning all transcribed elements in the genome. Using rnase q researchers are able to, for instance, profile gene expression, interrogate alternative splicing, identify novel transcripts and detect aberrant transcripts and coding variants. rnase q experiments should ideally be able to directly identify and quantify all RNA species, regardless of their size or frequency. However, current rnase q protocols still possess several intrinsic biases and limitations, such as nucleotide composition bias, GC bias and PCR bias. These biases directly affect the accuracy of many rnase q applications () and can be directly checked from raw sequences using tools like fast qc. However, these raw sequence based metrics are not sufficient to ensure the usability of rnase q data; other rnase q specific quality control (QC) metrics, such
