Motivation: rubio seq has been developed to facilitate the primary and secondary analysis of re-sequencing projects by providing an integrated software suite of parallelized pipelines to detect exo me variants single nucleotide variants and copy number variations) and to perform bisulfite seq analyses automatically. rubio seqs variant analysis results have been already validated and published. Availability: http://rubioseq.sourceforge.net/.

introduction primary and secondary data analyses of next generation sequencing studies (NGS) consist of a set of successive stages that are repetitively and routinely executed using a wide collection of tools (e.g. quality control tools, read aligners, variant callers and so forth). These tools have different origins and usually lack of straight interoperability. This issue has driven computational biologists to demand intuitive, efficient and integrated pipelines to facilitate routine NGS analysis and improve the reproducibility of the results. Several remarkable efforts have been carried out in this sense. Prominent examples include NARWHAL, a recent proposal to automate illumina s primary analysis () and huge seq a powerful pipeline designed to cover primary and secondary analysis of single nucleotide variant sn vs and copy number variation (CNV) experiments (). huge seq uses fast q files as input to detect and annotate genomic variants running g atk () and sam tools however, the current version of huge seq does not support either sample quality control tools or bisulfite seq bs seq analysis methods. Galaxy, a large and flexible web based platform also provides an NGS toolbox (). Despite its potential, galaxy s NGS tools are still in and do not support either CNV or bs seq analysis. We present rubio seq an automated and parallelized software suite for primary and secondary analysis of Illumina and SOLiD experiments. Using standard input and output file formats and an intuitive XML configuration file, the application offers an integrated framework to run parallelized pipelines for variant detection in exo me enrichment and methylation studies. rubio seq results have been experimentally validated and accepted for publication ().
