rule based modeling is invaluable when the number of possible species and reactions in a model become too large to allow convenient manual specification. The popular rule based software tools bionet gen and nfs im provide powerful modeling and simulation capabilities at the cost of learning a complex scripting language which is used to specify these models. Here, we introduce a modeling tool that combines new graphical rule based model specification with existing simulation engines in a seamless way within the familiar Virtual Cell v cell modeling environment. A mathematical model can be built integrating explicit reaction networks with reaction rules. In addition to offering a large choice of ODE and stochastic solvers, a model can be simulated using a network free approach through the nfs im simulation engine. Availability and implementation: Available as v cell (versions 6.0 and later) at the Virtual Cell web site (http://vcell.org/). The application installs and runs on all major platforms and does not require registration for use on the users computer. Tutorials are available at the Virtual Cell website and Help is provided within the software. Source code is available at Sourceforge.

introduction the traditional approach for modeling reaction networks requires explicit specification of all molecular species and reactions. Therefore, a reaction network developed manually by the modeler can include only a limited number of species and reactions and can not capture the combinatorial complexity of many cell signaling systems (). The rule based modeling approach overcomes this limitation by providing a compact model description that is capable of accounting for all the potential molecular complexes and interactions among them that can be generated during a response to a signal, without explicit enumeration. In this approach, molecular interactions and their effects are represented in the form of reaction rules that serve as generators of molecular species and reactions (). A model is defined as an initial set of species with non-zero amounts (seed species), a set of reaction rules operating on seed species, and a set of observables that define computed outcomes of simulations. Every rule in the set is applied to those species among the seed species that can be selected as reactants, generating proper well defined reactions and an extended set of species (seed species and species that are products of these reactions). The set of rules is again applied to this extended set of species to generate even more reactions and more species. During network generation () this process is iteratively repeated until no new species and reactions are generated, or until a specified termination condition is reached, producing a reaction network that can be then simulated using deterministic or stochastic methods. During network free simulations () individual particles rather than populations of identical species are stochastically tracked over time without the need to explicitly enumerate all possible species and reactions. The rule based modeling approach was implemented in numerous modeling and simulation tools, such as bionet gen software () and s immune (V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 2006) for simulations following network generation, KaSim () and nfs im () for network free simulations. rule based models are often described using scripting languages such as bionet gen Language b ngl used by bionet gen and nfs im Kappa language (used by KaSim), ML Rules (), Python scripts () etc. Modeling with scripting languages requires considerable mathematical and or computational expertise and has a steep learning curve. Writing such scripts, although easier than writing a program in a computer language and usually aided by a set of tutorials, may be difficult for beginner modelers without programming experience. Writing a script is also an error prone process, where a simple typo can lead to a valid model that implements an unexpected mechanism different from the intended one. While a reaction network model can be verified by checking every species and reaction, such verification may be impossible for a model specified by rules because the generated network may include thousands of species and reactions and it can be too large for manual tracking and validation. Thus, preventing errors is a critical issue in rule based modeling. Here, we present a novel tool that makes rule based modeling easier by (i) providing a graphical user interface for specification and simulation of rule based models, eliminating the need to use a scripting language; (ii) preventing errors in model specification by constructing model elements through verified components and extensive built in automatic updating and verification algorithms of the model after any edits. Additionally, we allow user to link specified reaction networks and rules together, where a species can be a part of a reaction network and participate in a rule at the same time. Ordinary species and reactions are not required to be encoded in a script as trivial rules; rather, they can be specified and visualized graphically. Another feature is an explicit unit system, where a modeler is guided to distinguish between molecules and concentrations, thus avoiding situations when an inexperienced modeler may use concentrations in place of particle numbers for stochastic simulations. The tool is implemented within the Virtual Cell v cell modeling and simulation framework ().
