Biochemical reactions play a key role to help sustain life and allow cells to grow. rxn finder was developed to search biochemical reactions from KEGG reaction database using three search criteria: molecular structures, molecular fragments and reaction similarity. rxn finder is helpful to get reference reactions for biosynthesis and xenobiotics metabolism. Availability: rxn finder is freely available via: http://sdd.

introduction diverse biochemical reactions participate in various important biosynthesis and metabolic pathways. Those reactions are manually curated and stored in several widely used databases (). The KEGG reaction database () contains 8000 reactions. The KEGG reaction database search tools include sim comp and sub comp (), reaction ID, name, reactant entry, pathway and enzyme. In the present work rxn finder three additional search engines are developed to help researchers retrieve KEGG reactions.

description in rxn finder users can search KEGG reactions using molecular structures, molecular fragments and reaction similarity for different purposes.

discussion kegg provides two ways to search reactions with a molecule structure: kegg mola using compound ID (http://www.genome.jp/kegg/compound/); and kegg mol b using sub comp (http://www.genome.jp/tools/subcomp/) or sim comp (http://www.genome.jp/tools/simcomp/) (). The results obtained by rxn finder are the same as kegg mola. The difference is that the input in rxn finder is molecular structure; however, the input in kegg mola is compound ID. When molecular structure (such as c1ccccc1Br) is input, rxn finder retrieves two reactions (R07066 and R07068) with c1ccccc1Br. kegg mola gets the same two reactions if the compound ID (C11036) is input. However, users usually do not know the KEGG ID of a specific molecule, for instance C11036 for bromo benzene. Then, if the molecule structure of bromo benzene is input to KEGG search engines. kegg mol b using sub comp will retrieve 30 reactions. kegg mol b using sim comp will retrieve 571 reactions, in which most of them are similar to c1ccccc1Br, but not identical c1ccccc1Br. The reason might be that sim comp and sub comp are developed to search Page: 2467 24652467 similar molecules. In KEGG database, there are two reactions (R07066 and R07068) containing bromo benzene (c1ccccc1Br). For reaction search for a given molecular fragment, the algorithm used is a substructure match method (). Our method can support SMART (http://www.daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory theory smarts html SMILES string search. The implementations in KEGG are based on sub comp algorithms (). rxn finder will retrieve 1855 reactions with en amine fragment (=, a SMART SMILES string for en amine. KEGG sub comp (http://www.genome.jp/tools/subcomp/) does not support SMART SMILES string search. The novelty of this proposed reaction similarity is, at least to our knowledge, the first tool of its kind for retrieving biochemical reactions. The reaction similarity search is based on the Euclidean distance measurement of two reactions. After calculating reaction similarity between KEGG reactions and an input reaction, the KEGG reactions are retrieved based on the similarity rank. The distance values can range from 0 to infinity (theoretically). The distance 0 means the retrieved reaction holds the same chemical transformation to the input reaction. The direct prediction performance measurement of reaction similarity search is to check if the retrieved reactions are with the same chemical transformation pattern of the input reaction. Regarding to the statistical rigorous ness of reaction similarity, we applied an indirect way to get raw similarity scores, and found distance 10 is a good threshold. The methodology is as follows: (i) the reactions with the same chemical transformation have the same EC numbers. (ii) Take one reaction out as query reaction, and use the most similar reaction to predict the EC number of the query reaction. (iii) By leave one out cross validation, we found that similarity scores (in this case, reaction Euclidean distance) within 10 will get satisfactory accuracy (85%). (iv) The analysis is shown in. In rxn finder distance 10 is now used as a statistics threshold to select reactions similar to an input reaction.

conclusion rxn finder presents a collection of searching engines to search biochemical reactions from KEGG reaction database. With the engines at hand, researchers can get reference reactions for further analysis. rxn finder also includes online tools to input molecules and reactions, calculate molecular fragments, compute reaction difference fingerprints and measure reaction distance.
