samba mba is a high performance robust tool and library for working with SAM, BAM and CRAM sequence alignment files; the most common file formats for aligned next generation sequencing data. samba mba is a faster alternative to sam tools that exploits multi-core processing and dramatically reduces processing time. samba mba is being adopted at sequencing centers, not only because of its speed, but also because of additional functionality, including coverage analysis and powerful filtering capability. Availability and implementation: samba mba is free and open source software, available under a GPLv2 license. samba mba can be downloaded and installed from http://www.open-bio.org/wiki/ samba mba. samba mba v0.5.0 was released with

introduction processing speed matters, not only for diagnostics, but also for analysis and sharing of computational resources. next generation sequencing (NGS) is increasingly used as a genetic screening tool in diagnostics () and reducing time from sample intake to test result diagnosis potentially saves lives. Introducing multi-core processing can accelerate steps in a pipeline when the CPU is the bottleneck (). Since its introduction by the 1000 Genomes Project (), the sequence alignment map format (SAM) and its compressed binary counterpart (BAM) have become the de facto file formats used for storing and distributing NGS data. sam tools is the original tool for samba m files processing, including data extraction and filtering (). Recently, sam tools added the CRAM format as a compressed alternative to samba m (). While sam tools exploits the speed of the low level C programming language and uses streamed data for efficiency, it has limited support for parallel processing (). sam tools has inspired a number of other BAM processors, notably Picard (), sam blaster (), bio bambam () and Scramble (), each of which is either slower than sam tools or offers a subset of its functionality. To accelerate analysis pipelines we created samba mba a new incarnation of sam tools that fully utilizes parallel processing. samba mba (which means 'parallel' in Swahili) is written in the D programming language, a modern programming language with runtime performance similar to that of C (). D has powerful abstractions for parallel computing which make it possible to scale computations with the number of cores ().

conclusions am bamba is a software engineering example that shows how to make effective use of the D programming language and multi-core computers to reduce the time needed to get from sample to result. Whole genome sequencing and growing sample numbers make such performance improvements increasingly relevant.. Processing speed comparison of sam tools and samba mba. wall clock time (s) versus number of threads to convert an 11-GB CRAM (1000 genomes HG00110) to 108-GB SAM. With sam tools VIEW is bound to a single thread at CPU 90%. With samba mba IO gets saturated at approximately CPU 250%. When using a faster RAM-disk, IO gets saturated at approximately CPU 350%. For sam tools a RAM-disk makes no difference. When adding more threads, performance reproducibly degrades because of CPU cache contention. All timings were performed on a server class machine with 512 GB of RAM and 48 CPU cores (4  12-core AMD opteron tm Processor 6174 @2.2 Ghz with
