Motivation: Data from rnase q experiments provide us with many new possibilities to gain insights into biological and disease mechanisms of cellular functioning. However, the reproducibility and robustness of rnase q data analysis results is often unclear. This is in part attributed to the two counter acting goals of (i) a cost efficient and (ii) an optimal experimental design leading to a compromise, e.g. in the sequencing depth of experiments. Results: We introduce an R package called sam explorer that allows the subsampling (m out of n bootstrap ing of short reads based on SAM files facilitating the investigation of sequencing depth related questions for the experimental design. Overall, this provides a systematic way for exploring the reproducibility and robustness of general rnase q studies. We exemplify the usage of sam explorer by studying the influence of the sequencing depth and the annotation on the identification of differentially expressed genes. Availability and Implementation: sam explorer is available as an R package from Bioconductor.

introduction rnase q data () generated with next generation sequencing (NGS) platforms are offering many new and exciting opportunities from basic biology to translational clinical research. However, one important problem that have these diverse applications in common is the question regarding the reproducibility and the robustness of obtained results (). Due to the novelty of rnase q data, there are so far only a few studies investigating either the optimal sequencing depth in general V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com () or for context specific problems, e.g. for identifying differentially expressed (DE) genes (). In this paper, we introduce an R package called sam explorer that allows the convenient exploration of reproducibility and robustness of rnase q data analysis results. We demonstrate the utility of sam explorer by a case study for identifying DE genes.

conclusion a cornerstone of any scientific study is the question regarding the reproducibility and robustness of obtained results. Unfortunately, for high throughput data from rnase q experiments such questions are highly non-trivial to answer, which may be an explanation for the severe underrepresentation of this topic in the literature. sam explorer provides a flexible exploratory tool for investigating general rnase q datasets w.r.t. user defined metrics.
