Motivation: high throughput datasets such as genetic screens, mRNA expression assays and global phospho proteomic experiments are often difficult to interpret due to inherent noise in each experimental system. Computational tools have improved interpretation of these datasets by enabling the identification of biological processes and pathways that are most likely to explain the measured results. These tools are primarily designed to analyse data from a single experiment (e.g. drug treatment versus control), creating a need for computational algorithms that can handle heterogeneous datasets across multiple experimental conditions at once. Summary: We introduce sam net web a web based tool that enables functional enrichment analysis and visualization of high throughput datasets. sam net web can analyse two distinct data types (e.g. mRNA expression and global proteomics) simultaneously across multiple experimental systems to identify pathways activated in these experiments and then visualize the pathways in a single interaction network. Through the use of a multi-commodity flow based algorithm that requires each experiment share underlying protein interactions, sam net web can identify distinct and common pathways across experiments. Availability and implementation: sam net web is freely available at http://fraenkel.mit.edu/ sam net web
introduction due to large consortium based data collection efforts such as ENCODE () and tcg at cga the quantity of biological signaling data is growing at an astounding rate. These data repositories release mRNA expression data, chromatin accessibility data, DNA sequencing data and proteomics data for hundreds of tissues and thousands of patients. As a result, there is a growing need for algorithms to meaningfully interpret diverse types of data across experimental conditions such as different diseases and tissues. There are numerous network based analysis tools (), including their web server counterparts () that perform visualization and functional enrichment of high throughput datasets within a single experiment. These algorithms improve the functional enrichment of basic statistical approaches () by identifying 'hidden' nodes that are likely involved in the experiment but not measured as changing. However, these tools only analyse one experimental condition at a time, making visualization of multiple networks cumbersome. Furthermore, when applied to different perturbations in the same experimental system, these algorithms select similar networks (). sam net web is able to analyse multiple experiments by mapping both signaling and transcript omic datasets to the same underlying protein protein interaction network. Representing each experiment as a 'commodity', the algorithm identifies common and distinct paths between the two datasets for each experiment using the sam net multi-commodity flow based algorithm (). This approach makes it easier to visualize multiple experiments in the same network as well as enhances the ability to perform pathway enrichment to identify biological processes perturbed in each pathway. sam net web is implemented in an easy to use web server interface that enables the experimentalist to analyse multiple high throughput experiments with both transcriptional and signaling data from each experiment. The end result is the identification of pathways shared between experiments and those unique to each experiment.

descriptions am net web analyses signaling and transcript omic data from multiple experiments by mapping the data to a weighted graph and then running a constrained optimization algorithm that selects the combination of nodes and edges that best explains the observed data. protein level signaling changes are mapped to a protein interaction network, which connects to mRNA expression changes via a transcriptional regulatory network. Each edge in the network is weighted by confidence, enabling the sam net algorithm to create a reduced network that best explains the connections among the inputs. Usage is described in.
