Both alignment generation and visualization are important processes for producing biologically meaningful sequence alignments. Computational tools that combine reliable, automated and semi automated approaches to produce secondary structure based alignments with an appropriate visualization of the results are rare. We have developed sb al a tool to generate and edit secondary structure based sequence alignments. It is easy to install and provides a user friendly interface. Sequence alignments are displayed, with secondary structure assignments mapped to their corresponding regions in the sequence by using a simple colour scheme. The algorithm implemented for automated and semi automated secondary structure based alignment calculations shows a comparable performance to existing software. Availability and implementation: sb al has been implemented in Java to provide cross platform compatibility. sb al is freely available to academic users at http://www.structuralchemistry.org/pcsb/. Users will be asked for their name, institution and email address.

introduction accurate amino acid sequence alignments are central to many bioinformatic, biochemical and structural studies. In structural biology, amino acid sequence alignments are used to not only identify conserved residues that may be functionally significant, but also regions of conserved secondary structure that may provide information on the overall fold of the molecule. Of the alignment algorithms that are currently available, only a handful take into account secondary structure information; namely PRALINE (), SPEM (), prom als (), isp align () and OPAL (). Despite using different approaches to implement secondary structure information into multiple sequence alignments, these programs have shown * To whom correspondence should be addressed. that significant improvements in accuracy can be achieved when secondary structure information is included. However, a limitation of currently available programs is that they do not provide an easy means of visualizing alignments and secondary structure predictions after they have been generated. The visualization of alignments is an important part of the entire process of alignment generation, not only for quality control, but also for analysis and interpretation of the biological context of the alignments. Additionally, manual editing can frequently improve alignments because most algorithms apply heuristic approaches that may not generate an optimal solution. Despite the variety of alignment programs () and viewers available (), we found the process of generating secondary structure based alignments and appropriate visualization difficult. Some tools are only available as web based applications () and others require complex installation and compilation. Some visualization tools are specialized for other purposes, such as for phylogenetic reconstructions. Additionally, visualization of secondary structure assignments on a multiple sequence alignment in most programs is complicated and does not allow for easy visual comparisons. We have implemented a simple to use and portable Java application that aids in the generation of structure based sequence alignments by providing an automated alignment that may be edited and improved by the user through a user friendly graphical user interface.
