Structural analysis of long DNA fragments, including chromosomes and whole genomes, is one of the main challenges in modern bioinformatics. Here, we propose an original approach based on spectral methods and its implementation called s bars spectral based Approach for Repeats Search. The main idea of our approach is that repeated DNA structures are recognized not within the nucleotide sequence directly but within the function derived from this sequence. This allows us to investigate nucleotide sequences on different scales and decrease time complexity for dotplot creation down to ÂðnÞ. Availability and implementation: Pre-compiled versions for Windows and Linux and documentation are available at

introduction the vast majority of approaches used to analyze nucleotide and amino acid sequences are based on algorithms working with text strings. Until recently, such methods were justified because the length of processed genetic text was relatively short. The evolution of sequencing techniques, however, has resulted in dramatically increased datasets, providing nucleotide sequences that are comparable with whole genome in size. Algorithmic 'correction' of point mutations is computationally intensive and time consuming. At the same time it is reasonable to assume that a number of mutations are unintentionally incorporated into comparisons of large fragments of DNA (410 000 bp), resulting in significant decrease in efficiency of the text based algorithms. To bypass the problems of the text based algorithms, a number of effective spectral algorithms based on Fourier transform were developed, which are used to search for mini satellites [Spectral Repeat Finder (SRF) () and ow msa (, multiple alignments maff t (, etc. Despite a high performance, these tools are focused on finding short repeats and have a number of limitations for the analysis of long sequences and searching for extended homologous fragments in the present article, we propose an original method for finding different types of long repeats in genome scale DNA sequences. We also offer a possible solution for the problem of dotplot creation whose time complexity can be reduced to n.

discussions bars is a fast and efficient tool for identifying dispersed (direct, inverted) and tandem DNA repeats. The program is not aimed at the comparison of individual nucleotides. The main idea of this approach is to quickly identify the similarity of individual fragments within the query sequences, disregarding single nucleotide insertions or deletions. The current version of the program efficiently identifies repeated sequences and can be developed for the analysis of long insertions or deletions because of chromosome rearrangements in similar sequences. The underlying spectral algorithm demonstrated good scalability on multicore processors ().Note: self plots of sequences with different lengths have been calculated on a 2.2 GHz AMD Phenom 9550 quad core machine using ge pard and s bars. The resulting dot plots and the corresponding parameters are presented in the Supplementary Material.
