Motivation: The SBML Render Extension enables coloring and shape information of biochemical models to be stored in the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML). Rendering of this stored graphical information in a portable and well supported system such as T E X would be useful for researchers preparing documentation and presentations. In addition, since the Render Extension is not yet supported by many applications, it is helpful for such rendering functionality be extended to the more popular cell designer annotation as well. Results: SBML2TikZ supports automatic generation of graphics for biochemical models in the popular T E X typesetting system. The library generates a script of T E X macro commands for the vector graphics languages pg fti kz that can be compiled into scalable vector graphics described in a model. Availability: Source code, documentation and compiled binaries for the SBML2TikZ library can be found at http://www.sbml2tikz. org. In addition, a web application is available at http://www.sys-bio org layout
introduction the Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) is an extensible format for storing biochemical models (). SBML promotes model exchange and longevity, and has become widely supported by numerous software tools (). In order to augment model data stored in SBML with graphical information, a render extension specification was proposed to enable the storing of coloring and shape information (). The SBML Render Extension is currently supported by a collection of libraries written by Frank Bergmann which can generate images in PNG, BMP and PDF format (http://sbmllayout.sf.net). In addition to exactly rendering SBML Render Extension information, these libraries are also capable of assigning Systems Biology Graphical Notation Styles s bgn to existing model layout and rendering information (). s bgn is an increasingly popular standard notation for representing models; such support is similarly seen in tools such as Arcadia and cell designer that automatically render s bgn (). In addition to the PNG, BMP and PDF formats supported by bergmann s libraries, the SVG format is supported as well * To whom correspondence should be addressed. via a stylesheet written by Ralph Gauges (http://otto.bioquant.uniheidelberg.de/sbml/). SBML2TikZ extends existing support for the SBML Render Extension to T E X by generating a script of macros for pg fti kz. pg fti kz are a pair of languages for creating vector graphics through T E X macros (http://tug.ctan.org/tex-archive/graphics/pgf/base/doc/ generic pgf pgf manual pdf. These macros are translated by the pg fti kz interpreter into images in the PDF or PS format. The benefit of having a T E X intermediate is the ease it allows graphics to be integrated with text within a T E X document. Instead of relying on imported images, a graph can be embedded within a document as a T E X script that is converted to a resolution independent image during document compilation. Once the image is compiled, it can be used in other documents as well. The ubiquity of T E X support and extensive documentation on pg fti kz syntax (http://www.texample.net/tikz/) makes it possible for users to quickly edit rendering information post file generation. This adds a layer of flexibility to graphics generation since users can now modify their graphics outside of whichever modeling environments were used to create the SBML file. At the same time, less experienced T E X users are insulated from the pg fti kz commands since SBML2TikZ performs all essential rendering functions such as scaling, page size selection and accurate graph generation automatically.

conclusions bml2tikz enables rapid and automatic generation of T E X encoded graphics from SBML files with layout and rendering information. A variety of examples and tutorials, as well as downloads for the application and its source code (available under the new BSD license) can be found at http://sbml2tikz.org
