Standard and Consensus Clustering Analysis Tool for Microarray Data (SC 2 at md is a matlab implemented application specifically designed for the exploration of microarray gene expression data via clustering. Implementation of two versions of the clustering validation method figure of merit allows for performance comparisons between different clustering algorithms, and tailors the cluster analysis process to the varying characteristics of each dataset. Along with standard clustering algorithms this application also offers a consensus clustering method that can generate reproducible clusters across replicate experiments or different clustering algorithms. This application was designed specifically for the analysis of gene expression data, but may be used with any numerical data as long as it is in the right format. Availability: SC 2 at md may be freely downloaded from

introduction to days technological advancements have provided researchers with an abundance of information, especially in the field of molecular biology. high throughput technologies, such as microarrays, are capable of generating overwhelming amounts of biological data. Due to the large scale of these datasets, non computational analysis is unrealistic; therefore, new computational tools and techniques are needed for the efficient organization and analysis of these data. Clustering is an important exploratory tool that aids in the analysis and organization of biological data by dividing the dataset into smaller, more manageable groups based on a chosen definition of similarity. Many freely available applications, such as the Cluster and Tree View program suite (), Hierarchical Clustering Explorer v3.0 () and multi experiment Viewer v4.0 (), implement several standard clustering techniques with a multitude of options; however, selection of the most appropriate method for each dataset can be difficult, and clustering results from standard clustering algorithms are not always reproducible across replicate experiments. * To whom correspondence should be addressed to aid users in the selection of clustering options, SC 2 at md integrates two versions of the figure of merit (FOM) () with standard clustering techniques. This creates a virtually seamless process that tailors the clustering analysis according to the individual characteristics of each dataset. SC 2 at md also implements consensus clustering to address the issue of cluster reproducibility (). Consensus clustering has the ability to identify robust clusters across multiple clustering algorithms and or replicate experiments. Other features of SC 2 at md include portable tab delimited output files, the customization of figures with access to a variety of image file formats and implementation of a cluster mapping routine which is a novel technique that defines one clustering solution in terms of another. SC 2 at md was designed to aid scientific researchers in the analysis of microarray data, and has already proven to be an invaluable tool in this area. Currently, SC 2 at md is being used in the analysis of several large time course microarray experiments including the study of phenyl propan oid signaling in Arabidopsis thaliana, the early effects of osteoarthritis, and the process of dendritic cell maturation (). SC 2 at md has also proven to be an effective teaching tool with its user friendly graphical user interface (GUI) and intuitive output that is easy for students to understand.
