De novo assembly tools play a main role in reconstructing genomes from next generation sequencing (NGS) data and usually yield a number of contigs. Using paired read sequencing data it is possible to assess the order, distance and orientation of contigs and combine them into so called scaffolds. Although the latter process is a crucial step in finishing genomes, scaffolding algorithms are often built in functions in de novo assembly tools and can not be independently controlled. We here present a new tool, called s space which is a stand-alone scaffold er of pre-assembled contigs using paired read data. Main features are: a short runtime, multiple library input of paired end and or mate pair datasets and possible contig extension with unmapped sequence reads. s space shows promising results on both prokaryote and eukaryote genomic test sets where the amount of initial contigs was reduced by at least 75%. Availability: www base clear com bioinformatics tools
introduction the determination of the complete genomic sequence of a new species, also called de novo sequencing, is an important next generation sequencing (NGS) application. The task is to puzzle back millions of short sequence reads into a limited set of contiguous sequences (contigs), although in practice the total number can be rather high. This can partly be attributed to the presence of repetitive elements on the genome. paired read sequencing technology may help to reduce the amount of contigs as the known intermediate distance between read pairs can be used to place contigs in their likely order and orientation. The length of the resulting scaffolds (or supercontig s also reflects the estimated distance between the initial contigs. Illumina for instance supports two types of paired read libraries: short insert paired end and long insert mate pairs. The combination of these two types of data provides an ideal input for the scaffolding process, as it can potentially resolve repetitive structures of various sizes. Nonetheless, the majority of assembly tools provide a scaffolding option only as a built in function which can not be independently controlled, among which s sake (), Abyss () and SOAP (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed to date only a few programs are able to scaffold pre-assembled contig sequences. A commonly used tool is Bambus (), although it was not designed for the current generation of sequencing technologies. We developed the s space s sake based Scaffolding of Pre-Assembled Contigs after Extension) program to scaffold pre assemblies produced by any desired assembly tool. The input is given by a set of contig sequences and Illumina paired read files. The user can specify whether the paired reads are used only for scaffolding or also for contig extension. We compared our method to the Abyss scaffold er on a bacterial (Escherichia coli) and fungal grosman nia cla viger a. Both methods significantly reduce the number of contigs in a comparable manner, although s space achieves overall better results. To prove the suitability of s space also on large eukaryotic genomes, we tested its performance against SOAP on the giant panda genome assembly. We show that s space is a valuable tool for scaffolding pre-assembled contigs.

conclusion we have shown that s space is a powerful and effective standalone scaffold er. s space is able to scaffold large genomes in a reasonable amount of time even when using huge datasets. Our method is suited both for prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and in comparison with two built in scaffold ers s space achieves competitive results. We demonstrate that applying contig extension prior to scaffolding can further enhance the outcomes. Importantly, s space is designed in a user friendly manner and requires limited computation resources (Supplementary). We think our method is a useful addition to present NGS de novo assembly tools in the automated reconstruction of genomic sequences.
