Motivation: The ready availability of next generation sequencing has led to a situation where it is easy to produce very fragmentary genome assemblies. We present a pipeline, sw ips (Scaffolding With Protein Sequences), that uses orthologous proteins to improve low quality genome assemblies. The protein sequences are used as guides to scaffold existing contigs, while simultaneously allowing the gene structure to be predicted by homology. Results: To perform, sw ips does not depend on a high N50 or whole proteins being encoded on a single contig. We tested our algorithm on simulated next generation data from Ciona intestinalis, real next generation data from Drosophila melanogaster, a complex genome assembly of Homo sapiens and the low coverage Sanger sequence assembly of call or hinch us mil ii. The improvements in N50 are of the order of $20% for the c intestinalis and h sapiens assemblies , which is significant, considering the large size of intergenic regions in these eukaryotes. Using the ce gma pipeline to assess the gene space represented in the genome assemblies, the number of genes retrieved increased by 4110% for cmi lii and from 20 to 40% for c intestinalis. The scaffold error rates are low: 85–90% of scaffolds are fully correct, and 495% of local contig joins are correct. Availability: sw ips is available freely for download at

introduction new sequencing technologies have lowered the cost of generating genomic DNA sequence to the point where high coverage of a moderately sized animal genome (e.g.51 Gb) can be obtained for a few thousand euros. Currently, short read lengths (i.e. 100 250 bp) present challenges for assembling sequence into a complete genome, usually owing to an inability of short reads to bridge repetitive sequence. This problem can be circumvented by using paired end or mate paired reads with different insert sizes long enough to span repetitive regions. For instance, the genome of the giant panda () and, more recently, the one of the naked moler at () have been sequenced using short read sequencing technology alone and achieved high quality. Both projects used multiple libraries; the latter used 18 paired end sequencing libraries with 8 different insert sizes spanning 170 bp to 20 kbp. This strategy has the disadvantage of incurring significant extra cost, and large insert size libraries require larger amounts of DNA that may not be readily available for some tax a. Apart from mainstream de novo assemblers, several groups have worked on incorporating available related assembled genomes into the assembly process (). For instance, it is standard procedure (e.g. the orangutan genome project,) to use whole genome alignments to build super scaffolds by aligning the new assembly to the high quality genome of closely related species. Many species, however, are sequenced precisely because they are not closely related to species for which a complete genome is available. Thus, other approaches have been adopted to increase assembly contiguity. In, for example, researchers exploited the eukaryote exon intron gene structure and used rnase q data to scaffold contigs from a Caenorhabditis nematode genome, increasing the initial N50 from 5.0 to 9.4 kb. This strategy obviously requires the generation of rnase q data in addition to genomic sequence, and genes that are not expressed in the rnase q library will not be available for scaffolding. As protein sequences are generally well conserved across distant tax a (compared with non-coding or DNA sequences), a possible way to deal with fragmented initial assemblies is to use orthologous proteins to guide the scaffolding of contigs that encode fragments of the same proteins. sur get grob a and montoya burgos used orthologous proteins to guide transcriptome assembly by mapping contigs onto a related protein set and improved the N50 of their zebrafish transcriptome assembly by up to 42% sur get. The presence of introns, large intergenic regions and the much larger volume of data involved in genome assemblies, however, make this a fundamentally more difficult problem. Salzberg et al. introduced a gene boosting algorithm that used amino acid sequences from predicted proteins to improve the scaffolding of a 6 Mb bacterial genome, although again, as bacterial proteins lack introns, this is a somewhat easier problem to approach (). Here, we present an algorithm that uses proteome sets from different species to guide scaffolding of genome assemblies of various qualities (including highly fragmented ones, e.g. N50 5 3 kb). In this article, we use the term scaffolding to refer to the process of ordering and orienting contigs, although we recognize that we do not estimate distances between contigs. We call this sw ips (Scaffolding With Protein Sequences). Existing algorithms and strategies, including the Ensembl gene build process for low coverage assemblies, and g pipe (Heger *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/3.0/), which permits unrestricted reuse, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. and), are not suited for highly fragmented assemblies where a gene may be spread over multiple contigs. sw ips uses orthologous proteins (possibly from distantly related species) as guides to link exons of the same protein that may be situated on different contigs. To our knowledge, only one other published method, ESPRIT (), does this. ESPRIT was used to bridge 666 call or hinch us mil ii contigs from a sanger based assembly together and reported precision of $80%. ESPRIT, however, assumes a uniform evolutionary rate over the entire length of split proteins, something that is clearly questionable in the general case. We present a novel score optimization framework for scaffolding contigs and a strategy to optimize this score to improve the contiguity of novel assemblies, reduce their fragmentation, as well as predict the content of their exo mes. We tested sw ips on a set of genomic assemblies of simulated Ciona intestinalis next generation sequencing data, real sequencing data from Drosophila melanogaster, as well as the Sanger sequenced, but low coverage (1.4) assembly of cmi lii and a pre-assembled genome of Homo sapiens.

discussion we have shown that our method is able to use protein sequences to order and orient contigs into scaffolds, thus improving assembly contiguity and gene prediction, showing significant improvements over the only other available tool. Although the overall improvements in N50 found by sw ips may appear modest, they should be understood with reference to the fact that the majority of most animal genomes is composed of non-coding sequence, and thus not amenable to scaffolding via protein coding sequences. To confidently scaffold exon containing regions on different contigs, we need to be sure that they come from the same gene. In the context of this problem, the most obvious way of doing this is by assuming that our guide protein comes from a gene that shares a 1:1 or many 1 orthologous relationship with the gene encoded by the exons. We thus need to test that each exonic since human genes are known to possess longer introns than general eukaryotic genes, we allowed 200 kb (instead of 100 kb) to assess the accuracy of sw ips on the human assembly.. Example of five contigs scaffolded using sw ips. Protein SACC29144576 links contigs scaffold 23914 'C5811784' and scaffold 25071 together, whereas SPUR115976525 links contigs scaffold 23914 'C5926424' and scaffold 5359 together. The two protein models allow sw ips to scaffold all contigs together. Each arrow represents a region of homology (dark grey); the intron exon structure (light grey and dark grey) of the orthologous proteins is clearly represented within each scaffold 164 Y.I.Li and rr copley
