Motivation: The S/TQ cluster domain (SCD) constitutes a new type of protein domain that is not defined by sequence similarity but by the presence of multiple S/TQ motifs within a variable stretch of amino acids. s cds are recognized targets for DNA damage response (DDR) kinases like ATM and at r. Characterizing DDR targets is of significant interest. The aim of this work was to develop a web based tool to allow for easy identification and visualization of s cds within specific proteins or in whole proteome sets, a feature not supported by current domain and motif search tools. Results: We have developed an algorithm that (i) generates a list of all proteins in an organism containing at least one user defined SCD within their sequence, or (ii) identifies and renders a visual representation of all user defined s cds present in a single sequence or batch of sequences. Availability and implementation: The application was developed using Pearl and Python, and is available at the following

introduction atm and at r are the chief controlling kinases of a cell's response to DNA damage (). The complete set of ATM and at r at matr targets is currently unknown, but several high throughput studies suggest that the final tally could be well over a thousand proteins (). Furthermore, there is growing evidence for ATM functions even in the absence of DNA damage, although direct at matr targets in those pathways are currently mostly uncharacterized (). Both ATM and at r preferentially phosphorylate substrates on serine or threonine residues that are followed by a glutamine (S/TQ). Their specificity for this motif is such that mutations on the glutamine can be as deleterious for function as mutating the serine or the threonine (). In addition, several well known at matr targets contain clusters of more than one S/TQ motif within a small region of the protein. This observation led to the description of the SCD, a new type of domain that is not defined by a rigidly conserved sequence similarity but rather by the presence of at least three S/TQ motifs within a stretch of 100 amino acids (). This domain is present in 43 of 81 of the better characterized ATM targets in mammalian cells, and it can also be found in more than half of 686 human proteins identified in a high throughput analysis as containing phosphorylated S/TQ motifs (). Studies using a more stringent SCD definition (three S/TQ in 50 amino acids) found this domain present four times more abundantly in the yeast proteome than expected by random generation and concentrated in proteins belonging to pathways known to be under at matr control (). Searching for proteins that may contain an SCD is not a simple task, given the domain's arbitrary length and structural diversity that has been observed to date. Current tools for motif or domain identification (like SMART, which is designed to search for signaling domain sequences) typically rely on conserved sequence similarity and are thus not best suited for searching for SCD domains. Even ELM, which identifies functional motifs in eukaryotic proteins and has a phospho blast tool that identifies phosphorylated serines, threonine s and tyrosines, does not identify s cds. Similarly, most motif finding tools do not support the search for multiple motifs in regions of limited length. While it is possible to use the ScanProsite tool with a user defined pattern, the SCD is not part of the default ProSite collection of motifs. A user can submit a customized search pattern, but whole genome analysis is not possible without integrating to an external bioinformatics pipeline to perform the necessary filtering of the initial results, which requires programming abilities by the user. To facilitate this process, we have created scd finder a web based tool that allows a user to easily search for scd containing proteins in different proteomes using a user determined SCD definition. This program can also be used to identify and visualize user defined SCD domains within a given sequence or in a batch of submitted sequences.

discussions cd finder is a new web based tool for the detection and visualization of user defined s cds within single proteins, a set of proteins, or entire proteomes. It can be used to identify putative novel at matr substrates or to reveal new pathways under the possible control of these kinases. This tool may be particularly useful to investigate the function of at matr in the absence of DNA damage by identifying potential direct targets that may have been missed in studies that fail to reproduce the conditions under which these kinases are activated. Other valuable applications may include its use in comparative proteomics studies or to determine the optimal SCD definition for different organisms.. Flowchart depicting the step-wise process followed in scd finder. Also shown is an example of the output, showing a retrieved protein sequence highlighted (S/TQ motif in red, SCD in green) for easy identification of the SCD
