Knowledge of the subcellular location of a protein provides valuable information about its function and possible interaction with other proteins. In the post genomic era, fast and accurate predictors of subcellular location are required if this abundance of sequence data is to be fully exploited. We have developed a subcellular localization predictor scl pred which predicts the location of a protein into four classes for animals and fungi and five classes for plants (secreted, cytoplasm, nucleus, mitochondrion and chloroplast) using machine learning models trained on large non-redundant sets of protein sequences. The algorithm powering scl pred is a novel Neural Network (N-to-1 Neural Network, or N1-NN) we have developed, which is capable of mapping whole sequences into single properties (a functional class, in this work) without resorting to predefined transformations, but rather by adaptively compressing the sequence into a hidden feature vector. We benchmark scl pred against other publicly available predictors using two benchmarks including a new subset of Swiss-Prot Release 2010_06. We show that scl pred surpasses the state of the art. The N1-NN algorithm is fully general and may be applied to a host of problems of similar shape, that is, in which a whole sequence needs to be mapped into a fixed size array of properties, and the adaptive compression it operates may shed light on the space of protein sequences. Availability: The predictive systems described in this article are publicly available as a web server at

introduction with the recent advances in high throughput sequencing technology, there has been a rapid increase in the availability of sequence information. To fully exploit, this information sequences need to be annotated quickly and accurately, which has led to the development of automated annotation systems. A major step toward determining the function of a protein is determining its subcellular localization (SCL). Knowledge of the location of the protein sheds light not only on where it might function but also what other proteins it might interact with, as, in order to interact, proteins must inhabit * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the same location or physically adjacent compartments, at least temporarily. There is a growing gap between the number of proteins that have reliable SCL annotations and the number of known protein sequences. Experimental approaches to SCL prediction are time consuming and expensive, whereas computational methods can provide fast and increasingly accurate localization predictions. There are various different mechanisms by which a protein is directed to a particular location in the cell, and there are many possible compartments in which eukaryotic proteins may be located. Some nuclear proteins have a nuclear localization signal (NLS), which may occur anywhere in the sequence (). Most secreted, mitochondrial and chloro plastic proteins have n terminal cleavable peptides (SP, mTP and cTP), but many proteins have no known motif (), and many are known not to have n terminal peptides (). Even in these cases, the information contained in a protein sequence may be sufficient to predict the protein's location in the cell, given that residue and k residue frequencies correlate with locations (). There are many methods for the prediction of SCL that can be roughly divided into two groups: homology or knowledge based which rely on similarity to another sequence of known location, or other known information about the sequence or similar sequences, for example WoLF PSORT () or she rloc (); and de novo or ab initio, sequence based methods, which may use evolutionary information in the form of multiple sequence alignments (MSAs), but do not depend on similarity to sequences of known location, for example ba cello (). We predict SCL for eukaryotes only, which we divide into animals, plants and fungi. There are many potential classes of subcellular localization, and different prediction systems sometimes use different class subdivisions, ranging from 3 () up to more than 10 classes (). Here, similarly to ba cello (), to which we directly compare our results, we consider four subcellular localizations for animals and fungi and five for plants: nucleus, cytoplasm, mitochondrion, chloroplast and secreted. In a first series of tests, we adopt essentially the same experimental setting as in () and (), to which we compare our predictor. We then take a further step by developing new, redundancy reduced training and testing sets starting with Swiss-Prot release page 2813 28122819
