Motivation: The coiled coil is a ubiquitous α-helical protein structure domain that directs and facilitates protein protein interactions in a wide variety of biological processes. At the protein sequence level, coiled coils are quite straightforward and readily recognized via the conspicuous heptad repeats of hydrophobic and polar residues. However, structurally they are more complicated, existing in a range of oligomer states and topologies. Here, we address the issue of predicting coiled coil oligomeric state from protein sequence.

introduction the coiled coil is a protein structure domain comprising two or more -helices wound around each other, usually in a left handed fashion () (). By using the super fam method to detect coiled coil containing superfamilies of proteins, it has been estimated that on average 2.9% of open reading frames across all genomes contain regions that encode coiled coils (range, 0.36.5%) ().Moreover, coiled coil domains play roles in mediating protein protein interactions across a wide array of biological functions from transcription, through membrane remodeling, to cell and tissue structure and stability. Despite this ubiquity and diversity, a relatively straightforward sequence motif of hydrophobic (H) and polar (P) residues hp php pp underlies most coiled coil structures. The positions in these so called heptad repeats are labeled a through g, with the hydrophobic sites falling at the a and d positions. Traditionally, it is these repeats that are identified by coiled coil region prediction algorithms (vide infra). However, this apparent simplicity of coiled coil sequences hides considerable complexity in their 3D structures: coiled coil assemblies can have different numbers of helices, which may be in parallel or antiparallel arrangements, and may be formed from the same (homo) or different (hetero) helical sequences (). coiled coil structure prediction, then, can be aimed at one or more of three problems 1 Given a protein sequence, can we accurately identify coiled coil regions 2 Given a coiled coil sequence, can we correctly assign its architecture and topology 3 Given two or more coiled coil sequences, can we predict how these combine to form functional assemblies here we focus on the second problem, and specifically on oligomer state prediction. However, the first problem of locating coiled coil page
