Motivation: protein protein interactions play vital functional roles in various biological phenomena. Physical contacts between proteins have been revealed using experimental approaches that have solved the structures of protein complexes at atomic resolution. To examine the huge number of protein complexes available in the Protein Data Bank, an efficient automated method that compares protein complexes is required. Results: We have developed Structural Comparison of Protein Complexes (SCPC), a novel method to structurally compare protein complexes. SCPC compares the spatial arrangements of subunits in a complex with those in another complex using secondary structure elements. Similar substructures are detected in two protein complexes and the similarity is scored. SCPC was applied to dimers, homo oligomers and haemoglobin s. SCPC properly estimated structural similarities between the dimers examined as well as an existing method, mm align. Conserved substructures were detected in a homo tetramer and a homo hexamer composed of homologous proteins. Classification of quaternary structures of haemoglobin s using SCPC was consistent with the conventional classification. The results demonstrate that SCPC is a valuable tool to investigate the structures of protein complexes. Availability: SCPC is available at http://idp1.force.cs.is.nagoya-u ac jps cpc
introduction proteins are crucial molecules in biological phenomena that function via specific interactions with target molecules, including small ligand molecules, other proteins and nucleic acids. Such molecular interactions are involved in biological processes including various kinds of metabolism, signal transduction and transcriptional regulation. Numerous protein protein interactions have been experimentally identified using high throughput techniques, such as the yeast two hybrid system (), and the results are available in open public databases (). In addition, structures of protein complexes have been * To whom correspondence should be addressed. determined at atomic resolution by X-ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance, and this information has been deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (). Currently, the number of structural complexes in the PDB is rapidly increasing (Supplementary). To process such large numbers of structural complexes and derive valuable biological insights from them, an automated method to compare the structures of protein complexes is required. Data processing of the huge amount of sequences and structures of bio macromolecules has been facilitated by automated comparison methods; for example, the Needleman Wunsch algorithm (), fast a (), BLAST () and the s search () for protein and nucleic acid sequences, and DALI (), SSAP (), VAST (), CE (), MATRAS () and tm align () for protein structures. These methods have also made significant contributions to various studies on the structure, function and evolution of bio macromolecules. An improved understanding of many aspects of structural complexes and protein protein interactions is obtained by employing automated comparison methods. One of these is the comparative analysis of structural complexes composed of evolutionary related proteins. When proteins constitute a protein complex, their orthologous proteins also frequently form complexes. By applying an automated comparison method to these protein complexes, the evolutionary relationships between structure variation and sequence diversity can be revealed. Such a method also enables us to compare a query structural complex with each structure in databases and retrieve the structures that are similar to the query structure. This approach can be further extended to an exhaustive comparison among all existing structures of protein complexes. Similar structures are grouped into a cluster and a variety of clusters each consisting of similar complexes are subsequently obtained from the analysis. The resulting data present a comprehensive classification of protein complexes. Therefore, the development of an automated method to compare the structures of protein complexes would facilitate future investigations into protein complexes and protein protein interactions. In general, in the comparison of two structural complexes, each subunit of a complex exclusively corresponds to one subunit of the other complex. Exploring subunit correspondence is a unique process of comparing protein complexes that is not required for comparing protein structures. Currently, only a few methods have been proposed investigated structures of dimeric proteins, in which the subunit correspondence was provided in
