Background: The sc pdb database is an annotated archive of drug gable binding sites extracted from the Protein Data Bank. It contains all atoms coordinates for 8166 protein ligand complexes, chosen for their geometrical and physico-chemical properties. The sc pdb provides a functional annotation for proteins, a chemical description for ligands and the detailed intermolecular interactions for complexes. The sc pdb now includes a hierarchical classification of all the binding sites within a functional class. Method: The sc pdb entries were first clustered according to the protein name in different of the species. For each cluster, we identified dissimilar sites (e.g. catalytic and allosteric sites of an enzyme). Scope and applications: The classification of sc pdb targets by binding site diversity was intended to facilitate chemo genomics approaches to drug design. In ligand based approaches, it avoids comparing ligands that do not share the same binding site. In structure based approaches, it permits to quantitatively evaluate the diversity of the binding site definition (variations in size, sequence and or structure).

introduction the Protein Data Bank (PDB) is the main public resource of biologically active 3D structures available to study the interactions that govern ligand binding to protein (). To assist structure based approaches in drug design, we have parsed the PDB to identify binding sites suitable for the docking of a drug like ligand and so have created a database named sc pdb. The protein selection is based on the molecular weight, buried surface area and chemical structure of ligands as well as the volume of corresponding cavities (). Since its creation in 2004, the database is updated annually, with regular improvements. Notably, the curation of ligand chemical structures (2005), the optimization of ligand bound coordinates (2005) and the systematic description of the ligand binding mode (2006) give significant added values to the structural information contained in the database. The sc pdb is annotated at a functional level and a sc pdb target name is assigned to each entry. However, two sc pdb entries * To whom correspondence should be addressed with the same sc pdb target name do not necessarily describe an identical binding site. For example, there are 37 copies of the tyrosine kinase scr in the sc pdb (); in 24 entries, the binding site is the ATP binding site of the kinase domain (Site 1), while in other entries, the binding site is located in the SH2 domain and accommodates ligands of variable size (Sites 2 and 3). The present application aims at the distinction of the sc pdb binding sites for a particular protein. A hierarchical classification was established based on the geometrical and physico-chemical diversity of binding sites. All the binding sites found similar for a given protein were structurally aligned to yield a new set of coordinates for the ligand, site and protein files.
