Determination of haplotypes is important for modelling the phenotypic consequences of genetic variation in diploid organisms, including cis regulatory control and compound heterozygosity. We realized that single cell rnase q scrn a seq data are well suited for phasing genetic variants, since both transcriptional bursts and technical bottlenecks cause pronounced allelic fluctuations in individual single cells. Here we present sc phaser an R package that phases alleles at heterozygous variants to reconstruct haplotypes within transcribed regions of the genome using scrn a seq data. The devised method efficiently and accurately reconstructed the known haplotype for !93% of p has able genes in both human and mouse. It also enables phasing of rare and de novo variants and variants far apart within genes, which is hard to attain with population based computational inference. Availability and Implementation: sc phaser is implemented as an R package. Tutorial and code are available at https://

introduction the haplotype phase, the sequence of alleles present on the same nucleic acid molecule, such as the maternal or paternal copy of a chromosome, is of importance to reveal relationships between DNA sequence and phenotype. Major efforts have been made using expression quantitative trait loci studies to identify cis regulatory variants that affect gene expression. Making use of allele specific expression (ASE) increases the power of such studies; however, to reach the full potential of ase based approaches require or depend on phased alleles within genes (). Phase information is also important for associating clinical outcomes to genetic variation, e.g. to identify cases of compound heterozygosity where risk alleles at different loci do not co occur on the same DNA molecule but affect both homologous copies of a gene.

discussion we conclude that phasing by leveraging the imbalanced ASE frequently observed in full length scrn a seq data is both accurate and fast. Using RNA instead of DNA enables phasing of variants located far apart from each other within a gene due to introns. As data from only a single individual is needed sc phaser can also phase rare and de novo variants. The number of genes available for phasing depends on (i) the number of sequenced single cells, (ii) cell type, as the number of expressed genes vary considerably between cell types, (iii) the number of heterozygous variants in the individual, where genetically distant parents yield higher heterozygosity, (iv) sequencing depth and (v) the efficiency of the full length scrn a seq protocol. The retrieved gene phase information has important applications in functional and clinical genomics, such as empowering cis regulatory variation studies and in elucidating the impact of haplotype structures on phenotypic outcome and response.
