The genomics era provides opportunities to assess the genetic overlap across phenotypes at the measured genotype level; however, current approaches require individual level genome wide association (GWA) single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotype data in one or both of a pair of GWA samples. To facilitate the discovery of pleiotropic effects and examine genetic overlap across two phenotypes, I have developed a user friendly web based application called SECA to perform SNP effect concordance analysis using GWA summary results.

introduction epidemiological and clinical studies indicate many human complex disorders co occur within an individual, whereas family and twin studies suggest correlations in familial and genetic liabilities. Since 2007, 41700 genome wide association studies g was have been performed to identify common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), associated with 4890 phenotypes (disease endpoints or quantitative traits) (). A surprising finding of g was is that many loci show pleiotropic effects by being associated with more than one distinct phenotype. A study of 1380 genes and 1687 SNPs listed in the NHGRI Catalog of Published g was www genome gov gwa studies accessed February 4, 2011) found 16.9% of genes and 4.6% of SNPs show pleiotropic effects (). Identifying and taking advantage of genetic overlap across phenotypes can improve detection of genetic risk factors because when risk is correlated across phenotypes, pooled analyses will be better powered than individual disorder analyses. Genetic overlap can also help determine whether our current classification and categorization of diseases are valid or whether genetic similarities traverse current divisions. Understanding pleiotropic effects is also important for drug development. For example, if a gene has opposing effects on different common diseases, drug development and marketing will be greatly complicated. Knowledge of pleiotropic associations could help to predict and avoid adverse side effects. Polygenic prediction, or genetic risk score (GRS), analysis () and bivariate linear mixed model bivariate gct a analysis () have recently been developed to assess the genetic overlap across phenotypes. GRS analysis requires g was summary results for a discovery sample dataset 1 to construct a score in an independent target sample dataset 2 by forming the weighted sum of associated alleles (i.e. a GRS) within each subject (thus requiring individual level GWA SNP genotype data for the target sample). Association between the GRS and a phenotype in the target sample implies genetic overlap between the discovery and target phenotypes. The bivariate gct a approach requires individual level population based GWA SNP genotype data for both the discovery and target sample to estimate the genetic correlation explained by SNPs between pairs of quantitative traits or pairs of binary traits. For example, the snp based genetic correlation (r g SNP ) will be positive when the cases of one (discovery) trait show higher genetic similarity (i.e. pairwise genetic relationship estimated from genome wide SNP genotype data) to the cases of the other (target) trait, than they do to their own (discovery) controls. The sharing of individual level genotype and phenotype data requires application, material transfer agreement, informed consent and ethical consideration (). Given most large GWA studies meta analyze summary results from multiple independent samples, the sharing of individual level GWA SNP genotype data is often difficult, if not impossible. Therefore, to overcome these challenges, I have developed a user friendly web based application called SECA to perform SNP effect concordance analysis using g was summary results.
