Motivation: Sharing genomic data is crucial to support scientific investigation such as genome wide association studies. However, recent investigations suggest the privacy of the individual participants in these studies can be compromised, leading to serious concerns and consequences, such as overly restricted access to data. Results: We introduce a novel cryptographic strategy to securely perform meta analysis for genetic association studies in large consortia. Our methodology is useful for supporting joint studies among dispar-ate data sites, where privacy or confidentiality is of concern. We validate our method using three multisite association studies. Our research shows that genetic associations can be analyzed efficiently and accurately across substudy sites, without leaking information on individual participants and site level association summaries. Availability and implementation: Our software for secure meta analysis of genetic association studies, secure ma is publicly available at http://github.com/XieConnect/SecureMA. Our customized secure computation framework is also publicly available at http://github. com

introduction decreasing costs in sequencing technologies, in combination with large repositories of clinical information, has enabled the discovery of novel associations between genetic variants and disease. These achievements are facilitated by increased collection and reuse of genomic data (), as well as broad efforts to obtain larger sample sizes (by sharing and combing data) for increased statistical power (). meta analysis is a common solution for aggregating substudy results across large consortia to achieve this goal. In fact, meta analysis is responsible for $37% of the 15 845 genome trait associations listed in the NHGRI genome wide association studies g was Catalog (). At the same time, the sensitive nature of genomic data has led to numerous discussions around the governance of genomic records (). Currently, policy and advisory groups recommend removing identifying information (e.g. personal names) to uphold the privacy of study participants (; Presidential Commission for the Study of Bioethical). Yet, the efficacy of such protections is increasingly being questioned (). Various studies demonstrate that the identity of participants, as well as sensitive information (such as disease status) can still be inferred from the shared genomic data (). This can occur by leveraging an individual's genome sequence or the study summary statistics about associations, such as genotype frequencies and allelic regression coefficients that would be used in meta analysis. Most recently, it was shown that an individual's identity could be ascertained through y chromosome short tandem repeats y strs using public genealogy databases on the internet (). While certain privacy attacks may seem non-trivial in the knowledge necessary to be executed, they have already raised serious concerns from scientists, policy makers and the general public. They have also led to reduced sharing of genome sequences and site level summary statistics. For instance, based on (), the NIH and Wellcome Trust stopped sharing aggregate genomic data directly to the public (). These demonstrations have also influenced proposed regulations [e.g., (, some of which would designate all bio specimens and their derived data as identifiable (U.S. Department H.H.S., 2011). To address the privacy concerns on individual genomic information as well as site level summary statistics, we engineered a practical protocol to securely perform meta analysis for genotype phenotype association studies across substudy sites in large consortia (). Our protocol leverages cryptographically secure technology to provide provable security guarantees. Unlike alternative proposals (), in our protocol, substudy sites retain full control of their respective individual participants' data and local site analyses. This allows each site to make appropriate adjustments to effect estimates to account for *To whom correspondence should be addressed. study specific differences in design, which is pervasive in multisite studies but not supported in (). Our protocol also allows sites to contribute to meta analysis without exposing site level summary statistics. Such comprehensive protections make our protocol impervious to popular privacy attacks over genomic data at both the individual and site level. In this article, we demonstrate the design and implementation of our secure meta analysis protocol (called secure ma and provide empirical evaluations with three separate multisite genetic association studies.

DISCUSSION

conclusion this work illustrates that the privacy of individual participants, and site level summary statistics, in genetic association meta analysis can be guaranteed without sacrificing the ability to perform analysis that use shared data. Our proposal, secure ma is useful for running joint studies over disparate data sites in large consortia, where privacy or confidentiality is a concern. If appropriately implemented, our approach can prevent privacy intrusions posed by the attacks published to date. While there are opportunities to make this protocol more efficient and to incorporate quality control measures, we believe it is possible to enable much broader analytic access to genomic data for the purposes of effect estimation and statistical association via meta analysis
