In this article we present Simple Exploration of Ecological Data (Seed), a data exploration tool for microbial communities. Seed is written in R using the Shiny library. This provides access to powerful r based functions and libraries through a simple user interface. Seed allows users to explore ecological datasets using principal coordinate analyses, scatter plots, bar plots, hierarchal clustering and heat maps. Availability and implementation: Seed is open source and available at https://github.com/danlbek/Seed. Contact:

introduction the proliferation of microbial community profiling is allowing researchers to study microbial communities in new ways. Increasingly, researchers in diverse fields are asking questions relating to how microbial communities vary across samples. For example, researchers studying the human microbio me are interested in how microbial composition changes across body sites and through time (HMP). Researchers studying disease look at how microbial communities differ between samples from healthy and unhealthy individuals (). It is now standard practice to use cultivation independent high throughput sequencing to identify the microbial composition of many samples. This produces a wealth of data about microbial composition in many different environments and conditions. In conjunction with advances in sequencing resources, researchers have developed a number of powerful software tools to analyze and visualize this wealth of data. Packages such as mo thur () and q ii me () aggregate many tools to allow researchers to quickly and efficiently process large sequencing datasets. These currently available packages excel at performing robust, computationally intensive calculations that attempt to minimize the effects of noise and sequencing artifacts on downstream analyses. They often use a non-visual interface for analysis, even when they provide a graphical user interface for their own functions, requiring the user to know specific command and parameter combinations. While this setup is ideal for pipeline development, it is often a hindrance for data exploration. Simple Exploration of Ecological Data (Seed) fills a currently unmet need for a tool that allows researchers to quickly and easily visualize and explore the data that results from these pipelines. This so called exploratory data analysis has an 'important place in the toolbox of ecologists' (). Though there are texts that recommend specific exploratory techniques (), we know of no tool such as Seed that bundles appropriate tools into an easy to use system for non programmers. In this article, we present Seed, a software package that focuses on data exploration and visualization of microbial community data derived from high throughput sequencing. abundance and Hellinger transformations. Seed is not limited to microbial data, though that was our primary research domain. It can be used to explore any data that include both feature counts and values for response variables. Once the user has imported and verified their dataset, they may easily explore their data with many plot types. Examples of some of the plots generated by Seed are shown in the supplementary information. Many of the plots include options to incorporate sample information by coloring points or bars according to metadata values. This allows users to easily visualize the relationship between the sample metadata and the structure of the microbial communities present in the samples. The design of Seed emphasizes simplicity over exhaustive inclusion of parameters. In many or most cases, researchers will use Seed to understand general trends in the data, which may then inform more specialized analyses. Seed is designed to quickly explore ecological datasets and to act as a hypothesis generating tool. Publication quality figures and polished analyses are beyond the current scope of this project, though Seed can output all plots in pdf or png format. Additionally, large dataset analysis may be too slow for a comfortable user experience. Note, however, that we used published microbio me and patient data with nearly 400 samples and 250 tax a () on a standard laptop while preparing this publication. Seed is certainly capable of handling datasets with hundreds of samples and more than a thousand tax a. As with any software package, not all analyses have been implemented in Seed. We encourage users to also consider other visualization tools including phylo seq () for analyses incorporating phylogenetic relationships and EMPeror (V az que z for pco a analyses of very large datasets. Additionally, while Seed provides some guidance for users, tool selection and result interpretation still relies on user expertise.
