Motivation: The systematic observation of phenotypes has become a crucial tool of functional genomics, and several large international projects are currently underway to identify and characterize the phenotypes that are associated with genotypes in several species. To integrate phenotype descriptions within and across species, phenotype ontologies have been developed. Applying ontologies to unify phenotype descriptions in the domain of physiology has been a particular challenge due to the high complexity of the underlying domain. Results: In this study, we present the outline of a theory and its implementation for an ontology of physiology related phenotypes. We provide a formal description of process attributes and relate them to the attributes of their temporal parts and participants. We apply our theory to create the Cellular Phenotype Ontology (CPO). The CPO is an ontology of morphological and physiological phenotypic characteristics of cells, cell components and cellular processes. Its prime application is to provide terms and uniform definition patterns for the annotation of cellular phenotypes. The CPO can be used for the annotation of observed abnormalities in domains, such as systems microscopy, in which cellular abnormalities are observed and for which no phenotype ontology has been created. Availability and implementation: The CPO and the source code we generated to create the CPO are freely available on

introduction phenotype studies on all scales and levels of granularity are now an invaluable tool for functional genomics research. Phenotypes of targeted mutations in animal models are now systematically recorded to reveal the role of individual genes within a biological system. These phenotype studies now play a key role in translational * To whom correspondence should be addressed. research and are being used to reveal candidate genes for orphan diseases and to identify chemicals that may have effects on these diseases (). The large volume and diversity of phenotypes within different species and across multiple scales and levels of granularity necessitates the application of flexible strategies for managing and integrating data so that it becomes amenable to automated comparative analyses. To integrate biomedical data across heterogeneous information systems, biomedical ontologies are being developed (). An ontology is an explicit specification of a conceptualization of a domain and can be used to make the meaning of terms in a vocabulary explicit (). They play a crucial role in the annotation of biomedical data and the integration of model organism databases (). Ontologies increasingly rely on the use of Semantic Web technologies (). The Semantic Web provides a stack of protocols and languages to include explicit semantics in websites. In particular, the Web Ontology Language (OWL) () has been designed to express and share ontologies within the Semantic Web. OWL is a language based on description logics (a group of formal languages based on first order predicate logic). Automated reasoners have been developed within the Semantic Web to perform complex operations on ontologies formulated in OWL. In particular, automated reasoners can verify an ontology s consistency and use deductive inference to perform powerful queries over ontologies. To benefit from automated reasoning and the rapidly increasing number of software tools that are being developed within the Semantic Web, most biomedical ontologies are now available in OWL or can be converted into an owl based representation (). In the domain of phenotypes, multiple ontologies have been developed. In particular, ontologies to characterize mammalian (), human (), yeast () and worm () phenotypes are now available, while several more phenotype ontologies are under development. To benefit from automated reasoning, integrate phenotypes across species and reuse the content of anatomy and process ontologies, we have defined process classes using the framework of the Phenotypic Attribute and Trait ontology pa to
DISCUSSION
