Motivation: Semiconductor sequencing directly translates chemically encoded information (A, C, G or T) into voltage signals that are detected by a semiconductor device. Changes of pH value and thereby of the electric potential in the reaction well are detected during strand synthesis from nucleotides provided in cyclic repeated flows for each type of nucleotide. To minimize time requirement and costs, it is necessary to know the number of flows that are required for complete coverage of the templates. Results: We calculate the number of required flows in a random sequence model and present exact expressions for cumulative distribution function, expected value and variance. Additionally, we provide an algorithm to calculate the number of required flows for a concrete list of amplicons using a BED file of genomic positions as input. We apply the algorithm to calculate the number of flows that are required to cover six amplicon panels that are used for targeted sequencing in cancer research. The upper bounds obtained for the number of flows allow to enhance the instrument throughput from two chips to three chips per day for four of these panels. Availability and implementation: The algorithm for calculation of the flows was implemented in R and is available as package ion flows from the CRAN repository.

introduction for more than 25 years, the chain termination method developed by was the predominating method for DNA sequencing. Pyrosequencing was one of the first methods for DNA sequencing that is based on sequencing by synthesis rather than chain termination (). Since the late 1990s, further next generation sequencing (NGS) methods have been developed and a technology development race started to achieve the $1000 genome. Most of the NGS technologies such as 454 pyrosequencing () or Illumina sequencing () rely on the generation of light signals upon incorporation of one of the four nucleotides A, C, G or T into the new DNA strand. In contrast, semiconductor sequencing () uses a different approach that is based on direct measurement of electric potential changes induced by the release of protons (H) during strand synthesis. In semiconductor sequencing, the reaction wells are sequentially flooded by one of the nucleotides A, C, G and T. Whenever the offered nucleotide is complementary to the template DNA strand at the actual position, it is incorporated into the new strand and induces a change in the electric potential in the reaction well. Using the scalable technology of ion sensitive field effect transistors (ISFET) organized in highly integrated circuits, millions of wells can be interrogated at the same time. An ISFET detects a voltage signal,) allows sequencing of templates of a length of up to 200 bp or 400 bp using a novel chemistry. The Ion Personal Genome Machine (PGM) system is suited for targeted sequencing of disease relevant regions of the human genome or complete sequencing of smaller genomes, e.g. of microbes. Ion PGM Sequencing 200 kit includes reagents for sequencing of amplicons up to 200 bp. Using this sequencing kit, a total number of 1000 flows can be executed, which are usually split to 2  500 and running of two sequencing chips. Here, we present an approach to compute the number of flows required to sequence a DNA template of length n. These are the main results of our study: (i) while k  3n  1 flows are needed to sequence each template of length n to the full length, in most situations, a much lower number of flows suffices. (ii) In a random sequence model, we calculate the cumulative distribution function of the number of required flows and its expected value and variance. (iii) We provide an algorithm to calculate the number of required flows for a concrete amplicon panel from a BED file of genomic positions. In semiconductor sequencing, the sequencing depth and the number of flows are independent quantities. We present a formula to calculate the sequencing depth from the number of amplicons and the number of samples that are sequenced in parallel.
