Motivation: Gene expression profiling has shown great potential in outcome prediction for different types of cancers. Nevertheless, small sample size remains a bottleneck in obtaining robust and accurate classifiers. Traditional supervised learning techniques can only work with labeled data. Consequently, a large number of microarray data that do not have sufficient follow-up information are disregarded. To fully leverage all of the precious data in public databases, we turned to a semi supervised learning technique, low density separation (LDS). Results: Using a clinically important question of predicting recurrence risk in colorectal cancer patients, we demonstrated that (i) semi supervised classification improved prediction accuracy as compared with the state of the art supervised method SVM, (ii) performance gain increased with the number of unlabeled samples, (iii) unlabeled data from different institutes could be employed after appropriate processing and (iv) the LDS method is robust with regard to the number of input features. To test the general applicability of this semi supervised method, we further applied LDS on human breast cancer datasets and also observed superior performance. Our results demonstrated great potential of semi supervised learning in gene expression based outcome prediction for cancer patients.

introduction a major challenge in clinical cancer research is the prediction of prognosis at the time of tumor discovery. Accurate outcome prediction can help guide the selection of appropriate therapy for each individual patient. For example, if patients can be accurately assigned to a low risk or a high risk subgroup based on whether the disease would relapse within a certain amount of time after tumor resection, adjuvant chemotherapy (CTX) can be administered to high risk patients, while low risk patients might for go this toxic treatment. microarray based gene expression profiling has showed great potential in outcome prediction for different types of cancers (To whom correspondence should be addressed 2002. Nevertheless, small sample size remains a bottleneck in obtaining robust and accurate prediction models (). The number of samples in microarray based cancer studies is usually small because microarray experiments are time consuming, expensive and limited by sample availability. For outcome prediction, sample size is further reduced significantly by the availability of follow-up data for the analyzed samples. In fact, in publicly available gene expression databases such as the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), only a small fraction of human tumor gene expression datasets provide clinical follow-up data. gene expression data based outcome prediction usually relies on traditional supervised learning techniques, in which only labeled data (i.e. data from samples with clinical follow-up) can be used for learning, while unlabeled data (i.e. data from samples without clinical follow-up) are disregarded. Recent studies in machine learning suggest that unlabeled data, when used in conjunction with limited amount of labeled data, can produce considerable improvement in learning accuracy, a technique called semi supervised learning (). Indeed, semi supervised learning has proved to be effective in solving different biological problems including protein classification (), peptide identification in shotgun proteomics (), prediction of transcription factor gene interaction () and gene expression based cancer subtype discovery (). Because semi supervised learning is able to use a large number of unlabeled microarray data in conjunction with some labeled data, we hypothesize that this technique can be used to improve gene expression based classification of human cancer. Different algorithms for semi supervised classification have been proposed (), and many successful algorithms directly or indirectly rely on the assumption that the decision boundary should not cross high density regions but lie in low density regions (usually called 'cluster assumption'). This can be illustrated by comparing the well known support vector machines (SVM) to its semi supervised extension, trans ductive SVM t svm (). The goal of a standard SVM is to maximize the margin around the decision boundary of the labeled data to enable robust classification. In a t svm in addition to the original goal of SVM, unlabeled data are used to guide the boundary away from dense regions by finding a hyperplane that is far away from the unlabeled data points. Finding the exact t svm solution is np hard. Therefore, several approximation algorithms have been proposed (). In this article, we aimed to develop and evaluate semi supervised classifiers for human cancers based on one of the most successful semi supervised classification method, low density separation (LDS) (). We started with the prediction of relapse free survival for Stage I through III colorectal cancer (CRC) patients based on gene expression profiles of primary tumors. Colorectal carcinoma is the third most commonly occurring non cutaneous carcinoma and the second leading cause of cancer related deaths in the USA. Although clinical trials have showed clear benefit of adjuvant CTX for Stage III patients, 4044% of Stage III patients enrolled in surgery only groups did not recur in 5 years even without adjuvant treatment. On the other hand, while clinical trials have failed to show the benefit of adjuvant CTX when applied to unselected Stage II patients, some studies suggest that a subset of high risk Stage II patients may benefit from adjuvant therapy. Moreover, although the standard treatment for Stage I patients requires no adjuvant treatment after surgery, about 10% of Stage I cancer will recur (). Therefore, an accurate and reliable method that identifies high risk Stages I and II patients and low risk Stage III patients could improve the selection of individualized therapy. Using five CRC gene expression datasets from the GEO database, we demonstrated that, (i) semi supervised classification improved prediction accuracy as compared with the state of the art supervised method SVM, (ii) performance gain increased with the number of unlabeled samples, (iii) unlabeled data from different institutes could be employed after appropriate processing and (iv) the LDS method is robust with regard to the number of input features. To test the general applicability of the semi supervised method, we further applied it on human breast cancer datasets and demonstrated superior accuracy as compared with SVM.

discussion the present study was designed to address the small sample size problem in gene expression based outcome prediction for human cancers. As compared with SVM, the semi supervised LDS
