Motivation: Discovering variation among high throughput sequenced genomes relies on efficient and effective mapping of sequence reads. The speed, sensitivity and accuracy of read mapping are crucial to determining the full spectrum of single nucleotide variants sn vs as well as structural variants (SVs) in the donor genomes analyzed. Results: We present dr fast a read mapper designed for di base encoded color space sequences generated with the AB SOLiD platform. dr fast is specially designed for better delineation of structural variants, including segmental duplications, and is able to return all possible map locations and underlying sequence variation of short reads within a user specified distance threshold. We show that dr fast is more sensitive in comparison to all commonly used aligners such as Bowtie, b fast and SHRiMP. dr fast is also faster than both b fast and SHRiMP and achieves a mapping speed comparable to Bowtie. Availability: The source code for dr fast is available at

introduction genomic variation between individuals or across species ranges from single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and structural variation to larger chromosomal rearrangements (). Thanks to the improvements in sequencing technologies, large scale genome variation studies such as the 1000 Genomes Project (1000 Genomes) have made it possible to better characterize normal human genomic variation and disease (). The development of high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies has changed the landscape of genome research. The first commercially available HTS technology was from Roche/454 Life Sciences () and was used to sequence the genome of James Watson (). It was followed by other 'second generation' sequencing platforms that generate orders of magnitude more data for a fraction of the cost, such as Illumina Genome Analyzer () and AB SOLiD (McKernan * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First). third generation sequencing platforms are now under development, and heli scope () and pac bio RS () were recently made available; however, for the time being, they produce reads with higher error rates. Analysis of genomic variation using sequencing starts with mapping the randomly sheared and ideally uniformly sampled DNA fragments from the genome. Different properties and error models of sequence reads generated by these technologies require the development of specialized read mapping algorithms for each platform for accurate read alignment and characterization of genomic variants. This becomes more complicated for short reads: due to repeats and duplications in genomes, they can map to multiple locations with equal sequence identity. Leveraging the high sequence coverage and randomly selecting one 'best' location when a read can not be unambiguously placed has proven to be effective in discovering SNPs and small indels in relatively non complex areas of the genome (). However, structural variation detection sensitivity is shown to benefit from tracking all map locations of the reads including suboptimal alignments (), and characterization of segmental duplications is extremely resistant against mapping the reads uniquely (). Read mappers can be broadly classified into two categories according to the method used to index the reference genome using either hash tables or suffix arrays [compressed through the ferra gina manzini index (with the use of the burrows wheeler Transform (. hash based aligners such as MAQ (), SHRiMP (), mr fast (), mrs fast () and b fast () have poorer performance in comparison to suffix array based aligners [e.g. BWA (), Bowtie (when dealing with short reads; however, their relative performance increases considerably and surpasses the suffix array based aligners when the read length and thus the number of errors (mismatches or indels) that need to be tolerated increase. In this article, we describe a hash based read mapping algorithm named di base read fast alignment search tool' dr fast designed for the di base encoded color space reads generated with the SOLiD platform. The main advantage of di base encoding is increased base call accuracy due to each base being represented by two 'colors'. This helps in differentiating base calling errors color space errors) from real sequence variance, thereby increasing the reliability of detected genomic variants. We show that mapping speed of dr fast is higher than other solid enabled hash based read mappers, b fast () and SHRiMP (),
