Motivation: paired end whole transcriptome sequencing provides evidence for fusion transcripts. However, due to the repetitiveness of the transcriptome, many reads have multiple high quality mappings. Previous methods to find gene fusions either ignored these reads or required additional longer single reads. This can obscure up to 30% of fusions and unnecessarily discards much of the data. Results: We present a method for using paired end reads to find fusion transcripts without requiring unique mappings or additional single read sequencing. Using simulated data and data from tumors and cell lines, we show that our method can find fusions with ambiguously mapping read pairs without generating numerous spurious fusions from the many mapping locations.

introduction the discovery of chimeric transcripts emerging from different and potentially distant genes has introduced another layer of complexity to the genome (). Additionally, the importance of fusion transcripts in the genesis and progression of cancer is becoming increasingly apparent (). Fusion transcripts may be the product of trans splicing the joining of two different transcripts emerging from distinct and often distant genes. This is especially common among lower eukaryotes () where trans splicing is part of normal transcript processing (). However, trans splicing has also been observed in higher eukaryotes, including humans (). Additionally, fusions may be produced by adjacent genes yielding a single, joined RNA product, creating a read through transcript (). Fusion transcripts can also result * To whom correspondence should be addressed. from genomic rearrangement that brings together two once distant regions of the genome. Probably the best known example of this type of fusion is BCR-ABL1, a product of a chromosomal translocation () found in many hematologic cancers and a successful drug target (). In addition, a growing list of fusion genes are being found in both hematologic and solid tumors that are the product of genomic lesions or trans splicing (). Thus, the study of fusion transcripts has implications clinically as well for our basic understanding of the genome. The development of high throughput sequencing methods such as rnase q () has offered an opportunity to hasten a fuller characterization of the transcriptome (), including the identification of fusion transcripts.) demonstrated the potential of the technology by applying transcriptome sequencing to several tumors and cancer cell lines. Using two different sequencing protocols, they were able to detect known fusions such as TMPRSS2-ERG () in a prostate cancer cell line and BCR-ABL1 in a leukemia cell line. Additionally, they identified and experimentally confirmed multiple previously unidentified fusions. later carried out similar work on the melanoma transcriptome, finding 11 novel fusions. Alongside these biological discoveries has been the development of computational tools and frameworks for the detection of fusion transcripts from rnase q data developed a method for joining partial alignments of single rnase q reads to find splice junctions and gene fusions. Upon application of the method to a public dataset, they found hundreds of examples of transcripts that apparently spanned different chromosomes but were doubtful that many were genuine fusion genes created a probabilistic method for aligning rnase q read pairs that uses expectation maximization (EM) to find maximum likelihood alignments. They showed that paired end reads better cover splice junctions than single reads and that their method can reliably identify splice junctions. Then, by augmenting their approach with long single reads, they were able to identify 18 gene fusions in two cancer cell lines. Common to all of these efforts has been the requirement that a fusion transcript be supported by reads that map uniquely to the genome or transcriptome. Maher and colleagues required single best hit mappings to the genome or mapped short, 36 nt Illumina. A read pair that maps to a fusion between genes A1 and B1 may also map to homologous genes, leading either to spurious fusion candidates or the elimination of read pairs supporting a true fusion from consideration. paired end reads to sequences derived from 230 nt Roche 454 reads required paired end reads to map uniquely and at least one end of a read to unambiguously map to a junction between exons required each partial alignment for each read to be unique considered fusion discovery with short paired end reads infeasible and found putative fusions with uniquely mapping 75 nt single reads. These strategies highlight a key difficulty in the analysis of transcriptome sequencing data: the transcriptome is filled with repetitive and similar sequences, and many reads can not be unambiguously mapped to a reference. Some of the repetitiveness is attributable to known repeat families such as the Alu repeat sequence, which can be found both in 5 and 3-UTRs as well as occasionally in coding sequence (). Additionally, many genes are part of gene families or have paralogs or expressed pseudogenes and thus share sequence homology with other parts of the transcriptome. Reads mapping to these genes or regions of these genes will often map well to other loci. Ambiguously mapped reads are a concern for all transcriptome sequencing analyses and have previously been addressed by discarding them () or by proportionately allocating them over the different positions to which they map (). However, this issue becomes more prominent for gene fusions because combinations of mappings are considered. Consider, for example, a fusion between a pair of genes, A1 and B1. It is possible that a read pair that maps to this fusion will also map to paralogs of each gene, say A2 and B2. If all of these mappings were accepted as true, then three spurious fusions would be called (). If the read pair was discarded because of its ambiguous mappings, evidence for the true fusion would be disregarded. As we detail below, our simulations indicate that these ambiguously mapping reads are present in up to 30% of the possible gene fusions, underscoring the significance of the problem. In this article, we propose a method to discover fusion transcripts that exploits ambiguously mapping rnase q read pairs, does not require additional long, 75 nt or greater, single read sequencing and decreases the occurrence of mapping artifacts. We begin by mapping read pairs to the transcriptome independently without imposing any unique mapp ability criterion. We then find pairs which do not map to the same gene and build a set of possible gene fusions from the mappings of each read. Next, we employ a generative model of rnase q data that utilizes mapping qualities and insert size distributions to resolve any ambiguous mappings. After the convergence of the EM technique used to find maximum likelihood transcript abundances, we perform a final partial expectation step for the discordant ly mapping read pairs to find optimal fusion assignments for pairs that span fusion junctions. In this way, rather than discarding ambiguously mapping read pairs or allowing them to over state the number of fusions present, we find the best supported fusions by using the mappings of all the reads in the dataset, the quality of those mappings and the implied insert sizes of read pairs that span a fusion site. This allows our method to more sensitively detect gene fusions than if ambiguously mapping read pairs were discarded. We have implemented our method on simulated data generated from fusions between genes with very high similarity to other genes to demonstrate that our method can resolve the ambiguous mappings to find the correct fusions when it is possible to do so. We then implemented it on reads derived from neoplastic and hyperplastic prostate tissue and recovered the known TMPRSS2ERG fusion along with several read through fusions without finding many spurious, poorly supported fusions as a result of allowing reads to have many mappings. Finally, using publicly available data from several melanoma tumors and cell lines, we find fusion events that would not be detectable without allowing for multi mapping reads that span the fusion site.

discussion in this article, we have demonstrated a method to use discordant ly and often ambiguously mapping rnase q read pairs to identify fusion transcripts. In doing so, we bring the increasingly sophisticated methods employed to estimate transcript abundance in the presence of multi mapping reads to the problem of fusion discovery. In contrast to previously proposed methods for fusion identification that focus on reads that map to the junction between two genes (), our method estimates fusion transcript abundances by considering physical coverage over the entire length of the proposed fusion. In addition, it employs several filters to minimize experimental artifacts. Finally, it does not require that any single read sequence hit the point of fusion. Instead, it uses implied insert sizes and known exon boundaries to determine the most likely point of fusion. This would be a liability if a fusion transcript contained partial exons, but reported fusions to date suggest that a vast majority of fusions do indeed involve the joining of whole exons from different genes, the breakpoints occurring in introns and the splice sites remaining unchanged (). Several avenues for future development are apparent from this work. Here, we chose to use RefSeq transcripts as the reference against which reads are mapped. This allowed us to avoid the issue of reads that map to splice junctions because the splice junction sequence would be contiguous in the transcript sequence. However, it prevents us from identifying transcripts that are produced by novel or aberrant splicing, which is common in cancer (), or are significantly altered by RNA editing (). It may be fruitful to combine the approach described here with methods that identify splice junctions and expressed regions of the genome de novo (). Additionally, fusion transcript discovery shares many parallels with the problem of resolving genomic rearrangements, especially the challenges of repetitive sequence. The adaptation of the methods developed here to genomic sequencing may prove useful in this related field.
