seq2 pathway is an R/Python wrapper for pathway (or functional gene set analysis of genomic loci, adapted for advances in genome research. seq2 pathway associates the biological significance of genomic loci with their target transcripts and then summarizes the quantified values on the gene level into pathway scores. It is designed to isolate systematic disturbances and common biological underpinnings from next generation sequencing (NGS) data. seq2 pathway offers Bioconductor users enhanced capability in discovering collective pathway effects caused by both coding genes and cis regulation of non-coding elements. Availability and implementation: The package is freely available at

introduction functional gene set analysis fgs a improves biological interpretability of genomic features with respect to prior knowledge and has led to important biological discoveries (). Its power lies in the fact that it detects statistical significance over an entire dataset of gene sets and yields biologically meaningful interpretations (). Recently, researchers revealed driver pathways that predispose individuals to disease () and shed light on the development of targeted therapy () by performing fgs a on genes proximal to significantly disease associated loci. However, with the increasing growth of genomic sequencing measurements, noncoding regulatory loci pose a critical challenge to fgs a as nearly 99% of the nucleotides in the human genome do not code for proteins but instead richly harbor functional regulators of genes (). gene based fgs a methods neglect non-coding regulatory information because they have no readily annotated gene function and can not be assigned to a specific biological pathway. For example, HOMER (Hypergeometric Optimization of Motif EnRichment), a popular tool for discovering cis regulatory regions before any subsequent fgs a links genomic loci to only the nearest genes (). Other fgs a algorithms take into account single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) only located in or near coding genes () or exonic mutations (). sequence derived fgs a regarding the functional impact of not only coding genes, but also non-coding regulators, is necessary. A growing body of evidence supports the strategy of connecting genomic loci and coding genes using a many to many mapping and considering long distance cis regulation. First, non-coding regions richly harbor functional regulatory elements in humans (). Second, nearly half of the disease associated SNPs are located in gene deserts (). Third, our recent study suggests that a disease associated SNP located in an intron could be the enhancer of a neighboring gene rather than of its host gene (van den). The first sequence derived fgs a method is GREAT (the Genomic Regions Enrichment of Annotations Tool) (). GREAT quantifies an fgs a score by determining if the total
