Motivation: next generation sequencing greatly increases the capacity to detect rare variant complex trait associations. However, it is still expensive to sequence a large number of samples and therefore often small datasets are used. Given cost constraints, a potentially more powerful two step strategy is to sequence a subset of the sample to discover variants, and genotype the identified variants in the remaining sample. If only cases are sequenced, directly combining sequence and genotype data will lead to inflated type i errors in rare variant association analysis. Although several methods have been developed to correct for the bias, they are either underpowered or theoretically invalid. We proposed a new method seq chip to integrate genotype and sequence data, which can be used with most existing rare variant tests. Results: It is demonstrated using both simulated and real datasets that the seq chip method has controlled type i errors, and is substantially more powerful than all other currently available methods. Availability: seq chip is implemented in an r package and is available at

introduction there is solid evidence that rare variants play an important role in the etiology of complex traits (). The development and implementation of next generation sequencing in genetic studies of complex traits have made possible the detection of rare variant associations. However, it is still very expensive to sequence a large number of samples at high coverage depth, which is necessary to accurately detect rare variants for association studies. Instead of sequencing all samples, a two stage strategy can be applied, where a subset of the sample is sequenced to discover variants, and the identified variants are then genotyped in the remaining sample. Genotyping currently is considerably less * To whom correspondence should be addressed. expensive than sequencing, therefore given a fixed budget, a two stage design can be much more powerful than a one stage design, where only sequencing is used. This is because for the same financial expenditure, genetic information from a much larger number of samples can be extracted and analyzed in a two stage study. In fact, the two stage study design has been widely applied. Many rare variant associations were identified for a number of clinically important traits, including colorectal adenomas (), age related macular degeneration (), lipids level () and inflammatory bowel disease (). In a two stage study, candidate genes that were previously implicated in the etiology of complex trait through genome wide association studies or functional studies may be sequenced to identify rare variants. It was demonstrated that sequencing 500 cases can uncover variants that can explain over 80% of the locus population attributable risk (). When more sophisticated methods are used for selecting samples, e.g. calculating expected number of causal variants for each individual and sequencing the individuals with the maximal counts (), it is potentially possible to enrich for causal variants using a smaller sample size than if samples are randomly selected. To make the two stage design cost effective for large scale studies, the commercially available exo me chip can also be customized and up to 30 000 variants can be added. Alternatively, custom genotyping arrays can also be developed. For the two stage study design integrating sequencing and genotyping, it was shown that for a fixed number samples sequenced, sequencing only cases can be more powerful than sequencing a balanced number of cases and controls, for detecting associations with causal variants that are enriched in cases (). This is because a larger portion of low frequency causal variants can be identified by sequencing only cases. However, it has also been shown () that type i errors will be inflated for two stage studies where only cases are sequenced to discover variants and nave analysis is implemented, which directly integrates sequence and genotype data and compares aggregated variant frequencies between cases and controls. A straightforward correction is to exclude the sequence data used for variant discovery and use only the genotyped samples in the downstream association analysis (GSO  genotype samples only). However, this approach does not make full use of the available data and is underpowered, especially when a large portion (e.g. 50%) of affected individuals are sequenced for variant discovery. In, the authors suggested removing one variant carrier from the

discussion in this article, we developed a data integration method for two stage case control studies where a portion of cases are sequenced to discover variants, and the identified variants are genotyped in the remaining sample. The seq chip method performs a correction on the variant genotypes observed in sequenced cases, such that the corrected sequence genotypes follow approximately the same distribution as that of the genotyped samples. The integrated dataset can be analyzed by all existing rare variant association tests that can handle genotypes with uncertainties (e.g. imputed genotypes). seq chip can also be used with regression based methods for detecting primary or secondary traits associations (Lin and Zeng,), where confounders such as population substructures can be controlled. Through extensive simulations, we demonstrate that when seq chip is used to integrate sequence and genotype data, all rare variant association tests have controlled type i errors. The power can be substantially improved compared with using other data integration strategies, i.e. ROPS and GSO. The method is mainly developed for combining sequence and genotype data when only cases were sequenced for variant discoveries. A popular alternative two stage study design is to sequence a combination of selected cases and controls for variant discovery, and genotype the identified variants in the rest of the samples. Under this study design, sequenced and genotyped samples can be separately analyzed and combined using standard meta analyses methods, which will have controlled type i error rates. When both cases and controls are sequenced, protective variants for the disease phenotype may be uncovered with higher probability (). For a two stage study that combines sequence and genotype data, given a small fixed number of samples that are sequenced, sequencing only cases can be more powerful for detecting causal variant associations than sequencing a balanced number of cases and controls. In practice, it is of interest to know the optimal fraction of cases to sequence to maximize power. Although sequencing a larger number of samples allows discovering a higher number of variant sites, it does not necessarily lead to improved power. This is because the frequencies of very rare variants identified in sequenced cases can be slightly underestimated by ROPS and seq chip methods, which reduces power. The optimal number depends on the underlying disease model, the size of the cohort, and the proportion of the cases that are sequenced, which will need to be examined on a case by case basis. Although the cost of sequencing is quickly dropping, genotyping still has a clear cost advantage. The two stage study design of sequencing cases and genotyping the remaining sample allows extracting genetic information from a much larger number of samples, which can be more powerful than one stage study design given a fixed cost constraint. seq chip is a very useful method for integrating data in a two stage study design and will greatly accelerate the process of identifying variants involved in complex trait etiologies.
