seq g sea is an open source Bioconductor package for the functional integration of differential expression and splicing analysis in rnase q data. seq g sea implements an analysis pipeline, which first computes differential splicing and differential expression scores, followed by integrating them into a per gene score that quantifies each genes association with a phenotype of interest, and finally executes gene set enrichment analysis in a cut off free manner to achieve biological insights. seq g sea accounts for biological variability and determines the statistical significance of gene pathways and networks using subject permutation, and thus requires at least five samples per group. Real applications show that seq g sea detects more biologically meaningful gene sets without biases toward long or highly expressed genes. seq g sea can be set up to run in parallel to reduce the analysis time. Availability and implementation: The seq g sea package with a vi-gnette is available at

introduction by enabling simultaneous quantification of abnormal expression and aberrant splicing, high throughput transcriptome sequencing or rnase q is providing unprecedented insight into disease and condition associated transcriptome alterations. Although these complex patterns of transcriptional activity have a profound influence in the pathophysiology of disease, we need tools that are capable of integrating their biological influences to determine their functional significance. Functional annotation of independently differentially expressed genes and their pathway analysis is ideal for investigating highly controlled interventions in clonal or syngeneic systems with no underlying heterogeneity. However, when comparing conditions in outbred populations, particularly for complex phenotypes or diseases, biologically significant effects are often distributed in pathways or networks such that the influence of individual genes is redundant and untraceable arguably the best alternative in thi situation is to consider related gene sets using gene set enrichment analysis g sea to identify disturbances at the pathway and network levels that have biologically associated function (). Although there are existing tools for performing g sea on conventional gene expression data, there are currently no tools for implementing g sea with rnase q data that can efficiently incorporate gene expression and alternative splicing (AS). For example, go seq () can not account for AS in its enrichment analysis. In higher primates, the majority of genes undergo AS; especially, in humans more than 90% genes are alternatively spliced (). Recent evidence suggests that splicing and transcription largely take place almost simultaneously (), and both result in the alteration of mRNA composition, stability, localization and translation. In this Applications Note, we introduce a new software system for implementing a recently proposed enrichment analysis approach for rnase q data, combining both overall differential expression (DE) and differential splicing (DS) (). We also demonstrate the utility of this approach designated seq g sea to maximize the yield of biological insight from rnase q data without any biases toward long or highly expressed genes, in a number of data sets.
