Motivation: X-ray crystallography based protein structure determination, which accounts for majority of solved structures, is characterized by relatively low success rates. One solution is to build tools which support selection of targets that are more likely to crystallize. Several in silico methods that predict propensity of diffraction quality crystallization from protein chains were developed. We show that the quality of their predictions drops when applied to more recent crystallization trails, which calls for new solutions. We propose a novel approach that alleviates drawbacks of the existing methods by using a recent dataset and improved protocol to annotate progress along the crystallization process, by predicting the success of the entire process and steps which result in the failed attempts, and by utilizing a compact and comprehensive set of sequence derived inputs to generate accurate predictions. Results: The proposed ppc pred (predictor of protein Production, Purification and Crystallization) predict propensity for production of diffraction quality crystals, production of crystals, purification and production of the protein material. ppc pred utilizes comprehensive set of inputs based on energy and hydrophobicity indices, composition of certain amino acid types, predicted disorder, secondary structure and solvent accessibility, and content of certain buried and exposed residues. Our method significantly outperforms alignment based predictions and several modern crystallization propensity predictors. Receiver operating characteristic (ROC) curves show that ppc pred is particularly useful for users who desire high true positive (TP) rates, i.e. low rate of mis predictions for solvable chains. Our model reveals several intuitive factors that influence the success of individual steps and the entire crystallization process, including the content of Cys, buried His and Ser, hydrophobic hydrophilic segments and the number of predicted disordered segments.

introduction structural genomics (SG) is an international initiative that aims at solving 3D shapes of important biological macro-molecules, primarily focusing on proteins, and which significantly contributes to the overall protein structure determination efforts (). This initiative shifts the focus from one by one determination of individual protein structures to protein family directed structure analyses where a group of proteins is targeted and structure(s) of representative members are determined (Terwilliger * To whom correspondence should be addressed). The process of choosing the representative proteins, which is known as target selection, encompasses restricting the candidate proteins to those that are tractable and of unknown structure and prioritizing them according to the expected interest and accessibility (). For instance, in case of the protein structure initiative (PSI), target selection concentrates on representatives from large, structurally uncharacterized protein domain families, and from structurally uncharacterized subfamilies in very large and diverse families with incomplete structural coverage (). The most recent psi biology phase psi nature Structural Biology Knowledgebase, 2011), includes four major SG centers that will continue high throughput structure determination defined through community nomination process. Importantly, these approaches allow for flexibility in the selection of the targets and would benefit from tools that support target selection. Protein structures are solved using X-ray crystallography, NMR spectroscopy, electron microscopy and (recently) by application of computational approaches, such as homology modeling. The most popular method, which accounts for about 87% of the structures deposited into the Protein Data Bank (PDB), is the X-ray crystallography (). One of the main challenges the SG faces is that only about 210% of protein targets pursued yield high resolution protein structures (). A more recent analysis shows that about 4.6% of targets produce the diffraction quality crystals (). Moreover, estimates show that 60% of the cost of structure determination is consumed by the failed attempts (), while crystallization is characterized by a significant rate of attrition and is among the most complex and the least understood problems in the structural biology (). This provides motivation for further research in this area. Several strategies have been proposed to improve the success rates including obtaining one representative structure per protein family and working with multiple orthologs (). In spite of the advances made in the context of protein crystallization (), the production of high quality crystals is one of the major bottlenecks in the structure determination pipelines (). This problem is usually tackled using an empirical trial and error approach, where a large number of experiments is brute force d to find a suitable setup, and through understanding of the fundamental principles that govern crystallization (). The latter is used to design new and improved methodologies that produce the high quality crystals. One of the steps taken to alleviate difficulties in solving the structures via the X-ray crystallography was to create databases that record information concerning both successful and failed attempts to produce the structures (). The largest and most comprehensive database, target db (
