Motivation: Databases of sequenced genomes are widely used to characterize the structure, function and evolutionary relationships of proteins. The ability to discern such relationships is widely expected to grow as sequencing projects provide novel information, bridging gaps in our map of the protein universe. Results: We have plotted our progress in protein sequencing over the last two decades and found that the rate of novel sequence discovery is in a sustained period of decline. Consequently, PSI-BLAST, the most widely used method to detect remote evolutionary relationships, which relies upon the accumulation of novel sequence data, is now showing a plateau in performance. We interpret this trend as signalling our approach to a representative map of the protein universe and discuss its implications. Contact:

introduction only a tiny fraction of the vast space of all possible protein sequences is populated by proteins present in existing organisms. Knowledge of these populated islands can be considered as a map of the protein universe. As sequencing projects continue to provide new data, the resolution of the map increases, permitting insights into protein function and evolution. The map currently covers 1214 published genomes (). In comparison, there are over 1.4 million known organisms () while estimates of the total number of species on earth vary between 4 and 100 million (). Despite the exponential growth in sequencing over the past two decades it would appear that a comprehensive map of the protein universe will not be achievable for many years. However, for many purposes the map need only contain representative sequences. A substantial proportion of the current map has been shown to be composed of very similar homologous sequences () whose diversity can be captured by far fewer representative sequences. Acquiring a representative map of the protein universe will be possible in a far shorter time than achieving comprehensive coverage. Here, we investigate our progress towards such a representative map for the purpose of this work, we consider the protein universe to be populated by protein sequences clustered by sequence identity into islands of varying degrees of density. As more genomes are sequenced, the map of the protein universe can become more detailed either through the creation of new islands or the progressive population of existing islands. Early stages of sequencing are expected to be dominated by the discovery of novel sequence islands (). As a complete representative map is approached an increasing proportion of newly determined sequences are expected to fall within existing islands in sequence space and for the creation of new islands to become progressively less common. Often, the evolutionary relationship between proteins is distant: in the map representation this would be seen as points appearing far apart within an island or even in a separate island if the map has insufficient resolution. To detect these remote relationships between proteins, sophisticated homology detection tools are required. As novel sequences accumulate in the database, bridging gaps in the protein map, these tools are expected to be capable of detecting more of these remote relationships ().observed the growth in the number of islands while incrementally adding 83 genomes consisting of 311 256 protein sequences (). Marsden et al. later used a larger dataset of 633 546 sequences from 203 genomes (). Both investigations showed a linear increase in the number of islands with the addition of each genome. Since then there has been a nearly 6-fold increase in the number of genomes sequenced. More recent analysis () using sequence profile matches to historical sequence databases, demonstrated that single domain sequences are now growing slowly and appear to be saturating in the sequence database. However, novelty in the form of the

discussion our map of the protein universe is reliant on the sequences available from various sequencing projects. As novel data is acquired, the resolution of this map is expected to increase and eventually become a global map fully representing the space of all existing sequences. Obtaining a representative map will be achievable long before we have sequenced all of Earth's biodiversity because of the similarities inherent in proteins due to sharing a common evolutionary origin. These similarities mean that proteins will exist in islands, the distribution, shape and density of which reflect their relationship to each other. When a point is reached where any new sequence can be placed in a pre-existing island we will have obtained the representative map. In this study, we investigated the progress towards such a map over the last 20 years of sequence data acquisition. By comparing the number of islands to the absolute number of added sequences over time we show that the rate of novel island discovery is in a sustained period of decline. An ever increasing proportion of newly sequenced genomes are highly similar to proteins already in the database. Thus, the general structure of the sequence map is changing more slowly as it is dominated by those protein families common to a wide range of species. This is not to say that novel sequences are no longer being found. It is clear from that the number of islands continues to increase to the present day. However, the effect of these sequences on the global picture of sequence space is diminishing. Methods for remote homology detection such as PSI-BLAST are able to routinely identify relationships with sequence identity 25%. Being able to detect these remote relationships is vital to our ability to map the protein universe and predict the function and structure of proteins. The PSI-BLAST paper () has over 30 000 citations in the literature making it the most highly cited of the past decade. This reflects the crucial role played by remote homology detection for the accurate inference of the relationships between protein sequence, structure, function and evolution. It has been assumed () that the continued growth of the sequence database will bring with it a steady improvement in our ability to detect remote homology with methods such as PSI-BLAST. Here, we have shown that the slowing in the gain of novel sequence data is associated with a plateau in our ability to detect remote homologues with PSI-BLAST. The recent decline in PSI-BLAST performance (since 2004) is of particular importance. Here, we eliminated this decline by either the removal of the most populated superfamilies from the analysis or by a global reduction in sequence redundancy in the databases. Thus, the decline appears to be related to errors regarding the handling of redundant data that have been previously identified (). Given the expectation of continued exponential growth in the sequence database, problems caused by redundancy are expected to become more acute. In addition, this growth is substantially increasing the computational burden of sequence analysis faster than progress in computational power. The removal of sequence redundancy can alleviate both of these issues. However, this approach does not alter the overall trend of substantial slowing or a plateau in performance over recent years. The utility of representative databases for remote homology detection will apply outside of the test set used here. For example, in the CASP8 assessment the phy re structure prediction server () used sequence profiles built using a 50% nonredundant sequence database similar to that described here and was placed in the top four servers ().
