The HIV Drug Research Centre hiv drc has established Web services for prediction of drug susceptibility for HIV proteases and reverse transcriptase s. The services are based on two proteo chemo metric models which accepts a protease or reverse transcriptase sequence in amino acid form, and outputs the predicted drug susceptibility values. The predictions are based on a comprehensive analysis where all the relevant inhibitors are included, resulting in models with excellent predictive capabilities. Availability and Implementation: The services are implemented as interoperable Web services (REST and XMPP), with supporting web pages to allow for individual analyses. A set of plugins were also developed which make the services available from the bio clipse workbench for life science. Services are available at http://www.hivdrc.org/services.

introduction hiv protease and reverse transcriptase (RT) are two major drug targets in HIV therapy with several drugs developed to inhibit their functions. However, the HIV virus is capable to escape current antiviral therapy directed at these targets by evolving into drug resistant variants with highly complex mutation patterns. Drugs show different efficiency for different viral strains, and it is important to pick the medication which most efficiently can block HIV on individual patient basis. Several attempts have been made to produce models to predict drug susceptibility based on the sequenced HIV (), but the current models are commonly trained only on data for one drug and hence do not make full use of the available information. Expert systems are also present (), which build on the experience of physicians and are hence unable to extrapolate and predict the effect of novel mutations. The services presented here are founded on proteo chemo metric models for HIV proteases and reverse transcriptase s a technology which typically produces accurate predictions based on more information (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion we here present two Web services that predict drug susceptibility for PIs and NRTIs from the mutation patterns of different HIV strains' genome sequences. The services are based on a comprehensive analysis of HIV protease and RT inhibitors, using data from all drugs in each model, resulting in a proteo chemo metric model with excellent predictive ability. The implementation as Web services allows for programmatic access to the services, and for inclusion in workflows the binding sites for NNRTIs and NRTIs are different so these compounds can not be incorporated into one proteo chemo metric model. A separate proteo chemo metric model for predictions of NNRTI drugs is in development.
