Descriptions of genetic variations and their effect are widely spread across the biomed-ical literature. However, finding all mentions of a specific variation, or all mentions of variations in a specific gene, is difficult to achieve due to the many ways such variations are described. Here, we describe SETH, a tool for the recognition of variations from text and their subsequent normalization to dbSNP or UniProt. SETH achieves high precision and recall on several evaluation corpora of PubMed abstracts. It is freely available and encompasses stand-alone scripts for isolated application and evaluation as well as a thorough documentation for integration into other applications. Availability and Implementation: SETH is released under the Apache 2.0 license and can be down-loaded from http://rockt.github.io/SETH/.

introduction over the last decades, a wealth of information about genetic variations and their effect on phenotypes has been published in the scientific literature. However, finding such variations, the genes they affect, and the associated effects on phenotypes is cumbersome due to the many ways in which variations can be described. Despite efforts towards defining nomenclature guidelines for genetic variants (den), authors often use descriptive natural language instead of following a suggested formalism, which incurs ambiguity and uncertainty in which variation actually is described. This severely hinders the usage of published variation data for subsequent analyses such as biological and clinical interpretation. Several tools have been developed to facilitate the identification of genetic variants in text (for a recent evaluation we refer to Jimeno Yepes and vers poor 2014b), but none of them is freely available, recognizes and normalizes mentions to an acknowledged nomenclature, links variations to structured databases (e.g. dbSNP or UniProt), and covers a large range of mutation types. SETH is an open source tool unifying all these features. Furthermore, SETH achieves consistent high precision and recall on several publicly available gold standard corpora.

conclusion we introduced SETH, an open source tool for recognizing and normalizing mentions of variations in natural language text. By rewriting variants using the HGVS nomenclature and normalization to dbSNP, SETH facilitates indexing and information retrieval of heterogeneous occurrences of the same biological variant across the literature. SETH achieves state of the art performance and is the only freely available tool performing physical validation not only for protein sequence mutations but also for DNA variations. Variation mentions recognized by SETH in PubMed and PubMed Central can be browsed in GeneView () at http://bc3.informatik.hu-berlin.de/.
