Motivations: Characterizing protein protein interfaces and the hydrogen bonds is a first step to better understand proteins structures and functions toward high resolution protein design. However, there are few large scale surveys of hydrogen bonds of interfaces. In addition, previous work of shape complementarity of protein complexes suggested that lower shape complementar-ity in antibody antigen interfaces is related to their evolutionary origin. Results: Using 6637 non-redundant protein protein interfaces, we revealed peculiar features of various protein complex types. In contrast to previous findings, the shape complementarity of antibody antigen interfaces resembles that of the other interface types. These results highlight the importance of hydrogen bonds during evolution of protein interfaces and rectify the prevailing belief that antibodies have lower shape complementarity.

introduction interactions are one of the most fundamental activities of biomolecules. Disturbance of these interactions underlie biological disorders including cancers and neurodegenerative diseases. Characterizing interactions is important to understand the detailed mechanisms of life (). Complementarity is a key concept in molecular recognition. Previous studies have extracted common features of protein protein interfaces and revealed peculiar features of particular classes of interfaces. Traditional structural surveys of protein protein interactions often divided complexes into hetero-dimers and homo-dimers and into different functional classes, such as antibody antigen enzyme inhibitor substrate and 'other' complexes (). A key driving force of molecular recognition and specificity is forming hydrogen bonds and salt bridges. Unlike salt bridges, hydrogen bonds are orientation dependent. Hence, modulating hydrogen bond networks is critical for specificity in protein engineering and design (). Hydrogen bonds are also crucial for protein folding where the patterns formed define secondary structure elements. Based on 319 protein complexes, nuss i nov and co-workers reported that backbone backbone hydrogen bonds are dominant within protein structures whereas side chain side chain hydrogen bonds are most common across protein protein interfaces (). Another important factor in the complementarity of molecular recognition is the shape of the interfaces. There are several analyses on shape complementarity of protein interfaces (). In such an analysis based on that the shape complementarity of antibody antigen interfaces was lower on average than that of protein protein interfaces in general (). Antibodies evolve independently of foreign antigens, while other proteins involved in protein protein interactions typically evolve with their counterparts, so that the shape complementarity of general interfaces is optimized by both partners. However, a later analysis with two high resolution crystal structures suggested that the observed lower shape complementarity of antibody antigen complexes was due to the low quality of the crystal structures (). Since the discussions were based on a limited number of protein protein complexes, a more comprehensive analysis of the complementarities of the interfaces is required to understand the essential nature of molecular recognition and to guide the rational design of protein therapeutics. The question is relevant today as computational design efforts strive to create de novo interfaces by optimizing only one protein in the pair, as antibodies do. Antibodies provide a natural system that can demonstrate what level of shape complementarity is possible in single sided interface design. In this study, we focus on hydrogen bond networks using 6637 non-redundant protein complexes. Our main dataset includes 547 antibody V L V H (light and heavy variable domain) pairs, 191 antibody protein antigen complexes, 104 antibody peptide antigen complexes, 88 enzyme inhibitor substrate complexes, 102 'other' complexes and 92 obligate complexes. For a reference, we also analyzed 2251 and 3262 protein protein interfaces of hetero and homodimers. The analyses reveal peculiar features of each protein complex type. We discuss the impact on antibody modeling, docking simulations and interface designs.
