Motivation: Life Sciences have emerged as a key domain in the Linked Data community because of the diversity of data semantics and formats available through a great variety of databases and web technologies. Thus, it has been used as the perfect domain for applications in the web of data. Unfortunately, bioinformatic ians are not exploiting the full potential of this already available technology, and experts in Life Sciences have real problems to discover, understand and devise how to take advantage of these interlinked (integrated) data. Results: In this article, we present bio queries a wiki based portal that is aimed at community building around biological Linked Data. This tool has been designed to aid bioinformatic ians in developing SPARQL queries to access biological databases exposed as Linked Data, and also to help biologists gain a deeper insight into the potential use of this technology. This public space offers several services and a collaborative infrastructure to stimulate the consumption of biological Linked Data and, therefore, contribute to implementing the benefits of the web of data in this domain. bio queries currently contains 215 query entries grouped by database and theme, 230 registered users and 44 end points that contain biological Resource Description Framework information. Availability: The bio queries portal is freely accessible at http://bioqu

introduction the amount of information on the World Wide Web has increased during the past few years. The way that we share and access this information has been especially altered by the lowering of the barriers to access and publish documents and data, and applications have difficulties in reusing this information because of data and format heterogeneity and the lack of formal descriptions of their meaning (semantics). In an effort to address the problems derived from the heterogeneity and the lack of semantics, Linked Data has emerged. Linked Data is commonly defined as a set of best practices with the objective of connecting, sharing and exposing data and knowledge. The underlying technology, supported by an active community, encourages the application of standards: (i) the use of HTTP URIs, (ii) the SPARQL query language and (iii) Resource Description Framework (RDF) and Web Ontology Language (OWL) for data modelling of data and representation. This technology has encouraged the publication of interlinked datasets, which in turn has caused a huge increase in the Linked Data cloud in the past few years. Datasets in 2007 contained 42 billion RDF triples and 2 million RDF links. In September 2011, this amount had reached 31 billion RDF triples, which were interlinked by means of 504 million RDF links (latest update). The Linked Data community has produced many tools to take advantage of these data, such as RDF editors (e.g. Vapour), browsers (e.g. Tabulator), search engines and semantic web search machines (e.g. Watson with millions of triples indexed). However, despite the rapid growth of data and the availability of developed tools, there are some problems in the development of applications closer to end users specifically in the Life Sciences domain where there has been a rapid growth in the amount of biological, biochemical and medical data in recent years. For this reason, we have developed a web tool called bio queries that uses Linked Data technology in the Life Sciences domain, and which has been designed for biological and bioinformatic end users. In the Life Sciences domain, available Linked Data tools are not usually targeted at biologists because they do not take into account end user usability. To address this, there have been some attempts to improve the application of this technology to the biological domain. Bio2RDF is a semantic web application designed to solve the integration problem in the bioinformatic area (). Bio2RDF integrates data from the most popular databases, such as Uniprot, OMIM, Kegg, Reactome and so forth. This mash-up system offers a graphical interface in which users obtain the information in RDF keyword based searches, and it also provides SPARQL end points. Linked Life Data (LLD) () is another integration project that stores billions of biomedical RDF statements in the Life Sciences and health care domains. The LLD group implemented RDF representation of PubMed, UMLS, Entrez-Gene and Open Biological and Biomedical Ontologies (OBO) Foundry data sources. Furthermore, it provides three ways to access the data: a web interface to introduce SPARQL queries, a browser to explore the information and a graphical visualization tool. This platform is similar to Bio2rdf project and offers the same features. The Uniprot consortium has also made a contribution and has published their knowledge base as Linked Data (). It offers several end points to be queried: the Bio2rdf end point and the end point provided by the Uniprot website. The Linking Open Drug Data l odd () was built around the need to integrate large amounts of biomedical data from different data sources because of the development of new therapies for diseases. This project stores 8.4 million triples and 388 000 links to external sources and is an important framework that interconnects different data from Linked Clinical Trials dataset, drug bank tcm gen edit and di sea ome. In the approaches cited (Bio2rdf, LLD, Uniprot and l odd the main goal is to publish helpful end points to provide direct access to the data. However, they are unconnected islands of knowledge that are at best, linked. bio queries addresses the problem that users have in locating and using such places of information. bio queries provides a central repository of queries that access distributed end points. Therefore, bio queries is not concerned with the publication of data as such but rather SPARQL queries for retrieving such data. In the biological domain, biologists are conscious of the importance of interactive wikis in solving the problem of large scale data management, even with the implicit inconsistencies in published and commonly accepted data in the literature (). The idea of using wikis in Life Sciences was born with the objective of the visualization of intracellular bio signalling pathways to promote bio curation and interactivity between biological users. The biological wikis are based on the Wikipedia idea where users can edit online with the intention of helping biologists handle large amounts of information on genes, proteins, transcripts and metabolites. The 1000 Genomes programme for humans () is a wiki, which contains unquantifiable information on protein structure and function, biomolecular interactions, metabolic and bio signalling pathways that need to be integrated. wiki omics is another wiki for bioinformatic ians which contains information on 'omic' concepts and tools (). ecoli wiki is a social community interested in the Escherichia coli organism (). wiki pathways is a wiki platform created for pathway model curation (). Both wiki genes () and Gene Wiki () are wikis for the field of genetics: wiki genes contains a set of articles edited to increase the accuracy of the large amount of data produced by sequencing techniques stored in GenBank database (). Gene Wiki is a specialized section of Wikipedia that focuses on re-organizing, extending and completing the human gene articles (). Despite the existence of sparql bin (http://www.sparqlbin. com/) to share SPARQL queries and the collaborative projects in biological areas, there is no biological social community that contributes to the consumption of Linked Data by sharing biological SPARQL queries. Hence, we aim to encourage the sharing of users' experience trying to take advantage of Linked Data in the biological domain. bio queries aims to start the process towards a greater understanding of Life Sciences Linked Data sources by means of online social networks. We have used social networks because these have been a key component in the development of great discoveries in Life Sciences. bio queries opens up a way to build up communities around a shared interest in certain biological domains to take advantage of public Linked Data. This is achieved by sharing a virtual space in a wiki based portal for the design and execution of (federated and non federated SPARQL queries that are executed and documented using natural language descriptions. Contrary to all the aforementioned biological wikis that use Wikipedia software, bio queries is implemented in Drupal taking advantages of what this technology offers. The main contributions of this work are (i) a community based approach to share SPARQL queries as a means of sharing the knowledge in Life Sciences Linked Data repositories; (ii) a set of queries provided as a seed for building the community formed by biological and bioinformatic users; and (iii) a set of software modules to provide a wiki system with SPARQL evaluation, which opens up new possibilities for creating distributed queries to answer more complex queries that can not be answered by a single data source. This article is structured as follows: Section 2 describes two use cases. Section 3 describes the methods applied to implement the system. Section 4 shows the website navigation, the bio queries content and a System Usability Scale (SUS) score usability test. Section 5 describes the advantages and limitations that bio queries presents in its current form and finally, Section 6 summarizes the key points presented in this article.

discussion in a social space like bio queries which has a large number of participants in a collaborative space, it is important to share different points of views to enrich overall knowledge. bio queries currently has 230 registered users and 215 query entries. Also, we have shown the evolution for 1 year and a 6 month period before February 28, 2013 of the number of registered users against the number of query entries. supplementary shows a registered user increase in the first months of bio queries because of the publicity given. The second increase corresponds to the recent addition of a new federation engine (which can be considered as the first federation system integrated in an end user Linked Data application in Life Sciences). Information on the top 20 most visited queries is provided by Supplementary. This table indicates that the Kegg, MGI and Reactome, top three queries, are the most visited. This information, derived from user's interests, could direct bio queries to solve problems in specific biological areas, such as metabolism and genetics. However, despite that these are the most viewed, they are not the most evaluated indicates Fraunhofer SCAI uima hpc and Uniprot end points are the most evaluated, followed by Kegg end point. These statistics lead us to think that there could be a clear tendency to use registered queries by end point owners to design new queries to test non published end points. Furthermore, the SUS score obtained from biologist and bioinformatic ian groups were 78.3 and 79.6, respectively (Supplementary Data). These SUS scores are 460, which means that bio queries is easy to use for these two groups. According to these results, we can not ignore the fact that the introduction of SPARQL queries ab initio is a hard task for biologists even with the features provided by the system. However, bio queries does not limit any biologist who has an interest in and a minimal knowledge of SPARQL query language for introducing new queries.

conclusion in this work, our main goal has been the construction and dissemination of a tool to create an active community of biologists built around the use of Biological Linked Data. The objective of bio queries is to bring researchers in the Life Sciences domain closer to Linked Data. Therefore, we have developed a social tool to design, document and execute, in different formats, non federated and federated queries. In this biological community, participants use, learn and share opinions and biological information by using Linked Data technology. This system is freely available for users to introduce new sharing and executing linked data queries SPARQL queries and to execute queries and use the services provided by the bio queries portal. The bio queries community is growing. The registration of new queries has improved the usability of the website; hence, we are considering integrating more features. As for future work, we propose a query recommender, which enables users to select a query from a list of queries according to the user profile and activity.
