Dynamics governing the function of biomolecule is usually described as exchange processes and can be monitored at atomic resolution with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) relaxation dispersion data. Here, we present a new tool for the analysis of cp mg relaxation dispersion profiles s here khan. The web interface to s here khan provides a user friendly environment for the analysis. Availability: A stable version of s here khan the web application and documentation are available at http://sherekhan.

introduction functions of biomolecules are governed by their dynamics of conformational inter conversions sometimes induced by binding of a second partner. The kinetics of these processes need to be explored. Normally, kinetics of the mentioned processes can be described with exchange processes. For example, proteins can be in conformational equilibrium, which may be characterized by two different conformations of the same molecule, or in chemical equilibrium, which may represent the bound and unbound state of molecules to a binding partner. The environments of the nuclei may differ in each state and thus their nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) parameters (e.g. chemical shifts, scalar or dipolar couplings and relaxation) may also be different. We focus here on processes, in which at least one of the magnetically active nuclei exchanges between these states by either chemical exchange or conformational exchange. The study of chemical exchange processes by NMR is already well established (). Depending on the time scale at which the exchange process occurs, various NMR techniques such as line shape analysis, measurements of the spin spin or spin lattice relaxation rates, the off resonance saturation method and pulse spin echo techniques such as the carr purcell mei boom gill cp mg experiment can be applied. In particular, the exchange processes occurring within the micro to millisecond time window can be detected by the NMR relaxation dispersion experiments by using cp mg or off resonance irradiation approaches. The cp mg experiment can provide thermodynamic (relative populations of the species), kinetic (rates of exchange) and structural information (in form of chemical shifts) at atomic. Although cp mg relaxation dispersion experiments are in general well established their analysis is not a straightforward process. Currently existing programs are available on request from the authors (e.g. cp mgf it demand a number of software libraries (), which are often not commonly available on personal computers and result in compatibility problems or require proprietary software (). Therefore, we developed s here khan which is accessible through a web interface allowing a user friendly selection of residues and suggesting models for the calculation of kinetic parameters like the relative populations of the species, the exchange rate and chemical shift information from the cp mg relaxation dispersion data. s here khan assumes a global two state exchange process to fit the data with models for the slow or fast exchange.
