The Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) is a public repository of gene expression data. Although GEO has its own tool, GEO2R, for data analysis, evaluation of single genes is not straightforward and survival analysis in specific GEO datasets is not possible without bioinformatics expertise. We describe a web application, shiny geo that allows a user to download gene expression data sets directly from GEO in order to perform differential expression and survival analysis for a gene of interest. In addition, shiny geo supports customized graphics, sample selection, data export and R code generation so that all analyses are reproducible. The availability of shiny geo makes GEO datasets more accessible to non bioinformatic ians promising to lead to better understanding of biological processes and genetic diseases such as cancer. Availability and Implementation: Web application and source code are available from http://gdan cik.github.io/shinyGEO/.

introduction the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) is a public repository of genomic data () that currently hosts 50 000 gene expression datasets containing 1 million samples. GEO is a valuable resource for identifying biomarkers of biological processes and disease. Its datasets have been used to identify biomarkers of hr as and MYC pathway activity (), biomarkers of monocyte differentiation in response to viral infection (), and prognostic biomarkers in breast (), bladder () and lung cancer (). Biomarker evaluation in GEO datasets typically involves data retrieval and gene (probe) selection followed by an appropriate statistical analysis. A differential expression analysis determines whether the expression of a gene differs significantly across two or more groups of samples. A survival analysis determines whether gene expression is significantly associated with an event (such as death from disease), through comparison of k a plain meier curves based on censored time to event data (). To facilitate data analysis, GEO provides an interactive web tool [GEO2R; http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/geo/geo2r/], which allows users to identify differentially expressed genes in GEO datasets. However, GEO2R does not support survival analysis and is designed for gene discovery rather than for evaluation of individual genes. In addition, although specialized tools have been developed to facilitate gene expression analysis by non bioinformatic ians (), there are no available tools that allow a user to evaluate whether a specific gene is differentially expressed or associated with survival in a specific GEO dataset. In this paper, we describe shiny geo a web based tool for performing differential expression and survival analysis on gene expression datasets in GEO. In addition, shiny geo produces publication ready and customizable graphics, allows for sample selection, data correction, data export for custom analyses and R code generation for reproducibility.
