We have created a shiny based Web application, called shiny phylo seq for dynamic interaction with microbio me data that runs on any modern Web browser and requires no programming, increasing the accessibility and decreasing the entrance requirement to using phylo seq and related R tools. Along with a data and context aware dynamic interface for exploring the effects of parameter and method choices, shiny phylo seq also records the complete user input and subsequent graphical results of a users session, allowing the user to archive, share and reproduce the sequence of steps that created their result without writing any new code themselves. Availability and implementation: shiny phylo seq is implemented entirely in the R language. It can be hosted launched by any system with R installed, including Windows, Mac OS and most Linux distributions. Information technology administrators can also host shiny phylo seq from a remote server, in which case users need only have a Web browser installed. shiny phylo seq is provided free of charge under a GPL-3 open source license through git hub at

introduction analysis of microbial communities requires the interpretation of one or more high dimensional abundance matrices and its relationship with other datasets, using a complex and emerging suite of methods from ecology, genetics, phylogenetics, multivariate statistics, visualization and testing. Filtering, custom curation and transformation of the abundance data are also required usually, but the precisely reproducible workflow from raw data to final analyses is often difficult or impossible to reproduce exactly. Ideally, published scientific analyses are completely reproducible in as easy a fashion as possible; and anything less represents an impediment to both progress and peer review (). Fortunately, R is well suited for the analytical aspects of microbio me research, with an interaction oriented functional programming design (R Development Core) that includes support for reproducible research (). We recently described a software package for the R language, phylo seq dedicated to the object oriented representation and analysis of microbio me census data (). One of the originally stated goals of phylo seq was to leverage r based resources for reproducible research, and thereby, improve the reproducibility and portability of published microbio me analyses. Unfortunately, for many microbio me researchers with classical training in biology, learning a programming language even a functional interactive language like r has proven to be a prohibitive investment of time and effort. However, most of the necessary computations are not only tractable by R, but also fast enough for dynamic interaction via a graphical user interface (GUI). Here we describe our release of shiny phylo seq a Web browser GUI that leverages phylo seq and other R resources for the analysis of microbio me census data while also allowing the user to archive the complete code and data necessary to exactly reproduce their session results. Although it is difficult for any single GUI application to support the full range of analyses required in microbio me research, shiny phylo seq provides a compelling framework and introduction to microbio me analysis in R. Its modular open source design encourages modification, customization and code reuse. There are other resources with GUI elements available for the analysis of microbio me census data, including mgr ast (), q ii me () and c lovr (). To our knowledge, there are no GUIs available for the analysis of microbio me census data that also leverage the R programming language, ggplot2 (), and phylo seq while also providing a 'provenance record' of a user's session.
