Motivation: rnase q experiments produce digital counts of reads that are affected by both biological and technical variation. To distinguish the systematic changes in expression between conditions from noise, the counts are frequently modeled by the Negative Binomial distribution. However, in experiments with small sample size, the per gene estimates of the dispersion parameter are unreliable. Method: We propose a simple and effective approach for estimating the dispersions. First, we obtain the initial estimates for each gene using the method of moments. Second, the estimates are regularized, i.e. shrunk towards a common value that minimizes the average squared difference between the initial estimates and the shrinkage estimates. The approach does not require extra modeling assumptions , is easy to compute and is compatible with the exact test of differential expression. Results: We evaluated the proposed approach using 10 simulated and experimental datasets and compared its performance with that of currently popular packages edgeR, de seq bay seq bb seq and sam seq. For these datasets, s seq performed favorably for experiments with small sample size in sensitivity, specificity and computational time.

introduction whole transcriptome shotgun sequencing rnase q technology () quantifies gene expression in biological samples in counts of transcript reads mapped to the genes. Accurate and comprehensive, it has made a major impact on genomic research (). One common goal of rnase q experiments is to detect differentially expressed genes, i.e. genes for which the counts of reads change between conditions more systematically than as expected by random chance (). Statistical methods for detecting differentially expressed genes must reflect the experimental design and appropriately account for the stochastic variation moreover many rnase q experiments serve as high throughput screens of a small number of samples with the goal of subsequent experimental validation. Therefore, the analysis must handle a relatively small number of biological replicates. A variety of statistical methods and software has recently been proposed for detecting differentially expressed genes. These include de seq (), edgeR (), bay seq (), sam seq (), bb seq. We briefly overview these methods. We further propose a direct and effective approach for characterizing the variation in the counts of reads, which improves the sensitivity and specificity of detecting differentially expressed genes for experiments with small sample size. We support this approach with an open source r based software package s seq
discussion in this manuscript, we advocated a model that specifies free per gene dispersion parameters in the Negative Binomial model for counts of rnase q reads. We also advocated a biased estimation of these parameters, which can reduce the variance of the estimates and minimize the overall MSE. Biased estimation is different from specifying a probability model (such as in de seq that assumes a true systematic relationship of the true variance and the true mean. It is particularly useful for experiments with a small sample size, where the systematic relationship may be difficult to evaluate. The shrinkage estimates are easy to compute, avoid iterative estimation, minimize the potential for overfitting and do not require extra computation time. They are compatible with the exact test of differential expression. For the datasets in this manuscript, s seq consistently had a similar or a higher sensitivity and specificity of detecting differential expression than the existing methods. The approach can be generalized to express the dependence of the dispersions on the expected value or on other covariates such as guanine cytosine (GC) content or Gene Ontology annotation s1 s seq (2) edgeR (3) de seq (4) bay seq (5) bbs eqp value p value p value 1 post. prob. p value. The e cdf curves of detecting differential expression for the datasets with no external 'gold standard'. Y-axis: e cdf function of the gene rank. x axis p value or 1 minus posterior probability. Solid line: two randomly selected replicates from a same condition avs a. Dotted line: one randomly selected replicate from each condition un replicated a vsb. Dashed line: a vsb on the full dataset for two group designs. dashed dotted line: a vsb on the full dataset for more complex designs. Gray line: 45 degree. sam seq is not applicable to un replicated experiments and is excluded. The desired patterns are high areas under the a vsb curves, and avs a curves that are at or below the 45 degree line Estimation of dispersion in Negative Binomial models s seq can produce meaningful results in under replicated rnase q screens. However, we stress that rnase q screens do not eliminate the biological variation in gene expression Equation (12). As evidenced by and the under replicated screens have lower reproducibility as compared with the replicated studies. Multiple biological replicates are necessary to adequately assess the full extent of the variation in the biological system. Therefore, the under replicated screens can only be conducted when followed by a rigorous experimental validation with complementary technologies and adequate sample size.
