Interactions between various types of molecules that regulate crucial cellular processes are extensively investigated by high throughput experiments and require dedicated computational methods for the analysis of the resulting data. In many cases, these data can be represented as a bipartite graph because it describes interactions between elements of two different types such as the influence of different experimental conditions on cellular variables or the direct interaction between receptors and their activators inhibitors. One of the major challenges in the analysis of such noisy datasets is the statistical evaluation of the relationship between any two elements of the same type. Here, we present SICOP (significant co interaction patterns), an implementation of a method that provides such an evaluation based on the number of their common interaction partners, their so called co interaction. This general network analytic method, proved successful in diverse fields, provides a framework for assessing the significance of this relationship by comparison with the expected co interaction in a suitable null model of the same bipartite graph. SICOP takes into consideration up to two distinct types of interactions such as up or downregulation. The tool is written in Java and accepts several common input formats and supports different output formats, facilitating further analysis and visualization. Its key features include a user friendly interface, easy installation and platform independence. Availability: The software is open source and available at cna.cs.uni-kl.de/SICOP under the terms of the GNU General Public Licence

introduction high throughput experiments resulting in interaction data require computational methods that enable the identification of their key interaction patterns. If the interaction is observed between elements of two different types, the data can be modelled as a bipartite graph in which the elements are represented by nodes and their interaction by edges. More than one type of interaction, e.g. up and downregulation, can be represented this way by the edges of the graph. Existing tools for the analysis of bipartite graphs like the R packages bipartite () or networks is () are mainly tailored to the purpose of understanding principles in community ecology. Systems biology applications pose three important challenges that these tools can not cope with: (i) large scale experiments that are often prone to noise, (ii) mild interaction effects that are difficult to detect and (iii) simultaneously observed distinct types of interactions. A recently suggested method deals with these problems by using a network analytic approach (). In this procedure, the number of common interaction partners of two elements is compared with its expected value in a randomized null model that maintains the number of interaction partners of all elements. The approach adopts and extends the general procedure for assessing the statistical significance of the so called network motifs (). The underlying assumption is that two elements with a statistically significant number of common interaction partners share the same functional role according to the so called guilt by association principle (). The method sketched in is based on the theoretical insights formulated in Zweig and Kaufmann (2011) and uses a more realistic null model than other existing approaches. The open source software SICOP (significant co interaction patterns) implements the algorithm as an easy to use client side tool. It is able to detect significant mild co interaction effects by taking into account up to two different types of interactions.

discussion the algorithm was applied to the data from high throughput screening experiments that show the effect of various microRNAs on a set of proteins that are highly relevant in breast cancer (). MicroRNAs have recently been recognized to act as tumour suppressors and have an oncogene role. Uncovering their targeting patterns is difficult because they are known to only have a moderate effect on the protein expression level. The extensive null model approach behind SICOP enabled the identification of key microRNAs that were shown in subsequent experiments to inhibit cell cycle progression and proliferation. This specific result confirms that the algorithm behind SICOP is a powerful tool for the detection of statistically significant protein co regulations. However, as described earlier, SICOP can be applied to a wide range of datasets, for instance, transcription factors binding to DNAs, gene coding RNAs interacting with co transcriptional non-coding RNAs, genes in relation with diseases or diseases and their symptoms. Our flexible tool offers an effortless way to explore such data to its full potential, considerably reducing the required amount of further experiments.. Illustration of the method behind SICOP: (a) heat map showing the results of a hypothetical high throughput experiment. Two types of interactions are distinguished based on the sign of their strength. (b) Bipartite graph representation of the thresholded interaction data. The two types of interactions are shaded differently. (c) Null model consisting of randomized graphs created from the original bipartite graph by permuting edges of the same type. (d) Resulting co interaction network that contains three types of edges: two uni type co interaction patterns (undirected edges) and one mixed co interaction pattern (directed edge). The edge labels show empirical p values computed as the fraction of randomized graphs in which the given co interaction appeared at least as often as in the original graph
