Motivation: Protein movements form a continuum from large domain rearrangements (including folding and restructuring) to side chain rotamer changes and small rearrangements. Understanding side chain flexibility upon binding is important to understand molecular recognition events and predict ligand binding. Methods: In the present work, we developed a well curated non-redundant dataset of 188 proteins in pairs of structures in the Apo (unbound) and Holo (bound) forms to study the extent and the factors that guide side chain rotamer changes upon binding. Results: Our analysis shows that side chain rotamer changes are widespread with only 10% of binding sites displaying no conformational changes. Overall, at most five rotamer changes account for the observed movements in 90% of the cases. Furthermore, rotamer changes are essential in 32% of flexible binding sites. The different amino acids have a 11-fold difference in their probability to undergo changes. side chain flexibility represents an intrinsic property of amino acids as it correlates well with configurational entropy differences. Furthermore, on average b factors and solvent accessible surface areas can discriminate flexible side chains in the Apo form. Finally, there is a rearrangement of the hydrogen bonding network upon binding primarily with a loss of h bonds with water molecules and a gain of h bonds with protein residues for flexible residues. Interestingly, only 25% of side chains capable of forming h bonds do so with the ligand upon binding. In terms of drug design, this last result shows that there is a large number of potential interactions that may be exploited to modulate the specificity and sensitivity of inhibitors.

introduction proteins bind small molecules as substrates, cofactors and allosteric regulators in order to perform essential cellular functions. As a consequence of induced fit (), conformational selection () or more likely a combination of both (), the ligand bound protein may display a wide gamut of structural changes. These changes can range from large movements of entire domains to small side chain rearrangements in the binding site. It is widely accepted that flexibility is essential for protein function (). Studying dynamic aspects of protein structure using nuclear magnetic resonance * To whom correspondence should be addressed. spectroscopy, for example, is still sufficiently costly and time consuming as to prevent its use in the same scale as X-ray crystallography. X-ray crystallography produces a 'snapshot' of a protein that offers little information on dynamic aspects of structure. However, it is possible to compare different 'snapshots' to infer dynamic properties of the protein. For example, one can compare two structures of the same protein crystalized in different conditions, say in the bound (Holo) and unbound (Apo) forms. Although this type of comparison is neutral with respect to the mechanism of binding induced fit or conformational selection), it makes possible, given the amount of available data, to perform statistically significant large scale studies of conformational changes associated to ligand binding. Understanding the factors that affect protein flexibility has important practical applications, as efforts in trying to simulate flexibility (even restricted to side chain movements) have been limited so far by the drastic increase in the size of the associated conformational search space. For example, docking algorithms are an example in which the flexibility of the protein can have a drastic impact on the results. As such, any knowledge that can be applied to decrease in a sensible way the size of the search space is advantageous. Our earlier study (), among the first statistical studies of side chain flexibility upon ligand binding, uncovered general features regarding side chain rearrangements. We used a dataset of paired X-ray structures of the same protein in bound and unbound forms comprising 353 complexes representing 153 different proteins. We used a 60 @BULLET dihedral angle difference threshold to denote the occurrence of conformational changes. Using this definition, we showed that up to three flexible residues account for the conformational changes observed in 85% of all binding sites studied and that different amino acid types have different probabilities to be observed in conformationally different states upon binding. More recently, a study revisited the question of side chain flexibility upon binding measuring Cartesian coordinate differences () using an ensemble of 60 complexes. The authors measured root mean square differences (RMSD) of Cartesian coordinates between atoms in the Apo form and those in the Holo form bound to all ligands necessary for the reaction at hand. For example, if an enzyme requires a cofactor or multiple substrates, the Holo form used for comparisons was that containing all such ligands present. The authors calculated the RMSD between: (i) all atoms in the superimposed structures; (ii) atoms belonging to residues that bind the ligands or (iii) those implicated in catalysis. As a control, the authors calculated the RMSD between pairs of different Apo form structures of the same
