Motivation: high dimensional omic data derived from different technological platforms have been extensively used to facilitate comprehensive understanding of disease mechanisms and to determine personalized health treatments. Numerous studies have integrated multi-platform omic data; however, few have efficiently and simultaneously addressed the problems that arise from high dimensionality and complex correlations. Results: We propose a statistical framework of shared informative factor models that can jointly analyze multi-platform omic data and explore their associations with a disease phenotype. The common disease associated sample characteristics across different data types can be captured through the shared structure space, while the corresponding weights of genetic variables directly index the strengths of their association with the phenotype. Extensive simulation studies demonstrate the performance of the proposed method in terms of biomarker detection accuracy via comparisons with three popular regularized regression methods. We also apply the proposed method to The Cancer Genome Atlas lung adenocarcinoma dataset to jointly explore associations of mRNA expression and protein expression with smoking status. Many of the identified biomarkers belong to key pathways for lung tumorigenesis, some of which are known to show differential expression across smoking levels. We discover potential biomarkers that reveal different mechanisms of lung tumorigenesis between light smokers and heavy smokers. Availability and Implementation: R code to implement the new method can be downloaded from

introduction the success of the Human Genome Project enables genome wide studies of various biological activities in humans and other organisms. The extensive development of high throughput biotechnologies have made data accessible from different platforms, including RNA sequencing, copy number variation, DNA methylation and protein lysate arrays. Although vital to the progress of biomedical research, these multi-platform data impose new challenges for data analysis. In addition to high dimensionality and complex correlations within and across platforms, different types of omic data also likely have different scales and distributions (). Therefore, appropriate and effective analytical methods are desirable to extract useful information from the emerging data platforms. Integrative analysis of multi-platform data has been proposed to study the interplay within and between different levels of biological data (). A large number of statistical methods have been discussed for different applications and purposes. For example, sequential analysis (e.g. multiple concerted disruption, () confirms or refines the findings obtained from one data type by analyzing additional omic data collected from the common set of samples. Pairwise correlation of genetic variables (e.g. weighted gene correlation network analysis, ()) is used to infer molecular network interactions. Network analysis (e.g. j active modules ()) identifies active or aberrant subsets in a certain biological system using molecular network interactions based on graphical models. Bayesian network approaches () identify biomarkers that are associated with clinical outcomes by incorporating another type of biomarkers collected from the same samples through prior distributions. Another line of work in canonical correlation analysis (CCA) intends to identify the linear combinations of the two sets of genetic variables which have maximum correlation with each other. More recent development based on the original CCA includes sparse CCA which identifies the linear combinations of the two high dimensional genomic data by incorporating penalty function, supervised CCA which associates the linear combinations with some clinical outcome, and multiple CCA which extends to the case of more than two datasets (). We propose to simultaneously analyze multi-platform data to detect predictive biomarkers for a response variable of interest, which is typically a disease associated phenotype. The widely used variable selection approach aggregates genetic variables derived from different platforms as covariates in regression models for the response variable (). To address the extremely high dimensionality of the covariate space, which is much larger than the number of samples, sparsity induced penalization methods have been commonly used. This line of work includes the L 1 penalty based Lasso (), its improved version, adaptive Lasso (), L 1 and L 2 combined elastic net () and smoothly clipped absolute deviation (SCAD) (). The SCAD method has been shown to have appealing theoretical oracle properties unbiased ness sparsity and continuity) (). However, the drawbacks of regression based methods include a limitation on the number of selected variables according to the available sample size and the in capability to detect correlated variables. To address these challenges, we propose a framework of shared informative factor models to use in integrating multiple types of omic data plus a disease associated response variable. In contrast to the conventional factor models, we incorporate the disease phenotype information in the factor space to detect genetic variables that interact with the response variable. In addition, we assume a common structured factor across multiple data types for the purpose of detecting different levels of the important disease associated genetic variables. The proposed framework lays the foundation for incorporating prior biological knowledge on functional pathways and networks, both within a data type and across different data types to improve the biological relevance of the results.

discussion we have proposed a generalized statistical framework si form to jointly model high throughput omic data produced by multiple platforms and to discover associations between these genetic variables and a disease associated phenotype. The new method conveniently produces direct rankings of genetic variables in terms of the strength of association with the response variable. Extensive simulation studies demonstrated the superior performance of si form in terms of biomarker detection accuracy, regardless of inter variable correlations, compared to the performances of other penalized variable selection methods. Biological meaningfulness of the proposed method is supported by two TCGA lung adenocarcinoma studies that investigate the association of the integrated mRNA expression and rpp a protein concentration data and two phenotypes, smoking status and discretized survival. In particular, we discovered that most of the identified proteins either belong to known key pathways for NSCLC tumorigenesis or are prognostic biomarkers in NSCLC. We also discovered some proteins that are potentially associated with the different ways in which NSCLC develops in smokers versus non-smokers. The proposed framework appears to fit the lung cancer data reasonably well. However, a more comprehensive version of this framework can be developed to improve the goodness of fit of the model if appropriate. A possible solution is to include a nonparametric mean component, for example, with the structure of singular value decomposition, and use model selection methods (e.g. BIC) to determine the rank of the additional component. This idea requires extensive investigation and, therefore, is deferred to our future research. Another ongoing research project is to modify si form by incorporating the prior biological pathway information to improve biomarker detection accuracy. Specifically, further regularization of the parameters, for example, a graphic model based penalization method (), will be investigated.
