Motivation: Chromatin structure, including post-translational modifications of histones, regulates gene expression, alternative splicing and cell identity. chips eq is an increasingly used assay to study chromatin function. However, tools for downstream bioinformatics analysis are limited and are only based on the evaluation of signal intensities. We reasoned that new methods taking into account other signal characteristics such as peak shape, location and frequencies might reveal new insights into chromatin function, particularly in situation where differences in read intensities are subtle. Results: We introduced an analysis pipeline, based on linear predictive coding (LPC), which allows the capture and comparison of chips eq histone profiles. First, we show that the modeled signal profiles distinguish differentially expressed genes with comparable accuracy to signal intensities. The method was robust against parameter variations and performed well up to a signal to noise ratio of 0.55. Additionally, we show that LPC profiles of activating and repressive histone marks cluster into distinct groups and can be used to predict their function. Availability and implementation: http://www.cancerresearch.unsw .edu.au/crcweb.nsf/page/LPCHP A Matlab implementation along with usage instructions and an example input file are available from:

introduction gene expression is controlled at multiple levels, including factors regulating DNA accessibility (). A combinatorial code of post-translational modifications of the nucleosome proteins H2A, H2B, H3 and H4, can render their associated DNA, accessible or inaccessible for transcription and splicing (). Acetylation is generally associated with activation, while the affect * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of histone methylation s is condition and position dependent (). Chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP), originally developed to enrich DNA fragments bound by specific proteins, is now frequently used in studies of histone modifications (HMs) (). In brief, a target protein, such as a transcription factor (TF) or histone with a particular modification is first crosslinked and immunoprecipitated using an antibody. The associated DNA is then extracted and detected using methods such as a hybridization array chip chip or deep sequencing chips eq. The later approach shows advantages in resolution and following bioinformatics processing provides genome wide maps of TF binding and HMs. A large number of algorithms for downstream processing of chips eq datasets have been developed (). These tools generally evaluate signal intensities, with the aim of detecting sparse, highly localized and enriched peaks. However, while this is a common characteristic for TF binding, the signals from HM chips eq are more variable. For example, H3K4me3 and H2A.Z, localize at the transcription start site (TSS) whereas others, such as H3K36me3 and H3K20me1, spread over many base pairs covering the promoter and full gene body (). In addition, these signals often differ in peak shape and location, as well as frequency. By focusing the analysis on signal intensity alone, existing methods are potentially limiting and constrain our ability to identify common motifs or patterns. A number of genome wide studies have recently been published and show correlations between HMs and gene expression. While each study varied slightly in processing of the chips eq data, in all cases, the read intensities that mapped to an arbitrary region around the TSS of a gene were extracted and normalized. A vector containing quantification values from each dataset was constructed for each gene, and these vectors were subsequently correlated with gene expression using different multivariate statistical approaches. The earliest work analyzed chips eq data for 20 histone methylation s () and identified two major gene groups by hierarchical cluster analysis. The first contained active marks and genes expressed above average while the second cluster contained repressive marks and genes expressed below average. A later study used the same methylation data but also included measures of 19 histone acetylation profiles (). Here, a linear regression model was used and again revealed that the HM chips eq data was predictive for gene expression.

discussion the analysis of enrichment profiles is currently based on read intensities and do not take into account signal structure. We show that modeled signal structures lpc hp from a set of 23 chips eq experiments correlate well with gene expression. We also show that lpc hp can be used to gain insights into chromatin function. It is important to note that the binding profiles obtained from HM chips eq are a superposition of signals from the histone modification and underlying location of the nucleosome. Therefore, the reported correlations likely reflect the influence of both factors, and normalization in the presence of data on total H2, H3 and H4 levels is necessary to avoid this bias. lpc hp is better suited for comparative studies of chromatin function, particular in situations where the signal structure is expected to change, while the signal intensity remains constant. Importantly, nucleosome free regions (NFR) mark general sites of transcription initiation for coding and non-coding RNAs, and are influenced by a combination of DNA sequence and transcription factors (Radman). If nucleosome repositioning is assumed in chips eq libraries, our approach is expected to detect the associated peak shift, while no differences would be detected from the signal intensities. The LPC approach can also be extended for the analysis of other sequencing protocols such as the distinction of nucleosome positioning between methylated and non methylated CpG islands (). Incorporating peak shape information will further facilitate the identification of specific TF binding to one of multiple, closely situated binding sites, as typically seen in promoters of critical developmentally regulated genes. Furthermore, our analysis pipeline automatically reduces noise and handles data scaling and normalization, while obtaining spectral features, which can be further analyzed using a variety of previously developed spectral pattern comparison techniques ().

conclusion in conclusion, both applications show that the lpc hp and the signal structural that they represent, provide a useful feature that is currently neglected in the literature. Since we show that the lpc hp can be used as an alternative to read intensities, its utility may extend beyond chips eq to other next generation sequencing applications. It will be particularly useful in situations where read intensity information is either insufficient or non informative. In addition, the transformation of the original signal into LPC feature vectors is a useful intermediate allowing for the application of various machine learning algorithms. As recently noted, a particular important task in bioinformatics is the identification of all possible chromatin states (), which could be obtained from a simple vector quantization analysis of the lpc hp. Other potential applications include the identification of enhancer or regulatory regions in the genome. In addition, further methodological development is needed to extend the application of lpc hp to the analysis of more complex genomic features. This includes, for example, the comparison of HM binding structures in gene body regions that are variable in length, and the number and length of exons, introns and enhancers.
