Motivation: Third generation sequencing methods provide longer reads than second generation methods and have distinct error characteristics. While there exist many read simulators for second generation data, there is a very limited choice for third generation data. Results: We analyzed public data from Pacific Biosciences pac bio SMRT sequencing, developed an error model and implemented it in a new read simulator called sim lord. It offers options to choose the read length distribution and to model error probabilities depending on the number of passes through the sequencer. The new error model makes sim lord the most realistic SMRT read simulator available. Availability and Implementation: sim lord is available open source at

introduction third generation sequencing technologies like SMRT (single molecule real time) sequencing are increasingly used because they yield considerably longer reads than second generation methods. The error characteristics of SMRT are fundamentally different from previous technologies: The basic error rates are higher (1015%), but errors are considered unbiased and uniformly distributed (), which means that they can be reduced by sequencing a molecule several times. As more bioinformatics applications are developed for sequence analysis tasks from SMRT data or hybrid data, e.g. genome assembly, SNP calling, structural variant discovery, authors of such tools will benefit from read simulators that take into account the specifics of the SMRT technology. The existing manifold simulators for second generation technologies, such as ART for 454, Illumina and SOLiD reads (), do not do this. There are few simulators designed for SMRT reads, e.g. pbs im (), fast q sim () and Alchemy from the blas r package (), the latter now being deprecated along with the .bas.h5 format. pb sims defaults are based on now outdated chemistry and can not be completely re-configured. Even if the read length is adapted, the conditional read quality distribution does not match well existing data (and Supplement). Also, pbs im does not provide sam formatted alignments between the reference and the simulated reads. fast q sim is a general purpose tool for both read analysis and simulation. In particular, it provides pre-set parameters for SMRT simulation, but also allows to analyze an existing dataset with regard to its properties and simulate accordingly. However, it is unable to provide mapping information or alignments of simulated reads and it simulates reads rather slowly (8700 N. crassa reads with 30 cores took 90 min). The simulated length quality distributions do not agree well with data (and Supplement), and it is difficult to change parameters directly. To improve upon the existing solutions, we developed a new read simulator called sim lord  Simulation of Long Read Data' that is convenient to use and easily re-configured when technical specifications change. The default values provide realistic simulation results according to the current state of the SMRT technology (); see.
