sim toolbox is an open source modular set of functions for MATLAB equipped with a user friendly graphical interface and designed for processing two dimensional and three dimensional data acquired by structured illumination microscopy (SIM). Both optical sectioning and super resolution applications are supported. The software is also capable of maximum a posteriori probability image estimation map sim an alternative method for reconstruction of structured illumination images. map sim can potentially reduce reconstruction artifacts, which commonly occur due to refractive index mismatch within the sample and to imperfections in the illumination. Availability and implementation: sim toolbox example data and the online documentation are freely accessible at

introduction in structured illumination microscopy (SIM), a sequence of images is acquired, each taken with a different position of an illumination pattern in a fluorescence microscope but without a mask in the detection path (). Subsequent processing of the raw data is required to reconstruct the final image. Current SIM methods include optical sectioning microscopy os sim () and super resolution SIM sr sim (). Several different algorithms can be used to process SIM data (). sim toolbox offers a set of MATLAB functions for processing both os sim and sr sim data according to a variety of methods. sim toolbox can also apply an alternative method for processing the data, maximum a posteriori probability estimation map sim (). The tools can be accessed from a user friendly graphical user interface. Our goal is to offer a collection of processing methods, which were developed based on extensive testing with real data. The software can be used to process data acquired by commercial SIM systems; however, some of the tools and documentation provided are meant for researchers developing their own systems. In addition to the software, we provide example data, a user's guide and a detailed description of the implemented methods and algorithms. Please refer to the Supplementary Note for further details.
