sysgen sim is a software package to simulate Systems Genetics (SG) experiments in model organisms, for the purpose of evaluating and comparing statistical and computational methods and their implementations for analyses of SG data [e.g. methods for expression quantitative trait loci e qtl mapping and network inference]. sysgen sim allows the user to select a variety of network topologies, genetic and kinetic parameters to simulate SG data (genotyping, gene expression and phenotyping) with large gene networks with thousands of nodes. The software is encoded in MATLAB, and a user friendly graphical user interface is provided. Availability: The open source software code and user manual can be downloaded at: http://sysgensim.sourceforge.net/

introduction the central goal of systems biology is to gain a predictive, system level understanding of biological networks. This entails inferring causal networks from observations on a perturbed biological system. An ideal experimental design for causal inference is randomized, multifactorial perturbation (). The recognition that the genetic variation in a segregating population represents randomized, multifactorial perturbation () gave rise to 'Genetical Genomics' and 'Systems Genetics' (SG), where a segregating or genetically randomized population is genotyped at (many) DNA variants, and is profiled for (disease) phenotypes of interest, genome wide gene expression and potentially other omics variables epi genomics microRNA expression, proteomics, metabolomics, etc.). SG experiments and studies enable us to elucidate the genetic control of gene expression (and other omics variables) (), to annotate DNA polymorphisms implicated in previous genome wide association studies g was for particular diseases and to infer key control genes and pathways causally underlying a disease or biomedical trait of interest (). Many statistical and computational methods are being developed for the analysis of SG data. An important component of any SG analysis is the quantitative trait locus (QTL) mapping of all expression traits e traits and other omics traits if available. It is well * To whom correspondence should be addressed. known that the e traits of groups of genes share common regulators (DNA variants), which are more easily identified when associated with a group of e traits rather than with individual e traits. Several approaches to associating DNA variants with groups of e traits have recently been proposed (e.g.). A major goal of SG studies is to reconstruct a causal network whose nodes are the phenotypes, the e traits (and potentially other omics variables) and the DNA variants. Methods proposed to achieve this goal include Bayesian networks, differential equation models (), structural equation modeling [SEM; (] and undirected dependency graph or co-expression network with edge orientation using DNA variants as causal anchors (). While multiple methods for QTL mapping of e traits (omics variables) and for causal network inference are available, at the present time not much is known about the strengths and weaknesses of all of these proposed methods and whether or when some methods perform better than others. However, researchers increasingly realize that thorough verification of algorithms in bioinformatics and (genetical) systems biology is required. In fact, several international competitions are organized on an annual basis to compare computational methods for systems biology and genetic analysis. These include the Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM) project with its reverse engineering Challenges (; http://www.the-dreamproject.org/), for which sysgen sim has been used to produce the SG challenges in 2010, and the Genetic Analysis Workshops (; http://www.gaworkshop.org), which compare analysis tools relevant for current analytical problems in genetic epidemiology, statistical genetics and genetical systems biology. The availability of realistically simulated (artificial) datasets, which are generated under a set of assumptions most relevant to real SG data, is of utmost importance for the verification of algorithms for SG data analysis. Several SG papers use simulations which are typically simplistic and not general (e.g.). Other more general software packages have been developed for simulating gene expression data with network models for gene network inference algorithm evaluation [e.g. a biochem (), gene netweaver () and inge neue (, but experimental designs are restricted to time series and steady state measurement after environmental or kinetic parameter perturbations, and single gene perturbation experiments. These and page 2460 24592462
