Motivation: Network prediction as applied to protein protein interaction (PPI) networks has received considerable attention within the last decade. Because of the limitations of experimental techniques for interaction detection and network construction, several computational methods for PPI network reconstruction and growth have been suggested. Such methods usually limit the scope of study to a single network, employing data based on genomic context, structure, domain, sequence information or existing network topology. Incorporating multiple species network data for network reconstruction and growth entails the design of novel models encompassing both network reconstruction and network alignment, since the goal of network alignment is to provide functionally orthologous proteins from multiple networks and such orthology information can be used in guiding intero log transfers. However, such an approach raises the classical chicken or egg problem ; alignment methods assume error free networks, whereas network prediction via orthology works affectively if the functionally orthologous proteins are determined with high precision. Thus to resolve this intertwine ment we propose a framework to handle both problems simultaneously, that of SImultaneous Prediction and Alignment of Networks (SiPAN). Results: We present an algorithm that solves the SiPAN problem in accordance with its simultaneous nature. Bearing the same name as the defined problem itself, the SiPAN algorithm employs state of the art alignment and topology based interaction confidence construction algorithms, which are used as benchmark methods for comparison purposes as well. To demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed network reconstruction via SiPAN, we consider two scenarios; one that preserves the network sizes and the other where the network sizes are increased. Through extensive tests on real world biological data, we show that the network qualities of SiPAN reconstructions are as good as those of original networks and in some cases SiPAN networks are even better, especially for the former scenario. An alternative state of the art network reconstruction algorithm random walk with resistance produces networks considerably worse than the original networks and those reproduced via SiPAN in both cases.

introduction in protein protein interaction (PPI) networks, nodes represent the proteins and the edges correspond to interactions between pairs of proteins. The PPI networks are quite central in understanding cell regulatory mechanisms, extracting protein functions and in disease diagnosis. Several high throughput techniques gave rise to extraction of large scale PPI networks for many organisms (). However, experimental prediction of PPI networks is usually time consuming and expensive. Thus, many approaches based on a wide range of computational techniques have been suggested for the problem of PPI network prediction (). Existing computational methods vary depending on the type of information they employ for predictions. These include methods based on genomic context, structure, domain or sequence information; see for useful reviews. A crucial problem with the predicted networks is that the extracted set of interactions may provide erroneous results in terms of false positives and false negatives. Therefore, several methods have been developed for network reconstructions that are based solely on network topology (). Such methods usually rely on making new interaction predictions or identifying spurious interactions by examining node neighborhoods of a given network. Parallel to the growth in produced experimental data several problem formulations and computational methods have been developed for the comparative analysis of genome wide PPI networks as well. In particular, biological network alignment problem has been of particular interest. In general terms, given two or more PPI networks from different species, the network alignment problem is to align the nodes of the networks or subnetworks within them. Functional orthology is an important application that serves as the main motivation to study the alignment problems as part of a comparative analysis of PPI networks; a successful alignment could provide a basis for deciding the proteins that have similar functions across species. Such information may further be used in predicting functions of proteins with unknown functions or in verifying those with known functions (), in detecting common orthologous pathways between species () or in reconstructing the evolutionary dynamics of various species (). Network alignment algorithms incorporate the interaction data and the evolutionary relationships represented possibly in the form of sequence data. Based on the assumption that the interactions among functionally orthologous proteins should be conserved across species, such an incorporation is usually achieved by aligning proteins so that both the sequence similarities of aligned proteins and the number of conserved interactions are large (). The problems of network prediction and network alignment are intertwined. The alignment methods make use of the predicted interaction networks to produce output alignments with large interaction conservation and sequence similarities. On the other hand, orthology detection may be used in network prediction reconstruction (). However, such an intertwine ment creates a so called chicken or egg problem; the alignment methods produce the orthologies based on the assumption that the interaction networks are correct and the interaction prediction detected from network alignments assume the proteins or the functional complexes are aligned correctly. This intertwine ment is especially evident with the topology based network prediction reconstruction methods, which usually rely on a definition of 'similarity' between node pairs. The similarity might be a measure of direct neighborhood similarity, such as sharing many common neighbors, or some indirect neighborhood similarity, usually described in some form of a graph theoretical distance between nodes. Likewise, one of the objectives of many alignment methods is to provide alignments where the neighborhoods of aligned nodes are also similar in the sense that nodes in the neighborhoods are also aligned, so as to provide large interaction conservation. Thus, rather than considering the two problems independently, we propose a new problem formulation encompassing both components simultaneously, that of simultaneous prediction and alignment of networks (SiPAN). To the best of our knowledge, this is the first study providing a model for capturing the simultaneous nature of the problems of network reconstruction and alignment. Employing data from relevant databases, we design two experimental settings; one where the network densities are preserved and one where network densities are increased. We show that the network qualities of SiPAN reconstructions are as good as those of original networks, and in some cases, SiPAN networks are even better, especially for the former scenario. An alternative state of the art topology based network reconstruction algorithm random walk with resistance (RWS) produces networks considerably worse than the original networks and those reproduced via SiPAN in both cases under most of the quality metrics.
