si pros pro rata is an open source software package for end to end data analysis in a wide variety of community proteomics measurements. A database searching program, si pros 3.0, was developed for accurate general purpose protein identification and broad range post-translational modification searches. Hybrid Message Passing interface openmp parallelism of the new si pros architecture allowed its computation to be scalable from desktops to supercom-puters. The upgraded pro rata 3.0 performs label free quantification and isobaric chemical labeling quantification in addition to metabolic labeling quantification. si pros pro rata is a versatile informatics system that enables identification and quantification of proteins and their variants in many types of community proteomics studies. Availability: Both programs are freely available under the GNU GPL

introduction community proteomics meta proteomics aims to characterize the whole protein complement of a microbial community. In a shotgun approach, proteins extracted from environmental samples of microbial communities are digested with trypsin into a more complex peptide mixture. Peptides are then separated by liquid chromatography and analyzed by tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS). MS/MS data are searched against translated meta genomic sequences to identify proteins from different members of a microbial community. Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins can be identified computationally by searching an expanded peptide space. Abundance changes of identified proteins can be measured between different environmental samples of a microbial community by quantitative proteomics. Common quantification methods include label free approaches, 15N metabolic labeling and isobaric chemical labeling with TMT and it raq. Here we present a versatile software package for a wide range of community proteomics analysis. The package integrates a redesigned and reimplemented si pros 3.0 program for highly scalable database searching and an upgraded pro rata 3.0 program for handling all common quantification methods.
