Supercoiling imposes stress on a DNA molecule that can drive susceptible sequences into alternative non b form structures. This phenomenon occurs frequently in vivo and has been implicated in biological processes, such as replication, transcription, recombin-ation and translocation. SIST is a software package that analyzes sequence dependent structural transitions in kilobase length superhelical DNA molecules. The numerical algorithms in SIST are based on a statistical mechanical model that calculates the equilibrium probability of transition for each base pair in the domain. They are extensions of the original stress induced duplex destabilization (SIDD) method, which analyzes stress driven DNA strand separation. SIST also includes algorithms to analyze B-Z transitions and cruciform extrusion. The SIST pipeline has an option to use the dz cb trans algorithm , which analyzes the competition among these three transitions within a superhelical domain. Availability and implementation: The package and additional documentation are freely available at https://bitbucket.org/benhamlab/sist_ codes.

introduction negative supercoiling in DNA can drive regions with susceptible sequences from the native b form into alternate structures. Such transitions lower the superhelical energy, so they become favored at equilibrium when the stress energy they relax exceeds their cost. As the transition relaxes super helicity its effect is felt throughout the domain involved. This makes superhelical transitions globally competitive. Several types of superhelical transitions have been shown to occur in vitro, including local strand separations, z dna cruciform extrusion and others. In vivo, supercoiling is imposed by DNA gyrase s in prokaryotes, and by transcriptional activity in all organisms. Recently, the ssdna seq technique has mapped the genome wide occurrence of in vivo alternate DNA structures (). This method found that increasing the cellular transcriptional activity substantially increases the occurrence of open regions throughout the genome. These denatured regions are accurately predicted by the SIDD algorithm. Competing superhelical DNA structural transitions are known to play roles in important biological processes. The c myc oncogene has a SIDD site called FUSE located 2 kb upstream from its promoters, three a lui fragments containing z forming sites and a potentially either g quadri plex forming or h forming site called the CT element 1 kb upstream from the promoters. Experiments have shown that each of these sites can be driven into their alternate structure by the super helicity that is induced by transcription. (See) and references therein.) cruciform s have been implicated in chromosomal translocations. (See zha bins kaya and Benham, 2013 and references therein.) The algorithms that underlie SIST can include any transition whose energetics have been experimentally evaluated. At present, there are only three such transitions: strand separation, B-Z transitions and cruciform extrusion. Other conformations that DNA can assume include the g quadri plex and the h form triplex, but their energetics are not yet fully characterized. However, the SIST algorithms are written to permit the inclusion of additional types of transitions into the model, as more experimental information about their energetics becomes available.

discussion the SIST package provides researchers with an accessible and flexible way to analyze the propensities of DNA sequences to form alternate structures under a variety of environmental conditions. Users can access the SIST source code through bit bucket which will enable them to extend the method to suit their evolving needs. They may, for example, include other transitions or update energy parameters with new experimental evidence. In the near future, we plan also to release our windowing algorithm. This will allow users to analyze long sequences, including complete chromosomes.. Transition probabilities calculated by SIST as functions of base pair position are shown for a sequence where regions susceptible to melting, z dna and cruciform extrusion were inserted into the pbr322 plasmid. The results are shown for the three-way competition algorithm trans compete run with default parameters. The sequence and instructions on how to generate these results can be found in the example directory in the bit bucket repository
