Motivation: Computational characterization of ligand binding sites in proteins provides preliminary information for functional annotation, protein design and ligand optimization. site comp implements binding site analysis for comparison of binding sites, evaluation of residue contribution to binding sites and identification of sub-sites with distinct molecular interaction properties. Availability and implementation: The site comp server and tutorials are freely available at

introduction the interaction of proteins with their ligands (metabolites, proteins, nucleic acids, lipids, etc.) is the most fundamental of all biological mechanisms. These interactions are often specific and are the consequence of distinct molecular interaction properties of the binding sites. Hence, the analysis and comparison of binding site properties can shed light on the basis of ligand affinity, selectivity and ultimately the molecular underpinnings of protein function. The most frequent questions that arise in binding site analysis are: (i) Does a binding site contain regions (sub-sites) with special molecular interaction properties? (ii) What residues contribute to the formation of a binding site? (iii) What are the differences between two similar binding sites? site comp is a web server designed to answer these questions, hence facilitating the design of new experiments and the analysis of existing data in the context of elucidating molecular mechanisms and drug design. While tools for the characterization of sub-sites within a ligand binding region have been available since the development of the GRID approach (), no freely available web servers exist to carry out this type of analysis. Existing computational methods have also achieved success in the identification of ligand binding sites (), including detection of local similarity (), or comparison of interaction properties of complete proteins (). However, these methods are not well suited for identifying differences between similar binding sites, which can be exploited to improve ligand selectivity. Methods that address the question of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. residue contribution to a binding site can be divided into two groups i computational alanine scanning methods (; mass ova and); and (ii) energy decomposition methods (). The former have been developed exclusively for protein protein interaction surfaces. While the latter, which are relatively accurate, require computationally expensive molecular dynamics or Monte Carlo simulations. site comp complements the existing methods, bridging several of the current gaps, by providing a web based interface for identification of differences between similar binding sites, discovery of sub-sites with different interaction properties and for fast (albeit more approximate) calculations of residue contribution to binding sites. It integrates these three modes of binding site analysis into an easy to use interactive interface with graphical input and output.). a larger binding site (). Visualization of the output in the server facilitates comparison and combination of m if clusters detected with different parameters and probes.
