As microbial ecologists take advantage of high throughput analytical techniques to describe microbial communities across ever increasing numbers of samples, the need for new analysis tools that reveal the intrinsic spatial patterns and structures of these populations is crucial. Here we present site painter an interactive graphical tool that allows investigators to create or upload pictures of their study site, load diversity analyses data and display both diversity and taxonomy results in a spatial context. Features of site painter include: visualizing α-diversity, using taxonomic summaries; visualizing β-diversity, using results from multidimensional scaling methods; and animating relationships among microbial tax a or pathways over time. site painter thus increases the visual power and ability to explore spatially explicit studies. Availability: https://sourceforge.net/projects/sitepainter

introduction as sequencing capacity increases, microbial community analysis is undergoing a revolution in throughput. Where it was once a monumental task just to analyze microbial communities in a handful of samples, we can now process thousands of samples in a single sequencing run (). Accordingly, instead of describing those communities in a few samples collected under a few specific conditions, we can now perform comprehensive spatial sampling, exploring interactions among members of the microbial communities and revealing large scale spatial dynamics (). However, the power of these analyses is often limited by our ability to visualize the data. When analyzing biogeographical data, researchers would like to know where specific microbes live, how abundant they are and whether there are any notable patterns relating microbial tax a to each other or to environmental conditions. Traditional ordination methods for visualizing large numbers of microbial communities such as Principal Coordinates Analysis * To whom correspondence should be addressed pco a () are extremely useful for reducing the dimensionality of vast multivariate datasets, but the patterns are often unclear, especially when the results do not map easily onto the sampling structure. For example, it may not be clear that all the points that cluster together at one end of an axis are on the surface of a complex shape without closely examining the sample identifiers (). To address this key barrier to microbial community research, we developed site painter that provides compelling visualizations that allow the researcher to better explore spatial patterns in microbial communities. site painter allows the user to draw or import representative images for biogeographical sites [in the example, we show a human hand (C), although any picture from micro to landscape scale is possible] and regions within that site (e.g. a finger, palm, finger tips, etc.). Once the biogeographical image is drawn, the user can import tab delimited text files, such as those produced by Quantitative Insights Into Microbial Community q ii me () to map onto their image. For example, it is often useful to plot the diversity (the number of species present in each sample), taxonomy summaries (the abundance of particular kinds of species in the sample) and or -diversity (the overall similarities and differences among samples region divided into smaller areas that were then sampled using cotton swabs dipped in saline solution. Using site painter we were able to rapidly deduce which bacteria were in different regions of the hand, along with a graphical representation of microbial abundances by processing the sequence data with q ii me () and mapping the abundance of each tax on onto the hand image (). Using this display, we can immediately see that Gammaproteobacteria is present in the palm, Bacilli are more visible toward the fingertips and Actinomycetales is present in only one area of the hand. This feature thus allows the user to easily visualize the distribution and abundance of microbes across sites. Going beyond the abundances of individual microbial tax a site painter also allows the user to view similarities and differences at the whole community level by loading the pco a axis of the microbial data to reveal patterns that are not obvious in the pco a plot but are immediately obvious when displayed in the context of the site itself (: compare left panel to the right two panels. In this case, we can see a clear gradient from the thumb and index fingers to the left bottom corner of the hand; additionally we can see that the distal phalanges are similar, may be due to constant contact). In addition to analyses of microbial tax a as shown here, site painter can also be used to interpret the abundance of genes or pathways across sites for metabolic studies. Several further examples can be found in the Human microbio me Project web site: http://hmpdacc.org/sp/. These examples analyze the entire Human microbio me Project () dataset at several taxonomic levels, and at several different levels of functional classification for shotgun meta genomic reads. We expect that this will be a useful community resource for those trying to interpret the complexities of the human microbio me
