high throughput sequencing (HTS) has opened up a new era for small RNA (sRNA) exploration. Using HTS data for a global survey of srn as in 26 angiosperms, elevated GC contents were detected in the monocots, whereas the 5 terminal compositions were quite uniform among the angiosperms. chromosome wide distribution patterns of srn as were investigated by using scrolling window analysis. We performed de novo natural antisense transcript (NAT) prediction, and found that the overlapping regions of trans nats but not cis nats were hotspots for sRNA generation. One cisn at generates phased natural antisense short interfering RNAs nat sirnas specifically from flowers in Arabidopsis, while one in rice produces phased nat sirnas from grains, suggesting their organ specific regulatory roles.

introduction in eukaryotes, small RNAs srn as are essential regulators in gene expression, heterochromatin formation and virus resistance (). The plant srn as are divided into two classes: microRNAs (miRNAs) and siRNAs. The 21-nt miRNAs exert post-transcriptional regulation on targets mostly through cleavage. However, the 2024-nt siRNAs are more diverse. Two subspecies, natural antisense short interfering RNAs nat sirnas () and trans-acting siRNAs (), have been characterized. Besides cleavage effect on targets, numerous siRNAs were reported to mediate DNA or histone methylation (). The development of sensitive high throughput sequencing (HTS) technology has enabled our efficient srn as exploration (), and there are a number of huge HTS datasets available (). A few analytical frameworks have been proposed for analyzing such data (), but it is clear that these datasets contain a wealth of information that has not been fully explored here we report a large scale analysis of HTS data for plant srn as. We have surveyed the GC contents, 5 terminal compositions and chromosome wide distribution patterns of srn as. De novo natural antisense transcript (NAT) prediction unveiled that the overlapping regions of trans nats were hotspots for sRNA generation. We have identified novel cis nats that produce phase distributed nat sirnas which are likely involved in organ specific regulation.
