snake make is a workflow engine that provides a readable python based workflow definition language and a powerful execution environment that scales from single core workstations to compute clusters without modifying the workflow. It is the first system to support the use of automatically inferred multiple named wildcards (or variables) in input and output filenames. Availability: http://snakemake.

introduction large scale data analyses in bioinformatics involve the chained execution of many command line applications. Workflow engines help to automate these pipelines and ensure reproducibility. Systems such as bio pipe (), Taverna (), Galaxy (), gene prof () or PegaSys () are easy to learn and use through their graphical user interface. Others such as ruff us (), pw rake (), GXP Make () and b pipe () use text based definition of workflows, which can be advantageous: workflows can be edited without a graphical environment (e.g. directly on a remote server); and developers can collaborate on them through source code management tools. Similar to pw rake and GXP Make, snake make is inspired by the build system GNU Make (). They all infer the actual workflow (dependencies, parallelization) from a set of rules with input and output files. snake make complements these prior works with a syntax close to pseudocode, in the spirit of the Python language. snake make interoperates with any installed tool or available web service with well defined input and output (file) formats. Although this approach lacks type checking of intermediate files, it does not require tight integration of tools into the workflow system, such as with PegaSys (), and thus is most flexible. snake make itself is fully portable, as only a Python installation is required to run snake files. It provides automatic scalability because it optimizes the number of parallel processes w.r.t. provided CPU cores and needed threads and can make use of single machines as well as cluster engines without modifying the workflow. In contrast to pw rake and GXP Make, snake make does not rely on any password less SSH setup or custom server processes running on the cluster nodes. Finally, snake make is the first system to support file name inference with multiple named wildcards in rules.
