Many existing databases annotate experimentally characterized single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Each non-synonymous SNP ns snp changes one amino acid in the gene product (single amino acid substitutions aas. This change can either affect protein function or be neutral in that respect. Most polymorphisms lack experimental annotation of their functional impact. Here, we introduce snp dbe snp database of effects, with predictions of computationally annotated functional impacts of SNPs. Database entries represent ns snps in dbSNP and 1000 Genomes collection, as well as variants from UniProt and PMD. sa ass come from 2600 organisms; human being the most prevalent. The impact of each SAAS on protein function is predicted using the SNAP and SIFT algorithms and augmented with experimentally derived function structure information and disease associations from PMD, OMIM and UniProt. snp dbe is consistently updated and easily augmented with new sources of information. The database is available as an MySQL dump and via a web front end that allows searches with any combination of organism names, sequences and mutation IDs. Availability: http://www.rostlab.org/services/snpdbe Contact:

introduction resources like dbSNP () and UniProt () contain many experimentally determined ns snps but few of these are annotated with respect to function. Some databases [e.g. PMD ()] contain experimental annotations of functional effects of mutants. However, these are sparsely populated and do not directly link to dbSNP or UniProt. For the vast majority of mutations lacking experimental annotation, we can gauge functional impact only via in silico analysis. Proper use of computational methods requires specific skills and resources generally inaccessible to medical researchers or experimental biologists. To help, we created an MySQL database readily usable by non experts. We collected sa ass from PMD, dbSNP, 1000 Genomes 1000 genomes project consortium 2010) and UniProt 'variant's and 'mutant's. We also store 'conflict' records to illustrate how sequencing discrepancies may lead to differing interpretations of the functional significance of a given * To whom correspondence should be addressed. sequence position. For each SAAS we predict the functional effect using SNAP () and SIFT (). Where available, predictions are augmented by experimental annotations and associated human diseases. We also compute evolutionary conservation of the mutant positions. A web interface provides convenient access to underlying data via organism, sequence and mutation ID queries.

conclusions npd be is designed to fill the annotation gap left by the high cost of experimental testing for functional significance of protein variants. It joins related bits of knowledge, currently distributed throughout various databases, into a consistent, easily accessible and updatable resource. The major features distinguishing snp dbe from other databases are: (i) the inclusion of a much wider array of organisms and data sources; and (ii) the explicit differentiation between functional structural effects and disease associations. Furthermore, unlike snp dbe existing resources (i) lack experimental annotation of functional structural changes or offer only single tool (e.g. SIFT) predictions (), (ii) are limited to naturally occurring variants (), (iii) are not consistently updated () or (iv) do not offer pre-computed effects on a large scale (). snp dbes database schema and management scripts are designed to easily handle the addition of new sequences and sa ass and the integration of new predictors and sources of experimental data. Monthly updates are planned. Information about current versions of included databases and statistics is available from snp dbe website. Our ultimate goal is to make snp dbe a toolbox for biologists and medical researchers dealing with mutation data. Computationally acquired predictions and annotations found in snp dbe will help design and prioritize further experimental research.
