Motivation: Recent studies sequenced tumor samples from the same progenitor at different development stages and showed that by taking into account the phylogeny of this development, single nucleotide variant (SNV) calling can be improved. Accurate SNV calls can better reveal early stage tumors, identify mechanisms of cancer progression or help in drug targeting. Results: We present snv ppi lp a fast and easy to use tool for refining gat ks Unified genotype r SNV calls, for multiple samples assumed to form a phylogeny. We tested snv ppi lp on simulated data, with a varying number of samples, sn vs read coverage and violations of the perfect phylogeny assumption. We always match or improve the accuracy of g atk with a significant improvement on low read coverage.

introduction recent studies on cancer tissue () suggest that as the disease progresses, the original tumor progresses into several different sub-clones. These sub-clones contain not only the original mutations but also new mutations added over time; this work focuses on single nucleotide variants sn vs. Accurate SNV calls can better reveal early stage tumors, identify mechanisms of cancer progression or help in drug targeting. This phylogenetic assumption has been recently taken into account in, by proposing a tool for refining the SNV calling of gat ks Unified genotype r (), the state of the art SNV multi-sample caller for next generation sequencing data. In this note, we present snv ppi lp (SNV calling with Perfect Phylogenies and Integer Linear Programming), a tool for refining gat ks Unified genotype r SNV calls for multiple samples. We assume these samples form a character based phylogeny, the characters being the sn vs reported by g atk. As in, we work with the perfect phylogeny model; however, we have a new problem formulation for fitting gat ks calls to such a phylogeny, which we solve exactly using integer linear programming (ILP). snv ppi lp can be run especially on low coverage samples, without big violations of the perfect phylogeny model. For a significant improvement in accuracy, six or more samples are needed.
