Motivation: rnase q provides a powerful approach to carry out ab ini-tio investigation of fusion transcripts representing critical translocation and post-transcriptional events that recode hereditary information. Most of the existing computational fusion detection tools are challenged by the issues of accuracy and how to handle multiple mappings. Results: We present a novel tool soap fusion for fusion discovery with paired end rnase q reads. soap fusion is accurate and efficient for fusion discovery with high sensitivity (!93%), low false positive rate (1.36%), even the coverage is as low as 10Â, highlighting its ability to detect fusions efficiently at low sequencing cost. From real data of Universal Human Reference RNA uhr r samples, soap fusion detected 7 novel fusion genes, more than other existing tools and all genes have been validated through reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction followed by Sanger sequencing. soap fusion thus proves to be an effective method with precise applicability in search of fusion transcripts, which is advantageous to accelerate pathological and therapeutic cancer studies.

introduction fusion transcript, the new transcript transcribed casually from two parental genes, may emerge through chromosomal rearrangements () or intergenic splicing (). Given their important roles in cancer development and progression (), some known fusions have been successfully used as biomarkers for development of inhibitors triggering cancer remission, e.g. BCRABL1 fusion in treating chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) (). Consequently, it is of enormous biological and therapeutic significance to locate such fusion events. Early studies mainly resorted to expressed sequence tag (), array CGH () or end sequence profiling () to seek for fusions. However, such methods were largely constrained by their limited sequencing throughput and uneconomic cost (). With the emergence of next generation sequencing technologies, rnase q has been introduced as an excellent technique in fusion discovery (), and, in particular, paired end (PE) sequencing was proved to exhibit distinguished strengths in both productivity and sensitivity (). The general idea of fusion detection from rnase q data is to align all reads to a reference genome or transcriptome and then explore alignments carrying potential fusion features to call fusions. Early computational detection approaches first narrow down regions containing possible fusions with PE reads intact ly mapped to the reference, and then search for the fusion junctions with remaining reads that mapped to those regions intact ly. Nevertheless, with successful application of segmental alignment strategy in some splicing junction detection tools, e.g. map splice () and soap splice (), a bunch of computational approaches have been proposed, including fusion seq (), short fuse (), fusion hunter (), fusion map (), deFuse () and top hat fusion (), to consider all segmental alignment of reads in addition to intact alignment. These current methods vary in performance and ability in fusion detection. Roughly speaking, the performance of these methods rely on their ability to precisely detect the reads encompassing fusion junctions (fusion reads), as those reads served as the major evidences for fusion events and could only be segment ally mapped to references. To obtain specific fusion junctions, current tools align potential fusion reads to combinations of candidate exons (e.g. fusion seq short fuse fusion hunter fusion map and deFuse) or split those reads into fixed segments for reference alignment (e.g. fusion map and top hat fusion. This induces higher computational requirement on alignment and or not easy to solve segmental mapping problems such as *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
