Motivation: Solenoid proteins are emerging as a protein class with properties intermediate between structured and intrinsically unstructured proteins. Containing repeating structural units, solenoid proteins are expected to share sequence similarities. However, in many cases, the sequence similarities are weak and non detectable. Moreover, solenoids can be degenerated and widely vary in the number of units. So that it is difficult to detect them. Recently, several solenoid repeats detection methods have been proposed, such as self alignment of the sequence, spectral analysis and discrete Fourier transform of sequence. Although these methods have shown good performance on certain data sets, they often fail to detect repeats with weak similarities. In this article, we propose a new approach to recognize solenoid repeats and non solenoid proteins using stationary wavelet packet transform sw pt. Our method associates with three advantages: (i) naturally representing five main factors of protein structure and properties by wavelet analysis technique; (ii) extracting novel wavelet features that can capture hidden components from solenoid sequence similarities and distinguish them from global proteins; (iii) obtaining statistics features that capture repeating motifs of solenoid proteins. Results: Our method analyzes the characteristics of amino acid sequence in both spectral and temporal domains using sw pt. Both global and local information of proteins are captured by sw pt coefficients. We obtain and integrate wavelet based features and statistics based features of amino acid sequence to improve the classification task. Our proposed method is evaluated by comparing to state of the art methods such as hh rep id and re petit a. The experimental results show that our algorithm consistently outperforms them in areas under ROC curve. At the same false positive rate, the sensitivity of our WAVELET method is higher than other methods.

introduction with several interesting features of repeating sequences, significant progress has been made in the identification of the DNA and protein repeats, understanding the duplication mechanism and special features of the repeat evolution (). Repeats are usually found in non-coding genomic regions. However, repeating sequences are also found in about 14% of all proteins coded by all known genes with about 25% of all eukaryotic proteins (). The known protein structures can be classified by the length of their repeats, which can provide information about a possible 3D structure of the repetitive protein (). There are four main structural classes (): Class I, crystalline structures 1 to 2 residue repeats); Class II, fibrous proteins 3 to 4 residue repeats); Class III, solenoid proteins 5 to 42 residue repeats); and Class IV, domain forming repeats (30 or more residues). Solenoid proteins contain a superhelical arrangement of repeating structure units (). This arrangement contrasts the structure of most class iv proteins that fold into globular domains in more complex manners. Repeats in Class I and Class II have only 14 residues, hence they have low sequence complexity and can be easily detected. Globular repeats in Class IV have their sufficient length to be detected by database search tools like PSI-BLAST (). Solenoid proteins are built of repeated structural units. The repeating units of the solenoids consist of one to several segments of secondary structure, among which are -helices (), -strands () and 3 10 helices. The solenoid proteins have purely -helices or -strands or a mixture of the secondary structures (). They are expected to share sequence similarities. However, in some cases, the sequence similarities are weak such as protein farnesyltransferase fta se and insulin like growth factor 1 receptor (IGF-1R;), so that they are non detectable (). Therefore, database search tools like PSI-BLAST relying on clear conservation pattern are not good tools to detect solenoid repeats. In recent years, several methods have been proposed to identify solenoid repeats. Some of them are based on self alignment of the sequence such as REPRO (), RADAR (), TRUST (), hh rep () and hh rep id (). hh rep and hh rep id utilized hidden Markov model comparison hmm hmm while the others used sequence sequence comparison to find suboptimal self alignments. Repeating parts of the sequence appear as off diagonal regions of similarity. They allow the detection of basic repeating units and locations of units along the sequence. hh rep id has been reported to be the most sensitive self alignment approach to detect repeats (). However, hh rep id often can not detect repeats with weak similarities. Other approaches to recognize solenoid repeats use periodic patterns in proteins such as (), (), (), rep per () and re petit a (). Repeating protein motifs, TIM barrels, propellor blades, coiled coils and leucine rich repeating structures have been analyzed () and used to detect repeats in known protein structure. The data utilized in are relative accessible surface area and simple hydrophobicity that provide information of the protein structure and page i468 i467i473

conclusion in this article, we proposed a new WAVELET method to recognize solenoid proteins and global proteins using sw pt and statistical features of amino acid sequences. In order to detect solenoid repeats with weak similarities, we took advantages of the integration of wavelet statistics features and the sw pt analysis of five factors representing protein structure and properties. Our new features can capture structure, properties of solenoid proteins and hidden components from sequence similarities, to distinguish them from global proteins. The proposed approach was validated by comparing to other state of the art methods in solenoid proteins detection experiments. In all results, our new scheme improved the solenoid protein recognition in all statistical metrics, including sensitivity, specificity and accuracy. The WAVELET method is a promising approach for solenoid protein classification. Based on different types of training data, the WAVELET method can be applied to classify different kinds of solenoids or different kinds of protein structures in future work.
