Motivation: Finding somatic mutations from massively parallel sequencing data is becoming a standard process in genome based biomedical studies. There are a number of robust methods developed for detecting somatic single nucleotide variations However, detection of somatic copy number alteration has been substantially less explored and remains vulnerable to frequently raised sampling issues: low frequency in cell population and absence of the matched control samples. Results: We developed a novel computational method solo del that accurately classifies low frequent somatic deletions from germline ones with or without matched control samples. We first constructed a probabilistic, somatic mutation progression model that describes the occurrence and propagation of the event in the cellular lineage of the sample. We then built a Gaussian mixture model to represent the mixed population of somatic and germline deletions. Parameters of the mixture model could be estimated using the expectation maximization algorithm with the observed distribution of read depth ratios at the points of discordant read based initial deletion calls. Combined with conventional structural variation caller, solo del greatly increased the accuracy in classifying somatic mutations. Even without control, solo del maintained a comparable performance in a wide range of mutated subpopulation size (10–70%). solo del could also successfully recall experimentally validated somatic deletions from previously reported neuropsychiatric whole genome sequencing data. Availability and implementation: java based implementation of the method is available at http:// sourceforge net projects solo del
introduction advances in next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies enable us to find novel aspects of disease on sets that could not be detected in the previous chip based technologies. Finding somatic mutations is a representative NGS analysis to detect genetic variants that occurred after conception. Various types of somatic mutations such as single nucleotide variations sn vs (), gene fusions (and transposable element insertions () have been focused in a number of disease genome studies, which has led to a successful development of the relevant computational detection methods (). Somatic copy number alteration (SCNA) is one of the major genomic aberrations frequently found in cancer (). Several SCNA detection algorithms have been developed based on read depth comparison () and or read pair analysis () between tumor and matched control samples. While these algorithms have successfully discovered a number of disease associated scn as several hurdles still remain. First, many somatic mutations reside only in a small population of the sample to be present in a low allele fraction; this problem is well known as tumor cellularity or tumor sub clonality in cancer. Furthermore, non tumor diseases may harbor similar issues due to somatic mosaicism. For example, remarkably low frequent (down to a few percent) mutations have been reported in brain diseases such as neuropsychiatric disorders and neurodevelopmental malformations (). At this range, conventional SCNA detection methods can be seriously compromised because their key evidence read depth discrepancy in disease control pair) is obscured; copy number changes occur only in a subset to make only an insignificant difference in overall read depth (). Consequently, these subtle read depth changes are hardly distinguished from natural variance. Second, matched control samples (e.g. blood, saliva or normal tissue) are not always available. Genomic study of brain diseases is one typical case; because brain tissues are usually collected posthumously, control samples are no more available once they are missed in the initial design. For example, only 22% of brain non tumor (and 72% of brain tumor) whole genome samples deposited in the sequence read archive contain matched control information (Supplementary). Although less frequent, there is still lack of matched control in general cancer data including 59 case only studies (2799 samples) archived in the database of genotypes and phenotypes. This absence of control samples prohibits the use of current algorithms for SCNA detection. We found the two critical problems, low mutational frequency and absence of control, turn to be a rather solvable probabilistic problem when considered simultaneously. A germline mutation is expected to be observed in the entire population of the sample. So the expected allele frequency of a germline mutation is 50% for heterozygous and 100% for homozygous events. And we expect a broadly shared somatic mutation would represent a similar frequency to germline mutations. On the contrary, if a somatic mutation exists only in a subpopulation (e.g. 10% of the sample), the allele frequency of its heterozygous mutation is expected to be much lower (e.g. 5%); these frequencies are hardly expected in germline mutations according to the binomial probability (that one haploid is dominantly sequenced by chance) and can be separated without control. If we can catalog all existing somatic and germline mutations in the sample, the overall allele frequency distribution can be utilized to de convolute somatic mutations in a subpopulation from the others. However, the classification of somatic mutation among the all cataloged mutations is also dependent upon the assumed subpopulation composition; for example a 1% allele frequency is generally a noise, but can be a successful somatic mutation candidate with a 2% sized subpopulation. So an efficient inference should be applied to find the optimal list of somatic mutations with proper composition that maximizes the observation probability. Another problem is interpreting the deviations in read depth to a deletion call and its frequency. Deletions in rare populations (5%) are difficult to be distinguish from noises. Likewise, rich populations (90%) are almost germline like and hardly separated. Here, we introduce a novel computational method solo del (Somatic low frequent Deletion call model) to find low frequent somatic deletions with and without matched control data. We first construct a probabilistic model of somatic mutation progression to represent the composition of two subpopulation groups, normal and mutated cells. Two types of model parameters, a rate of so matically affected haploid p s (a half of mutated subpopulation size assuming that all somatic deletions are heterozygous) and a proportion of somatic to total deletion k s are defined for somatic deletions to show the status of the mutated cell population and the number of somatic deletions. We then fit the constructed model for a given sample with the assumption that the sample consists of normal cells and mutated cells. Optimal model parameters that maximize the observation probability are estimated by applying the expectation maximization (EM) algorithms for Gaussian mixture model, which represent the mixed allele frequencies of deletions from normal and mutated cells. We accept the mixed model only if the likelihood of the estimated model is higher than that of a simple germline model (subpopulation free). Final somatic deletion candidates that show higher probability to be somatic are selected based on the estimated model. Using simulated data with various conditions, we demonstrated that solo del accurately estimates the mutated subpopulation size with an average error rate of 1%. False rejection of mixture model only happened in near germline samples. With the combined use of external structural variation caller, we also showed that solo del greatly improves the accuracy in terms of overall precision and recall in the entire range of subpopulation size and total number of somatic deletions (1001000). Moreover, the performance remained consistent without matched control in a wide range of subpopulation size (10%-70%). Finally, we could successfully recall experimentally validated low frequent somatic deletions from neuropsychiatric disease samples. This implies that low frequent somatic deletions can also be recruited using our in silico probabilistic model to alleviate high priced and laborious deletion searching procedures including nested pcr and single cell sequencing.

discussion in this article, we developed a novel computational method solo del for detecting low frequent somatic deletions with and without matched control samples. We defined a probabilistic model for somatic deletion generation and estimated model parameters using EM algorithms to provide the criteria of classifying somatic deletion candidates. Compared with previous methods, we showed outstanding performances of detecting low frequent somatic deletions with various simulation datasets. With the real sequencing data, we successfully recalled experimentally validated somatic deletions confirmed by the previous study, supporting the reliable performance. Recent studies have been increasingly reporting the contribution of low frequent somatic mutations to the onset of various diseases including neuropsychiatric diseases (). However, confirmed list of low frequent somatic mutations are still limited due to the lack of detecting methods, insufficiency of matched control information and difficulty of experimental validation. Advances of new techniques such as single cell sequencing and targeted ultra depth sequencing will allow us to fill up the catalog of low frequent somatic mutations. Decline of sequencing cost and growth of interest for the somatic analysis will increase the datasets with matched control and improve the quality of somatic call. With enough numbers of secured gold standards, the development of computational tools for accurate detection of somatic mutations will be followed. There are several issues to enhance the detecting ability of solo del. To detect low frequent somatic deletions as intended, enough coverage of whole genome sequencing data is indispensable. Initial calling of deletion candidates that completely depend on the external callers is another issue to improve. Consideration of polyploidy that affects the estimation of subpopulation size may also elevate the performance of solo del by using GC content normalization (). In spite of the issues for improvement, solo del showed considerable results compared with the conventional methods even with the harsh conditions, which makes it applicable for identifying low frequent somatic deletions of many challenging cases.
