Motivation: Nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy has been used to study mixtures of metabolites in biological samples. This technology produces a spectrum for each sample depicting the chemical shifts at which an unknown number of latent metabolites resonate. The interpretation of this data with common multivariate exploratory methods such as principal components analysis pc a is limited due to high dimensionality non negativity of the underlying spectra and dependencies at adjacent chemical shifts. Results: We develop a novel modification of pc a that is appropriate for analysis of NMR data, entitled Sparse Non-Negative Generalized pc a. This method yields interpretable principal components and loading vectors that select important features and directly account for both the non negativity of the underlying spectra and dependencies at adjacent chemical shifts. Through the reanalysis of experimental NMR data on five purified neural cell types, we demonstrate the utility of our methods for dimension reduction, pattern recognition, sample exploration and feature selection. Our methods lead to the identification of novel metabolites that reflect the differences between these cell types.

introduction metabolomics one of the newest fields within systems biology approaches to biomarker discovery in medicine, investigates an abundant pool of small molecules present in cells and tissues (). One of the commonly used technologies for acquisition of this data is nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy. It is a high throughput technology for acquiring reproducible and resolved spectra that can be used to study the complete metabolic profile of a biological sample (). The spectra contain thousands of chemical resonances, which may belong to hundreds of metabolites (). However, many metabolites resonate at multiple resonances and thus, unlike the typical DNA microarray data, different metabolite spectra overlap * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and introduce complexities that need to be addressed by signal processing and careful statistical analysis (). As understanding relationships between the set of biological samples and the underlying spectra is a challenge, principal components analysis pc a is commonly used for both dimension reduction and pattern recognition with NMR data (). In high dimensional settings, however, it is well known that pc a can perform poorly due to the large number of irrelevant variables (). Hence, many have proposed to incorporate sparsity into the principal component directions, thus selecting important features (). non negativity of the matrix factors, or principal component directions, has also been proposed in a number of settings to improve interpretability of the factors (). Several recent papers have combined these concepts to encourage both sparsity and non negativity into the model (). In this article, we make the following statistical contributions i propose a framework for incorporating sparsity, known structural dependencies and non negativity into the principal component (PC) loadings and (ii) develop a fast, computationally efficient algorithm to compute these in high dimensional settings. This work is presented in Section 2. Then, in Section 3, we evaluate the performance of our methods on real NMR data. We also demonstrate how to interpret the PC loadings to understand important biological patterns and identify candidate metabolites. In Section 4, we conclude with a summary of the implications of our work and future areas of research.

discussion we have presented a framework for incorporating structural dependencies, sparsity and non negativity into pc a. By comparing our techniques to traditional pc a methods on real NMR data, we have demonstrated the many advantages of our methods. Future areas of research are to extend our framework to supervised multivariate analysis techniques such as partial least squares and linear discriminant to better classify NMR samples. While we have demonstrated our methods on 1D h nmr spectroscopy, our approach can be applied to many other high throughput metabolomics technologies. Mass spectrometry and other spectroscopy techniques also produce a spectrum of non-negative variables. Additionally, many researchers employ multidimensional spectroscopy to further identify metabolites in a sample (). In this data, each sample consists of a matrix of spectroscopy variables. Sparse non-negative gpc a can be applied to this multidimensional data in a straightforward manner by vectorizing the matrix of variables and employing a 2D kernel smoother over the lattice of variables. As a future area of research, one can also extend our methods to tensors or higher order pc a to find patterns and achieve dimension reduction for this multidimensional metabolomics data. In addition to metabolomics data, our methods are general and hence applicable to a variety of other structured biomedical data. As the dependencies of the noise must be known to construct the quadratic operator, our methods can be used to find patterns in data where these noise dependencies are well established. Possible further applications of our methods then include copy number variation and methylation data in which variables strongly depend on known chromosomal location, and microscopy, neuroimaging and other bio-medical imaging data in which pixels are spatially correlated with adjacent pixels. In conclusion, we have developed a novel modification of pc a particularly suited to the challenges associated with analyzing NMR data. While our methods show numerous advantages in the analysis of metabolomics data, there are still many open research problems and potential extensions related to our work.
