Motivation: Molecular association of phenotypic responses is an important step in hypothesis generation and for initiating design of new experiments. Current practices for associating gene expression data with multidimensional phenotypic data are typically (i) performed one to one i.e. each gene is examined independently with a phenotypic index and (ii) tested with one stress condition at a time, i.e. different perturbations are analyzed separately. As a result, the complex coordination among the genes responsible for a phenotypic profile is potentially lost. More importantly, univariate analysis can potentially hide new insights into common mechanism of response. Results: In this article, we propose a sparse, multitask regression model together with co clustering analysis to explore the intrinsic grouping in associating the gene expression with phenotypic signatures. The global structure of association is captured by learning an intrinsic template that is shared among experimental conditions, with local perturbations introduced to integrate effects of therapeutic agents. We demonstrate the performance of our approach on both synthetic and experimental data. Synthetic data reveal that the multi-task regression has a superior reduction in the regression error when compared with traditional L 1 and L 2 regularized regression. On the other hand, experiments with cell cycle inhibitors over a panel of 14 breast cancer cell lines demonstrate the relevance of the computed molecular predictors with the cell cycle machinery, as well as the identification of hidden variables that are not captured by the baseline regression analysis. Accordingly, the system has identified CLCA2 as a hidden transcript and as a common mechanism of response for two therapeutic agents of CI-1040 and Iressa, which are currently in clinical use.

introduction genome wide association studies of expression and phenotypic data are becoming a routine methodology for identifying potential biomarkers. While the literature is rich with supervised or unsupervised clustering of genomic information, methods for studying the relationships between genomic and phenotypic data remain relatively limited. Existing association methods are typically based on the univariate correlation analysis, which either correlates a single gene to the resultant phenotype(s) or vice versa. This is known as the gene and phenotype based approaches, respectively (). More recently, () quantized large number of transcript data through clustering, and associated them with physiological responses or clinical metadata. In contrast, another group of researchers have taken a new direction by first clustering morphometric data and then associating with the transcript data (Han * To whom correspondence should be addressed). However, in both cases, correlation is based on the independent, pairwise univariate analysis. Pairwise univariate correlation analysis can quickly provide important association information, as well as candidates for further screening. However, it treats the genes and the phenotypes as independent and isolated units, therefore the underlying interacting relationships between the units might be lost. It is well known that some transcripts act as regulatory nodes, driving other transcripts in a coordinated manner to determine the phenotypic profile. Additionally, incubation with each therapeutic reagent simultaneously interferes with a subset of genes. Here, we hypothesized that simultaneous incorporation of genome wide expression data coupled with phenotypic data computed from multiple perturbation conditions, each targeting a different molecular region, can elucidate a common mechanism of response that may be hidden otherwise. In fact, perturbation and molecular diversity of the model system have shown to be capable of reducing the samples needed for biological inference, thus enhancing robustness of biological conclusion (). Thus, we ask the following questions. How can traditional univariate associations be modeled simultaneously and in the absence of a correlation threshold? How can the inherent sparsity of association be formalized within an optimization framework? How can one compensate for the lack of replicates due to the high experimental cost associated with gene expression profiling? To address these issues, we have developed an integrated platform that simultaneously and systematically takes into account an ensemble of gene and phenotypic signatures. Such an enterprise must incorporate an experimental design with sufficient degree of molecular diversity for increased computational robustness. In this context, molecular diversity is achieved by using a panel of breast cancer cell lines that are well characterized and readily available through American Type Culture Collection. Our computational framework consists of two major steps. First, a vector valued multitask regression formulation is adopted to model the relationships between transcripts and phenotypes under multiple experimental conditions. In particular, the regression coefficients are factorized into two parts. One part is a shared template that suggests a common mechanism of action under various treatments. The second part is related to the perturbation that is induced locally in the transcript network under individual perturbation. The regression has to be sparse, because only a subset of genes is typically involved in a specific phenotypic response. Sparsity is enforced through L 1-norm regularization, which inherently removes outliers and irrelevant associations. The end result is a sparse regression matrix that captures intrinsic properties of gene phenotype association. This matrix is reordered for improved visualization of the gene phenotype grouping, where the reordering aims at an optimum permutation of rows and columns of the regression matrix such that

discussion our experiments with synthetic data have clearly demonstrated that multitask learning offers the following advantages over independent L 1 regression: (i) regression is less noisy; (ii) regression error is reduced as a function of the number of tasks; and (iii) hidden variables are revealed since traditional L 1 regression can push non-zero coefficients to zero and vice versa. Therefore, the bulk of the discussion in this section is devoted to the experimental data by focusing on a few important genes and their independent analysis through Ingenuity Pathway Analysis (IPA) and Pathway Studio. (I) CLCA2 is a hidden variable that has been identified through multitask regression and is shown to be negatively associated with the S phase. We hypothesized that CLCA2 is a common mechanism of response for inhibitors CI1040 and Iressa. This gene is known to be downregulated in breast cancer cell lines. In addition to being a p53 client (), its knockdown leads to increased invasiveness (), and it is epi genetically regulated (). It is also a tumor suppressor gene that may be a potential target for therapy. It is likely that CLCA2 acts as a common molecular switch to inhibit DNA synthesis and initiate apoptosis as a result of treatment with either therapeutic agent. Therefore, it not only serves as a therapeutic target, but can also be used in combination with other therapeutic targets used today for improved lethality. (II) NLRP2 is regulated by NFB and is shown to be expressed in MDA-MB-436 and MCF-7 () breast cancer cell lines. This particular gene appears in both independent and multitask regression. Furthermore, the Gene Ontology annotation indicates that NLRP2 is in involved in caspase activities and apoptosis. We hypothesized that strong G1 arrest and complementary negative correlation with cells being in S is the result of treatment with the therapeutic agent. This particular gene is reflected in multitask regression and independent regression analysis corresponding to CI1040 and Iressa. It is also a potential common mechanism of response for further analysis. (III) CDKN2A (also known as p16) expression is positively associated with G1 arrest in normal cells and tissues, but is negatively associated with the S phase in our analysis of the human i103 breast tumor cell lines (in both the independent regression of and the multitask regression of). This discrepancy is likely explained by the fact that most of the malignant cell lines in the panel have aberrations in downstream effectors of the product of this gene. The aberrations result in continued proliferation in the presence of p16 expression that ordinarily would yield cell cycle arrest and senescence (). (IV) cst a is involved in apoptosis and differentiation, and is normally regulated by JUN and FOS (), whose gene products together constitute the AP1 transcription factor. AP1 drives the expression of a number of genes that are necessary for cell cycle progression. The relationships between these protein protein interactions are shown in. This gene appears in multitask and one of the independent regression analysis. (V) CA2 is an example of the gene that is reported by both independent association of gene expression data with CI1040 () and the multitask regression analysis (). CA2 is ordinarily involved in differentiation and apoptosis, overexpressed in MCF7 and MDA-MB-231 and negatively correlated with the S phase in the drug treated cells. sirna mediated interference with human CA2 gene expression has been shown to decrease survival of MDA-MB-231 cell lines (). Finally, we performed an independent analysis by using Ingenuity Pathway Analysis and Pathway Studio, scientific software that helps researchers more effectively search, explore, visualize, and analyze biological and chemical findings related to genes, proteins and small molecules. We selected the set of genes that was correlated with the S phase, and uploaded them into IPA and Pathway Studio. The IPA analysis indicated that this group of genes is largely involved in (i) cell cycle and signaling networks and (ii) cancer. The net result is a more substantial support for gene by gene analysis. Similar results have been obtained from Pathway Studio, which provides gene set enrichment analysis g sea and identifies common regulators with the user defined number of neighbors. Gene enrichment analysis revealed that predicted gene groups are involved in response to toxin, drug, negative regulation of cell proliferation, negative regulation of peptidase activity where S phase is one of them and apoptosis among top ranked groups. Furthermore, a number of common regulators with high p values were also inferred that are associated with the cell cycle machinery shows three regulators of MAPK, jun fos and GF, and their target entities in summary, multitask learning has the potential to summarize a vast amount of data, compute biologically relevant markers and identify hidden variables that traditional regressors may fail to capture. Although the technique is currently applied for integration of gene expression data with cell cycle data, it can also be used for other integrative biology applications.
