Motivation: Direct sequencing of microbes in human ecosystems (the human microbio me has complemented single genome cultivation and sequencing to understand and explore the impact of commensal microbes on human health. As sequencing technologies improve and costs decline, the sophistication of data has outgrown available computational methods. While several existing machine learning methods have been adapted for analyzing microbio me data recently, there is not yet an efficient and dedicated algorithm available for multiclass classification of human microbiota. Results: By combining instance based and model based learning, we propose a novel sparse distance based learning method for simultaneous class prediction and feature (variable or tax a which is used interchangeably) selection from multiple treatment populations on the basis of 16S rRNA sequence count data. Our proposed method simultaneously minimizes the intraclass distance and maximizes the inter class distance with many fewer estimated parameters than other methods. It is very efficient for problems with small sample sizes and unbalanced classes, which are common in meta genomic studies. We implemented this method in a MATLAB toolbox called meta distance. We also propose several approaches for data normalization and variance stabilization transformation in meta distance. We validate this method on several real and simulated 16S rRNA datasets to show that it outperforms existing methods for classifying meta genomic data. This article is the first to address simultaneous multi feature selection and class prediction with meta genomic count data. Availability: The MATLAB toolbox is freely available online at

introduction the human body is inhabited by on the order of 10 14 bacteria, collectively known as the human microbiota, which contains 100 times more genes (the microbio me than in the human genome. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Since these microbes interact with our bodies and provide functions lacking in our genome, changes in the microbial community structure are thought to impact our health. Given the vast number of genes in the microbio me and our inability to sequence all of them, a marker gene is often used for comparison among samples. The 16S rRNA gene is the most common marker gene used since it is universally present and well conserved among prokaryotes. Sequencing of 16S rRNA in an environment containing a mixed population allows the surveying of community structure without biases from culture based methods at a relatively low cost. Whole genome shotgun (WGS) sequencing of the community (a meta genome on the other hand, can provide estimates of functional capabilities of microbio me (), but the cost is substantially higher. A main promise of meta genomics is that it will accelerate the discovery of novel genes and new drug target and provide new insights into diseases with unknown etiologies (). The first step of 16S rRNA meta genomic analysis usually involves the classification of sequences by organism to reduce the dimensionality of the dataset (from millions of sequences to thousands of organisms). In the process, the number of sequences classified to each organism is kept to provide an estimate on organism abundance. Classification of sequences are done by comparing sequences from a sample to 16S rRNA from known tax a or by clustering of similar sequences into operational taxonomic unit (OTU), which represent an unnamed tax on. The end result is a series of sequence read counts associated with tax a in the sample. A popular software package for assigning 16S rRNA to known tax a based on km er frequencies is called ribosomal database project (RDP) Classifier (). In addition to sequence classification, software such as mo thur () and q ii me () provides diversity metrics and sample comparison statistics allowing comparison of microbio me profiles using alpha within community and beta across communities diversities. For graphical comparison, MEGAN () can compare the OTU composition of frequency normalized samples (). From these analyses, we can figure out what organisms are in each of the samples or classes of samples. While these tools can be used to compare and cluster samples based on microbio me profiles, they do not allow for the identification of differentially abundant microbes in samples. Therefore, the important question of which organisms (by virtue of their presence absence or relative abundance) distinguish one
