Motivation: To understand the molecular mechanisms of neurons, it is imperative to identify genomic dissimilarities within the heterogeneity of the neural system. This is especially true for neuronal disorders in which spatial considerations are of critical nature. For this purpose, hi rudo medicinal is provides here an ideal system in which we are able to follow gene expression along the central nervous system, to affiliate location with gene behavior. Results: In all, 221.1 million high quality short reads were sequenced on the Illumina Hiseq2000 platform at the single ganglion level. Thereafter, a de novo assembly was performed using two state of the art assemblers, Trinity and trans abyss to reconstruct a comprehensive de novo transcriptome. Classification of Trinity and trans abyss transcripts produced a non-redundant set of 76 845 and 268 355 transcripts (4200 bp), respectively. Remarkably, using Trinity, 82% of the published medicinal leech messenger RNAs was identified. For the in nexin family, all of the 21 recently reported genes were identified. Spatial regulation analysis across three ganglia throughout the entire central nervous system revealed distinct patterns of gene expression. These transcriptome data were combined with expression distribution to produce a spatio transcript o map along the ganglia chain. This study provides a resource for gene discovery and gene regulation in future studies.

introduction following the complete set of transcripts is elemental for uncovering novel molecular components, and for studying physiological and pathological conditions. next generation sequencing technologies provide cost effective means for quantifying the transcriptome. Recent technological advances have revolutionized the field, making it possible to analyze the transcriptome of selected sets of cells within an organism, leading to the collection of data at a high spatial transcript omic resolution. Exploring gene expression profiles quantitatively in combination with the cellular physical distribution in an intact model may provide the link between genomic information, contextual function and behavior. In the brain, associating gene regulation of collections of neurons within their spatial organization and role is of special importance to the study of health and disease. Particularly it is important in neurodegenerative diseases where loss of function is highly correlated with abnormalities in form (). To perform such mapping, the nervous system of the medicinal leech, hi rudo medicinal is was selected. This system, a favorable model for investigating development, regeneration and repair, provides a useful model due to its simple structure and distinct behaviors (). The central nervous system (CNS) of the leech consists of a chain of ganglia that has been characterized anatomically and physiologically, and presents high similarity between ganglia (). Each such ganglion contains 400 neurons, most with known function and connections (). Previous gene expression studies on leech CNS have resulted in the characterization of specific genes (). Attempts have been made to clone genes of interest via the candidate gene approach (). Recently, an expression sequence tag database was constructed and is now available to the scientific community (). Yet, functional genomic studies in the h medicinal is are in their infancy (). Recent approaches in rna sequencing rnase q analysis accommodate low amounts of total RNA, multiple condition comparisons and overcome the de novo assembly challenge (). Here, an rnase q method is used to study transcription along the leech CNS. The transcriptome of three ganglia is examined: close to the head, mid body and close to the tail. This choice of three representative ganglia enables querying of gene expression profiles and linking gene expression with CNS spatial organization, at the single ganglion level. The choice of three biologically distinct conditions and not the common two condition differential analysis () adds a level of complexity, enabling the identification of latent patterns of expression. In the current study, a transcriptome of the adult leech h medicinal is CNS was produced. A non-redundant set of transcripts has been identified and analyzed in various forms, including gene isoform relationships, functional relationships, full length analysis and gene ontology. To verify the full length analysis and coverage level, the in nexin family, which has been previously studied in the leech, was tested h medicinal is and hi rudo verb ana (*To whom correspondence should be addressed.). A differential expression analysis over the three spatially distinct regions has been used to identify patterns of gene expression. The gene expression profiles were characterized and classified into nine major patterns, demonstrating dominant expression distributions along the ganglia chain. In the present study, advantage is taken of a simple model, the leech CNS, together with a novel differential expression approach, to combine the transcriptome with the spatial configuration, thus, producing a spatio transcript o map of the CNS. Resultant data provide a highly useful functional and genomic resource for future systemic studies. Moreover, the strategy for transcriptome analysis presented here may be helpful in other similar transcriptome studies.

discussion along with the rapid advances in sequencing technologies, a set of bioinformatics tools has recently been developed for short read sequence data assembly () and analysis (). De novo assembly of short reads without a known reference genome is considered non-standard and non-trivial, but still attracts enough attention to provide the community with an adequate set of tools (). whole transcriptome sequencing provides a functional genomic view of the studied tissue. Recent developments in high throughput technologies have provided a plethora of molecular data, but a thorough account of RNA expression levels in the h medicinal is is still lacking. In this study, a de novo assembly of transcriptome is produced using short reads from non model annelids, the h medicinal is for which public sequence data are still limited. The production of a verified transcriptome is used here as a tool to study the CNS of h medicinal is. h medicinal is is one of the most important annelids and as such a valuable model for studying nervous system structure, function, development, regeneration and repair. More than 221 million sequence reads were generated for h medicinal is. Validation of the different assembly tools significantly affects the assembly output and is needed for optimal results. Trinity and trans abyss have been used for the reconstruction of the h medicinal is transcriptome. More reported mRNAs of h medicinal is have been identified using Trinity. Moreover, examination of full length transcripts reveals that Trinity reconstructed fuller transcripts for the in nexin family, making Trinity transcripts the choice for downstream analyses. Furthermore, we found that the N50, median and average lengths of the transcripts generated using Trinity were longer () and with higher similarity to related organisms as shown in Supplementary Table S4 (a comparison with trans abyss (). A non-redundant set of 76 845 transcripts is reported. The gene isoform relationship of the h medicinal is transcripts shows that the largest fraction of transcripts presents a single isoform. About 30% of the transcripts show significant homology with Swiss-Prot sequences. Comparison with other openly available leech datasets, the transcriptome of h robusta shows a 39% identity at the amino acid level (Supplementary). Interestingly, a comparison with capitel la capitata (a polychaete) shows similar high levels of amino acid identity (34%) (Supplementary). The unannotated transcripts () might indicate novel, and possibly, species specific functions. Perhaps most importantly, the expression pattern distribution in the leech nervous system presents a significantly larger class of transcripts that are co-expressed along the leech's spatial configuration. Other patterns are much smaller and do not co express but rather dominate specific expression patterns along the nervous system. This may indicate that (i) most of the transcripts tend to be located in the ganglia but are not ganglion specific. For example, HSP90 belongs to the previously described 'pattern 1', which supports our classification patterns, and (ii) within each group there is a sub group more dominant, which may suggest that spatial regulation dominates gene function in the ganglia chain. In conclusion, the specific genes and their spatial templates of expression across the CNS of a whole organism provide the community, for the first time, a functional affiliation between genomic and nerve loci.
