Multiple spaced seeds represent the current state of the art for similarity search in bioinformatics, with applications in various areas such as sequence alignment, read mapping, oligonucleotide design, etc. We present SpEED, a software program that computes highly sensitive multiple spaced seeds. SpEED can be several orders of magnitude faster and computes better seeds than the existing leading software programs. Availability: The source code of SpEED is freely available at

introduction approximate string searching is at the core of many fundamental algorithms in bioinformatics. Since the quadratic time dynamic programming algorithm of smith waterman is too slow, heuristic methods have to be used. The most popular of those is implemented in BLAST () and uses the hit and extend approach: 11 consecutive matches are considered a hit and the neighborhood is investigated further for potentially local similarity. Such a match is called a seed. It has been noticed by that requiring the matches to be non consecutive increases the chance of finding similarities, and introduced the idea of optimal spaced seeds, that is, seeds where the matches are distributed so as to maximize the sensitivity (i.e. probability to find a local similarity). Multiple spaced seeds () go much further and approach perfect sensitivity. Since then multiple spaced seeds have been used in many software programs in a variety of applications, such as sequence alignment () read mapping (), oligonucleotide design (), to name a few. It is therefore very important to compute seeds with very high sensitivity. The relevant problems are hard () and all heuristic algorithms for computing seeds require exponential time with the exception of the one of i lie and i lie (2007). Our goal in this note is to engineer this algorithm into an efficient software for computing multiple spaced seeds. The new program, SpEED, has two execution modes, fast and best. We have compared SpEED with the two leading software programs, Mandala () * To whom correspondence should be addressed and ieder a () for a variety of seeds used in practice. speed best computes always the best seeds with speed fast coming often in the second place, whereas speed fast is three to five orders of magnitude faster than all the other ones.
