Motivation: Interactions between amino acids are important determinants of the structure, stability and function of proteins. Several tools have been developed for the identification and analysis of such interactions in proteins based on the extensive studies carried out on high resolution structures from Protein Data Bank (PDB). Although these tools allow users to identify and analyze interactions, analysis can only be performed on one structure at a time. This makes it difficult and time consuming to study the significance of these interactions on a large scale. Results: speed b is a web based tool for the identification of protein structures based on structural properties. speed b queries are executed on all structures in the PDB at once, quickly enough for interactive use. speed b includes standard queries based on published criteria for identifying various structures: disulphide bonds, catalytic triads and aromatic aromatic sulphur aromatic cation– p and ionic interactions. Users can also construct custom queries in the user interface without any programming. Results can be downloaded in a Comma Separated Value (CSV) format for further analysis with other tools. Case studies presented in this article demonstrate how speed b can be used to answer various biological questions. Analysis of human proteases revealed that disulphide bonds are the predominant type of interaction and are located close to the active site, where they promote substrate specificity. When comparing the two homologous G protein coupled receptors and the two protein kinase paralogs analyzed, the differences in the types of interactions responsible for stability accounts for the differences in specificity and functionality of the structures. Availability and implementation: speed b is available at http://www.parallelcomputing.ca as a web service.

introduction the majority of biological processes in living organisms are carried out by proteins. Proteins can function as enzymes, which catalyze and regulate chemical reactions. Some proteins transport and store essential biological molecules such as oxygen, metal ions and glucose. Other proteins are found in connective tissues and function as structural elements; collagen is an example of a structural protein which occurs in all multicellular organisms and functions as the major stress bearing component of connective tissues. The function of proteins is determined by the correct folding of the amino acid sequence into a stable three dimensional structure (). With so many different roles, it is crucial that proteins are able to recognize and interact with their specific substrates in order to carry out their function (). Interactions that occur between amino acid residues are the main factors that determine the structure, stability and function of proteins (). A number of V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com interactions have been associated with protein stability and assembly into their native structures. These include weak hydrogen bonds, ionic interactions, disulphide bridges, aromatic interactions and hydrophobic interactions (). Being able to determine which interactions occur in which proteins has many applications in characterizing protein function, including drug design. For example had to find a candidate protein with specific disulphide bonds as a key step in HIV drug design. The ability to support similar future work was a key motivation for speed b. A key source of protein interactions is the protein data bank (PDB), which currently has over 80 000 resolved protein structures, with the relative 3D positions of each atom determined using experimental methods such as X-ray crystallography. Interactions are either explicitly annotated by the crystallogr a phers or can be inferred by the proximity and configuration of amino acids, together with the amino acid or atom properties. The goal of this work is to present a tool that allows the entire PDB to be searched for a wide variety of user specified interactions, rapidly enough for interactive use.

conclusion speed b is an online resource that allows users to quickly identify proteins structures using different types of interaction queries. speed b includes queries to identify various interactions, including disulphide bonds, aromatic aromatic sulphur aromatic cation p and ionic interactions. Additionally, users can construct custom queries based on atom characteristics, distances between atoms on different amino acids, and 'annotated connections' described in the protein structure files. Organism, resolution and classification filters can be added to queries to filter out proteins of interest. Results can be shown as a web page, or downloaded in CSV format. The ability to process results in other tools via CSV is particularly useful when analysing large result sets. As shown in Section 4.3.1, the distribution of PDB matches to a query can be very informative. However, care must be taken in interpreting the distribution. First, although PDB is large, it is not statistically representative since entries have been added to PDB ad hoc as various researchers resolved structures. Moreover, speed b searches all available structures and does not attempt to filter duplicate and near duplicate structures from the results. In the future, speed b may be enhanced to deal directly with these issues. Its current aim is to quickly find structures of interest and, in conjunction with possible postprocessing of the results, speed b is useful for answering new biological questions as demonstrated by the case studies presented here witwatersrand for their support and constructive feedback through the development of this resource.
