Motivation: Microarray profiling of mRNA abundance is often ill suited for temporal spatial analysis of gene expressions in multicellular organisms such as Drosophila. Recent progress in image based genome scale profiling of whole body mRNA patterns via in situ hybridization (ISH) calls for development of accurate and automatic image analysis systems to facilitate efficient mining of complex temporal spatial mRNA patterns, which will be essential for functional genomics and network inference in higher organisms. Results: We present SPEX 2 , an automatic system for embryonic ISH image processing, which can extract, transform, compare, classify and cluster spatial gene expression patterns in Drosophila embryos. Our pipeline for gene expression pattern extraction outputs the precise spatial locations and strengths of the gene expression. We performed experiments on the largest publicly available collection of Drosophila ISH images, and show that our method achieves excellent performance in automatic image annotation, and also finds clusters that are significantly enriched, both for gene ontology functional annotations, and for annotation terms from a controlled vocabulary used by human curators to describe these images. Availability: Software will be available at

introduction in multicellular organisms such as the metazoans, many important biological processes such as development and differentiation depend fundamentally on the spatial and temporal control of gene expression (). To date, the molecular basis and regulatory circuitry underlying metazoan gene regulation remains largely unknown. Numerous algorithmic approaches have been attempted to infer 'networks' of regulatory elements from high throughput experimental data, such as microarray profiles (), chip chip genome localization data () and protein protein interaction data (), based on formalisms such as Bayesian networks () or graph mining (). However, a key deficiency of these approaches is that they rely heavily on high throughput biological data like microarrays that only capture average behaviour of the genes and proteins in a large cell population from, e.g. a cell culture, a dissected tissue or even a homogenized whole animal. For multicellular organisms such as Drosophila and human, gene expressions must be described in a spatiotemporal context, which reveals the histological specificities and temporal dynamics * To whom correspondence should be addressed of the activities of the gene. Such information is not available from the standard whole animal microarray data which record only the average expression of each gene over all cells in the body, nor is it easily obtainable from tissue specific microarray assays using advanced micro-dissection and cell sorting techniques (). In situ hybridization (ISH) assay is an imaging method to visualize mRNA expression in tissues and cells without homogenizing the specimens to be analyzed and therefore retains the original histological context of gene expression. Such information is indispensable for in depth analysis of gene regulation networks, developmental mechanisms and oncogenic processes in higher eukaryotic organisms mont alta. Systematic profiling of ISH images capturing gene expressions over the entire span of Drosophila embryogenesis are now being undertaken at a whole genome scale, offering an unprecedented opportunity for investigators to compare the spatio-temporal behavior of genes and begin assembling realistic pictures of gene regulatory networks underlying the developmental process (). The fast growing 'Expression Pattern' database under the Berkeley Drosophila Genome Project () now contains around 75 000 digital images of expression patterns of over 3400 genes. As of now, the only mining approach offered by the BDGP to search for, for example, co-expressed genes, or anatomical and histological annotations of the gene expressions, is based on manual labeling of the images by a domain expert using a controlled vocabulary. However, with the rapid growth of data volume, manual analysis is no longer feasible, and automatic analysis techniques

discussion spex 2 represents the first step towards automatic functional analysis of ISH images of Drosophila embryos, namely concise extraction of spatial gene expression patterns. Our extraction system employs a pipeline of analytical techniques to first standardize the embryo via embryo outline extraction, orientation detection and correction, and registration; and then extracts spatial expression signal via filters and probabilistic segment ers. Finally, it converts the spatial signals into a low dimensional feature representation, suitable for advanced analysis. We evaluated our system by using the resultant features for automatic pattern annotation and clustering. Using simple classification techniques and our sophisticated feature extraction pipeline, we achieved a significant improvement in annotation accuracy over existing systems. We also clustered the Drosophila ISH images, and conducted enrichment analysis on both pattern term annotations, and GO functional annotations. We found significant enrichment in both scenarios. The next step is a more detailed analysis of ISH images using this feature representation. The current work has focused on clustering images from a single time step in the future, we plan to study image analysis across time. Another important question to be addressed is how to combine microarray data with ISH image data to be able to be able to leverage two independent sources for joint analysis. The concise spatial pattern of genes extracted from ISH images by SPEX 2 can also be used as a token of gene expression and applied to infer a gene regulation network, as with microarray data. A detailed study along this direction involves some additional technicalities, and is therefore beyond the scope of this paper. Finally, another direction of future research would be to find time varying gene regulatory networks using this data. Such analysis would allow us to capture spatial variations at a single time stage, as well as varying relationships between genes across time. A first step in this direction has been taken for microarray data by Ahmed and Xing (2009). We intend to develop extensions of this model for Drosophila ISH images, thus enabling us to discover spatial temporal gene regulation networks.
