Motivation: spi al (Specificity in alignments) is a tool for the comparative analysis of two alignments of evolutionarily related sequences that differ in their function, such as two receptor subtypes. It highlights functionally important residues that are either specific to one of the two alignments or conserved across both alignments. It permits visualization of this information in three complementary ways: by colour coding alignment positions, by sequence logos and optionally by colour coding the residues of a protein structure provided by the user. This can aid in the detection of residues that are involved in the subtype specific interaction with a ligand, other proteins or nucleic acids. spi al may also be used to detect residues that may be post translationally modified in one of the two sets of sequences.

introduction identifying residues in proteins that are associated with specific functions is a recurring task in molecular biology. To assist this, we have developed spi al (Specificity in alignments), a web based tool that allows the comparative analysis of two related protein subtypes (). spi al differs from other related tools by allowing the simultaneous identification of residues that are (i) either specific to one of the two subtypes but not the other and or (ii) conserved across the two subtypes. It also permits visualization using sequence logo and coloured alignments and mapping this information on to a representative structure, if available. For example, when comparing the alignments of two related receptor subtypes that bind two different ligands, spi al allows the identification of residues that are specific to the binding of each of the ligands. For this, spi al takes two related sets of sequences or alignments as input and assigns each residue to one of eight possible types, depending on whether it is specific to the first alignment, * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors types and categories for a position in the alignment. the second alignment, the consensus or any combination of those (). spi al accepts sequences or multiple sequence alignments as input in the case of submitting sequences, they are first combined together, aligned using MUSCLE () and then split into two separate sets of alignments. In the case of submitting alignments, they are accepted in fast a and SELEX formats. The sequences in the two input alignments should originate from related protein subfamilies. The alignments have to be of the same length and the positions in both alignments have to correspond. In rest of this article, we refer to these two alignments as alignments A and B, respectively. Additionally, spi al accepts a protein structure in the page 2907 29062907
