Motivation: Clustering algorithms play an important role in the analysis of biological networks, and can be used to uncover functional modules and obtain hints about cellular organization. While most available clustering algorithms work well on biological networks of moderate size, such as the yeast protein physical interaction network, they either fail or are too slow in practice for larger networks, such as functional networks for higher eukaryotes. Since an increasing number of larger biological networks are being determined, the limitations of current clustering approaches curtail the types of biological network analyses that can be performed. Results: We present a fast local network clustering algorithm spic i. spic i runs in time O(V log V + E) and space O(E), where V and E are the number of vertices and edges in the network, respectively. We evaluate spic is performance on several existing protein interaction networks of varying size, and compare spic i to nine previous approaches for clustering biological networks. We show that spic i is typically several orders of magnitude faster than previous approaches and is the only one that can successfully cluster all test networks within very short time. We demonstrate that spic i has state of the art performance with respect to the quality of the clusters it uncovers, as judged by its ability to recapitulate protein complexes and functional modules. Finally, we demonstrate the power of our fast network clustering algorithm by applying spic i across hundreds of large context specific human networks, and identifying modules specific for single conditions. Availability: Source code is available under the GNU Public License at

introduction high throughput experimental technologies, along with computational predictions, have resulted in large scale biological networks for numerous organisms. In recent years, much research effort has focused on analyzing these biological networks in order to obtain hints about cellular organization and functioning. Clustering is perhaps the most common approach for global network analysis, and is frequently applied to uncover functional modules and protein * To whom correspondence should be addressed. complexes, and to infer protein function (). As a result, numerous clustering algorithms for biological networks have been developed (e.g.). Previous methods for clustering biological networks work well on networks of moderate size. However, the size and number of biological networks continue to grow. For example, by extensive data integration, proteome scale functional networks have been built for hundreds of organisms across the evolutionary spectrum (). Recently, by additionally considering specific biological processes (BPs) of interest, hundreds of context specific functional networks for human have been built (). Moreover, in the near future, biological networks will include numerous additional biological entities such as non-coding RNAs as well as a wider range of interaction types. Large networks present considerable challenges for existing clustering approaches. Here, we develop a new efficient network clustering algorithm spic i ('spicy', Speed and Performance In Clustering). spic i builds clusters greedily, starting from local seeds that have high weighted degree, and adding nodes that maintain the density of the clusters and are adjacent to a suitable fraction of nodes within them. The intuition underlying spic i is similar to that of dp clus (). However, spic i exploits a simpler cluster expansion approach, uses a different seed selection criterion and incorporates interaction confidences. Approaches based on enumeration have also been developed; these aim to uncover all clusters with specific density requirements. c finder () finds clusters such that each consists of a maximal connected component of adjacent cliques of size k where two cliques are adjacent if they share k 1 nodes. An alternate approach relaxes the requirement of complete cliques and instead finds all subsets of nodes with high density (). While these approaches guarantee that they output all clusters with a particular property, they are computationally intensive. In contrast, spic i takes a heuristic approach with respect to the clusters it outputs, but guarantees a runtime of O(V log v +E), where V and E are the number of vertices and edges in the network. We demonstrate spic is excellent runtime and its state of the art performance via several analyses. First, we compare spic i to nine previous network clustering algorithms (2002;) on a test set of five existing biological networks (). spic i is more than 41000 times faster than the previous approaches on the networks for which the approaches terminate within 12 h on a standard desktop machine. Moreover, it is the only algorithm of those tested that is able to cluster all the networks within a reasonable amount of time. Second, we show that even though spic i is much faster than previous clustering approaches, the clusters it uncovers in biological networks recapitulate functional modules just as well. Third, we perform a robustness analysis on synthetic networks, as described by bro hee and van Helden (2006), and show that spic i has very good performance in re capitulating protein complexes, deteriorating only on extremely incomplete networks. We also find spic i to be robust to perturbations in dense functional networks. Finally, we use spic i to cluster 230 large, context specific human networks () and identify modules specific for single conditions; because of the size and number of networks, this type of analysis was made feasible only by utilizing our new fast clustering approach.
