Motivation: Given protein protein interaction (PPI) networks of a pair of species, a pairwise global alignment corresponds to a one to one mapping between their proteins. Based on the presupposition that such a mapping provides pairs of functionally orthologous proteins accurately, the results of the alignment may then be used in comparative systems biology problems such as function prediction verification or construction of evolutionary relationships. Results: We show that the problem is np hard even for the case where the pair of networks are simply paths. We next provide a polynomial time heuristic algorithm, SPINAL, which consists of two main phases. In the first coarse grained alignment phase, we construct all pairwise initial similarity scores based on pairwise local neighborhood matchings. Using the produced similarity scores, the fine grained alignment phase produces the final one to one mapping by iteratively growing a locally improved solution subset. Both phases make use of the construction of neighborhood bipartite graphs and the contributors as a common primitive. We assess the performance of our algorithm on the PPI networks of yeast, fly, human and worm. We show that based on the accuracy measures used in relevant work, our method outperforms the state of the art algorithms. Furthermore, our algorithm does not suffer from scalability issues, as such accurate results are achieved in reasonable running times as compared with the benchmark algorithms. Availability: Supplementary Document, open source codes, useful scripts, all the experimental data and the results are freely available at

introduction several high throughput techniques including the yeast two hybrid system (), co-immunoprecipitation coupled mass spectrometry () and computational methods such as those based on genome wide analysis of gene fusion, metabolic reconstruction and gene coexpression () enable extraction of large scale protein protein interaction (PPI) networks of various species. Several problem formulations related to network topologies (), module detections () and evolutionary patterns () have been proposed for the analysis of these networks. From a comparative interact omics perspective, network alignment problems constitute yet another important family of problem formulations for the analysis of PPI networks. In general terms, given two or more PPI networks from different species, where for each network, nodes represent the proteins and the edges represent the interactions between the proteins, the network alignment problem is to align the nodes of the networks or subnetworks within them. Functional orthology is an important application that serves as the main motivation to study the alignment problems as part of a comparative analysis of PPI networks; a successful alignment could provide a basis for deciding the proteins that have similar functions across species. Such information may further be used in predicting functions of proteins with unknown functions or in verifying those with known functions (), in detecting common orthologous pathways between species () or in reconstructing the evolutionary dynamics of various species (). Before the introduction of network alignment as a model, common methods to detect orthologous groups of proteins have been solely based on measures of evolutionary relationships, usually in the form of sequence similarities. HomoloGene and in paranoid () are examples of such approaches. Network alignment algorithms on the other hand incorporate the interaction data as well as the evolutionary relationships represented possibly in the form of sequence data. Based on the assumption that the interactions among functionally orthologous proteins should be conserved across species, such an incorporation is usually achieved by aligning proteins so that both the sequence similarities of aligned proteins and the number of conserved interactions are large. Two versions of this general alignment framework have been suggested. In local network alignment, the goal is to identify from the input PPI networks, subnetworks that closely match in terms of network topology and or sequence similarities. Approaches proposed for this version of the problem include path blast (), network blast (), ma wish (), grae ml in () and the graph match and split algorithm of Narayanan and Karp (2007). Typically many overlapping subnetworks from a single PPI network are provided as part of the local alignments; this gives rise to ambiguity, as a protein may be matched with many proteins from a target PPI network. In global network alignment on the other hand, the goal is to align the networks as a whole, providing unambiguous one to one mappings between the proteins of different networks. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com Starting with iso rank (), several global network algorithms using more or less similar definitions have been suggested. iso rank is based on an eigenvalue formulation of local neighborhood alignments. PATH and GA of are based on appropriate relaxations of a cost formulation over the set of doubly stochastic matrices. pi swap uses a greedy heuristic based on iterative swaps of mappings until local optimum (). migra al () and variants () use greedy heuristics based on cost formulations including one or more of the graph let degree signatures, degrees, clustering coefficients, eccentricities and the sequence similarities in terms of BLAST e values. Other related network alignment problems include global many to many alignments () and queries in interaction networks and pathways (). A major issue in network alignment is the computational intractability of all the appropriate optimization formulations. It becomes even more apparent with some input PPI networks containing tens of thousands of nodes and interactions. An important feature expected of the global network alignments is then scalability; the running time performances of the suggested methods should not degrade drastically with increasing network sizes. At the same time, accurate alignment scores close to optimum values of appropriate formulations is a natural expectation. However, existing approaches either aggressively optimize for better accuracy at the expense of scalability or vice versa. We propose a novel global network alignment algorithm, SPINAL, which consists of two phases: a coarse grained alignment score estimations phase and a fine grained conflict resolution and improvement phase. Both phases make use of the construction of neighborhood bipartite graphs and a set of contributors as a common primitive. Using these concepts within iterative local improvement heuristics constitute the backbone of the algorithm. In terms of scalability, SPINAL runs much faster and provides more accurate results than the compared state of the art methods in almost all of the experimented instances under consideration.
