Motivation: Alternative splicing (AS) is a pre mrna maturation process leading to the expression of multiple mRNA variants from the same primary transcript. More than 90% of human genes are expressed via AS. Therefore, quantifying the inclusion level of every exon is crucial for generating accurate transcript omic maps and studying the regulation of AS. Results: Here we introduce splice trap a method to quantify exon inclusion levels using paired end rnase q data. Unlike other tools, which focus on full length transcript isoforms, splice trap approaches the expression level estimation of each exon as an independent Bayesian inference problem. In addition, splice trap can identify major classes of alternative splicing events under a single cellular condition, without requiring a background set of reads to estimate relative splicing changes. We tested splice trap both by simulation and real data analysis, and compared it to state of the art tools for transcript quantification. splice trap demonstrated improved accuracy, robustness and reliability in quantifying exon inclusion ratios. Conclusions: splice trap is a useful tool to study alternative splicing regulation, especially for accurate quantification of local exon inclusion ratios from rnase q data. Availability and Implementation: splice trap can be implemented online through the CSH Galaxy server http://cancan.cshl.edu/ splice trap and is also available for download and installation at http:// rulai.cshl.edu/splicetrap/.

introduction in higher eukaryotes, a given transcribed locus can generate several mature mRNA isoforms via the process of alternative splicing (AS). AS is frequently a regulated mechanism, which coordinates the removal of the internal non-coding portions of the transcripts (introns) with the differential joining of the coding and 5 /3 untranslated portions (exons). As a result, proteins with similar, different or antagonistic activities can be generated from a single genomic locus (). In addition, AS can lead to downregulation of gene expression by diverting some of the mRNA isoforms to the nonsense mediated mRNA decay pathway (). More than 90% of human genes express primary transcripts that undergo AS (). Owing to the regulatory power of this process, an increasing number of studies are being directed at understanding AS regulation at the single exon level (). In general, researchers in the splicing regulation field have utilized comparative approaches to reveal tissue specific () or disease related () AS events. However, such methodologies have not been used to generate maps of AS activity within one cellular condition. The completion of such maps would add a higher level of resolution to transcriptome analysis, allowing precise quantification of exon inclusion levels within a population of related isoforms. Until recently, systematic analysis of AS was done using expressed sequence tags (EST) () or specialized microarrays (). These techniques facilitated the discovery of a large number of alternative transcripts, and the extraction of distinctive features of alternatively spliced exons. Nevertheless, these techniques suffer from several limitations. ESTs are subject to cloning biases especially towards the 3-end of transcripts low coverage and insufficient robustness to allow reliable quantification. Likewise, the specificity of splicing microarrays is negatively affected by cross hybridization with related mRNA molecules. The development of deep sequencing technologies provided an alternative to ESTs and microarrays for transcript omic quantification. Two recent studies utilized single end rnase q to analyze a series of human tissues. In, the inclusion level of alternative exons was quantified as the percentage of the number of reads that match the two splice junctions formed by exon inclusion, over the splice junction formed by exon skipping also utilized splice junction reads for quantification of minor isoforms with different frequencies, as a function of the read page 3011 30103016

discussion splice trap is a computational tool fully dedicated to quantify major classes of AS activity based on paired end rnase q data. Unlike other available tools, splice trap focuses on quantifying local exon inclusion ratios, instead of full transcript expression levels. Rather than reporting background based read densities, splice trap utilizes Bayesian statistics to summarize exon inclusion probabilities derived from every single read pair. For this reason, splice trap is also insensitive to transcript expression levels. splice trap was specifically designed to accurately quantify alternative splicing at the single exon level. To achieve this goal, we started by describing the problem with a statistical model based on exon trios duos instead of full transcripts. To reduce the number of false positives and yet minimize the loss of information, we applied dynamic cutoffs derived from simulation, rather than using fixed cutoffs. Finally, we adjusted the results using specific inclusion ratio models for different AS patterns. In theory, full transcript quantification tools like Cufflinks and Scripture can also be used to calculate inclusion ratios with tx db annotations (Supplementary Method 1.2), However, these tools were originally designed and optimized for transcript level estimation, and our analysis indicates that they are less accurate than splice trap for the specific problem of calculating exon inclusion ratios.
