RNA sequencing has provided unprecedented resolution of alternative splicing and splicing quantitative trait loci s qtl. However, there are few tools available for visualizing the genotype dependent effects of splicing at a population level. splice plot is a simple command line utility that produces intuitive visualization of s qtls and their effects. splice plot takes mapped RNA sequencing reads in BAM format and genotype data in VCF format as input and outputs publication quality Sashimi plots, hive plots and structure plots, enabling better investigation and understanding of the role of genetics on alternative splicing and transcript structure. Availability and implementation: Source code and detailed documentation are available at http://montgomerylab.stanford.edu/splice plot index html under Resources and at git hub. splice plot is implemented in Python and is supported on Linux and Mac OS. A virtual box virtual machine running Ubuntu with splice plot already installed is also available.

introduction alternative splicing is a post-transcriptional process in which exonic regions of the pre mrna are spliced together and intronic regions are removed. Because numerous combinations of exons can be spliced together, splicing contributes significantly to the diversity of the transcriptome and the resultant proteome. Further adding to this diversity, genetic variation in cis acting splice site regulators and trans-acting splicing factors can affect patterns of splicing between individuals and potentially manifest as phenotypic differences (). Here, the study of splicing quantitative trait loci s qtls through the statistical testing of genetic association with changes in alternative splicing proves useful in identifying functional effects that may contribute to the etiology of various genetic diseases. The invention of RNA sequencing rnase q provides high resolution, single base characterization and quantification of the transcriptome, providing enhanced resolution of patterns of alternative splicing. Specifically, using rnase q the usage of exons and splice junctions can be precisely quantified, enabling the comparison of splicing between individuals in a population. Indeed, several studies have reported on extensive diversity of s qtl detectable from rnase q data (). However, currently there are few (if any) existing tools that provide convenient and effective visualizations of s qtl and their effects in rnase q data. Existing tools, such as the Sashimi plot provided within the MISO package (), are capable of showing differential splicing between individual samples, but not between genotypes (a three-way comparison). Because the study of s qtls is, by nature, a study of individuals within a population, effective s qtl visualization requires tools that integrate population scale rnase q datasets and genotype information to visualize the effect of genetic variation on alternative splicing. Here, we present splice plot a command line utility for visualizing the effects of genetic variants on alternative splicing and transcript structure. It produces hive plots () and structure plots, as novel ways of visualizing and comparing patterns of splicing as measured by splice junction spanning reads, by genotype. It also modifies and extends the Sashimi plot to support the comparison of splicing and transcript structure between genotypic groups. Such visualizations take advantage of the high precision quantification of rnase q and enable a better understanding of the genetic effects behind alternative splicing in rnase q data.

conclusion splice plot is an analytic tool for summarizing read data and generating intuitive, publication quality figures for visualizing s qtl. It draws hive plots, structure plots and Sashimi plots to enable the effective comparison of alternative splicing and transcript structure. We have further provided an Ubuntu virtual machine containing the dataset with splice plot. This virtual machine can be downloaded and installed to allow users to investigate loci of interest, thereby providing new opportunity for the research community to investigate the impact of any genetic variant on splicing.
