Motivation: Illustrating how HIV-1 is transmitted and how it evolves in the following weeks is an important step for developing effective vaccination and prevention strategies. It is currently possible through DNA sequencing to account for the diverse array of viral strains within an infected individual. This provides an unprecedented opportunity to pinpoint when each patient was infected and which viruses were transmitted. Results: Here we develop a mathematical tool for early HIV-1 evolution within a subject whose infection originates either from a single or multiple viral variants. The shifted Poisson mixture model sp mm provides a quantitative guideline for segregating viral lineages, which in turn enables us to assess when a subject was infected. The infection duration estimated by sp mm showed a statistically significant linear relationship with that by Fiebig laboratory staging (P ¼ 0.00059) among 37 acutely infected subjects. Our tool provides a functional approach to understanding early genetic diversity, one of the most important parameters for deciphering HIV-1 transmission and predicting the rate of disease progression. Availability and implementation: sp mm web server is available at http://www.hayounlee.org/ web tools html
introduction a genetic bottleneck during HIV-1 transmission has been reported in a number of studies comparing sequence variants among transmission partners (). The HIV-1 transmission bottleneck has been recently linked to a fitness bottleneck, preferentially transmitting high fitness viruses (). Whereas a single strain infection is prevalent in heterosexuals, intravenous drug users id us show a higher chance of being productively infected by more than one virus (). Even within the same risk category, additional clinical variables may create a significantly different transmission landscape, which can in turn affect the frequency of multiple founder infections. For example, the presence of a genital infection may lead to a more permissive environment for multiple founder infections (). Early genetic diversity, typically associated with the number of transmitted strains, has been shown as a significant indicator of HIV-1 disease progression. Greater diversity among the infecting virus population was correlated with an increased risk of death, a higher steady state level of HIV-1 viremia, and a faster CD4 T cell decline (). Multiplicity of infection has been linked to increased transmission risk (). Therefore, addressing the diversity of viral variants at transmission is an important task that may help evaluate viral evolution and predict clinical outcomes. Recent advances in sequencing technology provide an accurate representation of the HIV-1 sequence population within an infected individual (). Early HIV-1 evolution has been quantitatively addressed, accomplishing tasks such as identifying transmitted founder viruses (), estimating infection duration (), and calculating the rate and timing of the viral escape from the first T cell responses (). However, success has been limited because current tools have been specifically designed for the analysis of infections originating from a single transmitted virus (). Early viral diversity arising from multiple founder lineages should be interpreted with caution because viral diversity due to early, random evolution is intertwined with sequence heterogeneity caused by distinct founder viruses. tree based methods have been useful for segregating viral sequences into multi variant founder lineages (). Here we develop an alternative framework to systematically estimate the duration of infection originating from multiple founders based on the characteristics of HIV-1 transmission and early evolution. We use this tool, called shifted Poisson mixture model sp mm to characterize early HIV-1 evolution within acutely infected subjects ().
