SPREAD is a user friendly cross platform application to analyze and visualize Bayesian phylo geographic reconstructions incorporating spatial temporal diffusion. The software maps phylogenies annotated with both discrete and continuous spatial information and can export high dimensional posterior summaries to keyhole markup language (KML) for animation of the spatial diffusion through time in virtual globe software. In addition, SPREAD implements Bayes factor calculation to evaluate the support for hypotheses of historical diffusion among pairs of discrete locations based on Bayesian stochastic search variable selection estimates. SPREAD takes advantage of multicore architectures to process large joint posterior distributions of phylogenies and their spatial diffusion and produces visualizations as compelling and interpretable statistical summaries for the different spatial projections.

introduction the advent of powerful and flexible Geographic Information Systems (GIS) has fostered an increasing interest in incorporating geographical information into molecular phylogenetic methods. Spatial phylogenetic projections in a cartographic background play an important role in these developments (), but most applications remain limited to mapping phylogenetic tip tax a to their geographical coordinates. Mapping phylo geographic histories of geo-referenced tax a requires a robust statistical estimate of the geographic locations at the ancestral nodes of the tree. To obtain such estimates under stochastic process driven models, we recently proposed a suite of Bayesian inference approaches for the joint reconstruction of evolutionary and geographic history (). Models that accommodate spatial diffusion in discrete and continuous space have been implemented in a flexible Bayesian statistical framework (BEAST,; http://beast.bio.ed.ac.uk) for hypothesis testing page 2911 29102912 SPREAD. Screenshot of SPREAD. This example visualizes the phylo geographic history of rabies among raccoons along the Eastern US seaboard under a continuous diffusion model. Such visualizations allow users to quickly inspect key evolutionary changes in their geographic context. Further generation of KML output enables interactive exploration in the time dimension as well in freely available virtual globe software, such as Google Earth (on the right). the rate and degree of geographical movement over the complete posterior distribution of trees. To obtain such ranges, we slice each rooted tree in the posterior sample at a number of points within a time interval, usually defined by the length of a summary (MCC) tree, and impute the unobserved ancestral locations for each branch that intersects those time points. To fully accommodate the uncertainty of the original inference, the imputation involves building Brownian bridges that can take into account branch specific scaling factors of diffusion rates under relaxed random walks (). For each time point, we collect the imputed locations across the posterior distribution and use bivariate kernel density estimates to plot the highest posterior density contours. The kernel density estimation follows () and uses bivariate normal kernels with a diagonal bandwidth with bandwidths based on silverman s rule of thumb plug-in value ().
