Motivation: Rapid advances in live cell imaging analysis and mathematical modeling have produced a large amount of quantitative data on spatiotemporal dynamics of biological objects ranging from molecules to organisms. There is now a crucial need to bring these large amounts of quantitative biological dynamics data together centrally in a coherent and systematic manner. This will facilitate the reuse of this data for further analysis. Results: We have developed the Systems Science of Biological Dynamics database ssb d to store and share quantitative biological dynamics data. ssb d currently provides 311 sets of quantitative data for single molecules, nuclei and whole organisms in a wide variety of model organisms from Escherichia coli to Mus musculus. The data are provided in Biological Dynamics Markup Language format and also through a REST API. In addition, ssb d provides 188 sets of time-lapse microscopy images from which the quantitative data were obtained and software tools for data visualization and analysis. Availability and Implementation: ssb d is accessible at http://ssbd.qbic.riken.jp.

introduction one of the leading challenges of systems biology is to understand the nature of the dynamical behaviors of biological phenomena. Recent progress in live cell imaging techniques has produced a large amount of microscopy images showing the spatiotemporal dynamics of biological objects such as single molecules, nuclei, cells and organisms (). Computational image analysis techniques can quantitatively extract numerical data from these microscopy images (). These quantitative biological dynamics data can then be analyzed further to provide crucial insight into the nature of dynamical behaviors of biological phenomena. Many sets of quantitative biological dynamics data have been obtained from various kinds of microscopy images. For example extracted quantitative data of nuclear division dynamics in green fluorescent protein labeled embryos using confocal microscopy with the aim of deciphering the cell lineage in Caenorhabditis elegans extracted quantitative data of nuclear division dynamics in c elegans embryos under a wide variety of gene perturbations from differential interference contrast microscopy images to understand molecular mechanisms in early embryogenesis. Similarly, quantitative data of nuclear division dynamics in embryos were obtained for Drosophila melanogaster () and Danio rerio () using digital scanned laser light sheet microscopy. These quantitative data allowed a comprehensive analysis of cell division patterns during embryogenesis extracted quantitative data of behavioral dynamics of adult c elegans to understand how genes influence behavior and locomotion. Quantitative biological dynamics data can be reused for further analysis of dynamical behaviors of biological phenomena; however, only a few existing datasets have been reused even though most are publicly available. For example, quantitative data of nuclear division dynamics in d rerio embryos produced by were reused to analyze spatial organization of cells with the use of newly developed information metrics (), and quantitative data of nuclear division dynamics in c elegans embryos were reused to evaluate image processing methods for nuclear detection (). There are two reasons for the low rate of data reuse. One is that the data are usually dispersed on individual websites across the Internet, so researchers often find it difficult to know what kinds of data are available. The other reason is that incompatible data formats create a barrier for other researchers to reuse the data because studying each individual format takes additional time and effort. Recent progress in mathematical modeling techniques has provided an opportunity to perform mechano biological simulations, which also generate quantitative data. Quantitative data of spatiotemporal dynamics of single molecules in an Escherichia coli cell were generated to elucidate the mechanism of pole to pole oscillations of target proteins (). Data of microtubule dependent pro nuclear migration in early c elegans embryos were generated to reveal the mechanism of the nuclear centering process (). In such simulation studies, data from computer simulations are often compared with in vivo dynamic patterns from biological experiments to evaluate the model validity. Once a plausible model is created, the model can predict dynamical behaviors over a range of parameter values. The deviation in predictions can be reused leading to further experiments and refinement of the models (). However, such kinds of quantitative data from computer simulation are neither stored nor shared. There is now a crucial need to bring large amounts of quantitative data of spatiotemporal dynamics together centrally in a coherent and systematic manner to facilitate the reuse of the data for further analysis. Several research groups are developing central databases that store and share data in the field of bio image informatics (). The Cell Image Library () and the Image Data Repository (http://idrdemo.openmicroscopy.org) store and share microscopy images with meta-information. However, these databases mainly focus on microscopy images and do not store and share quantitative data extracted from images. The bio studies database () stores and shares meta-information of biological studies, and it provides links to data sources for a wide range of biological datasets. Moreover, there are also several databases that provide quantitative biological dynamics data in the field of computer simulation. However, these databases were very specific for storing data from molecular dynamics simulations () and biochemical kinetic simulations (). Thus far there is no central database that stores and shares quantitative data of spatiotemporal dynamics obtained from bio image informatics techniques or mechano biological modeling techniques. In this paper, we present the Systems Science of Biological Dynamics database ssb d http://ssbd.qbic.riken.jp) for storing and sharing quantitative biological dynamics data. This database is developed and maintained with support from Japan's National Bioscience Database Center nb dc http://biosciencedbc.jp/en/) as a part of the Life Science Database Integration Project in Japan (http://biosciencedbc.jp/en/about-us/projects-and-activities). nb dc is part of the Japan Science and Technology Agency (JST). The Ministry of Education, Culture, Sports, Science and Technology of Japan (MEXT) requests all researchers in the life sciences in Japan to provide their data to support the project. ssb d was developed to sustainably store and share quantitative biological dynamics data that are created by the Japanese science community and beyond. It provides users with central access to quantitative data, and the microscopy images from which the quantitative data were obtained. It also provides additional software tools for data visualization and analysis.

discussions sbd is a database for storing and sharing quantitative biological dynamics data for biological objects of various scales, ranging from single molecules to organisms. Over 310 sets of quantitative data of biological dynamics can be reused in bd ml formatted () files and through the ssb d REST API. As an example of the reuse of data in ssb d we examined time dependent proliferation patterns during embryogenesis in several model organisms. The data can also be reused for comparative analysis. For example, we can directly compare the data from different laboratories when the data pertains to the same biological phenomena in the same model organism. Moreover, we can compare data obtained from related or different species to reveal similar and different features (). Furthermore, we might combine different types of data such as cell morphology and protein activity data () to explore the relationship between the underlying biophysical and biochemical changes. We store simulation results within ssb d enabling direct comparison with quantitative data extracted from biological experiments. Comparison between the extracted data under gene perturbation and the simulation results with perturbed parameters may provide a mechanistic insight into gene function (). However, it is difficult to determine what type of simulation results should be stored and shared because an infinite number of simulation results can be generated by varying each parameter in a mathematical model. It may be appropriate to store and share the computer programs and mathematical models that produce the results in the future. Meanwhile we plan to store simulation results that are expensive to produce, for example, simulations that take months to run on a supercomputer. These results can not be easily reproduced in researchers' individual laboratories. Data quality control is a major problem in most biological databases, and ssb d encounters the same problem. However, ssb d is different from other databases such as genome and gene expression databases because it also stores the original microscopy images from which the quantitative biological dynamics data were obtained. By visually checking the quantitative data with the original microscopy image data, one can directly evaluate the quality of the quantitative data. Online and offline visualization tools are available in ssb d enabling easy evaluation of the data quality. Microscopy images stored in ssb d can provide new opportunities for computational biologists, especially those in the field of bio image informatics. It is possible to develop new methods for extracting quantitative data of new biological objects from existing microscopy images because these images often contain information that the original study did not focus on or utilize. Other possibilities include the development of new or improved methods for extracting quantitative data of the same biological objects examined in the original study. The performance of these new methods can then be evaluated by comparing their output with the data stored in ssb d. The Broad bio image Benchmark Collection b bbc is a database for storing annotated microscopy image sets for testing image processing methods. Each image set is provided with the corresponding quantitative data such as contours of biological objects extracted by image analysis. b bbc aims to improve image processing algorithms for biological microscopy, whereas ssb d aims to provide quantitative biological resources for bioinformatic ians and computational biologists to further advance biological research. It might be possible for the b bbc and ssb d projects to collaborate and share a similar software platform to enhance image processing algorithms as well as to provide quantitative data resources for biologists in the future. We distributed an open source version of ssb d opens sbd as a software platform for managing quantitative biological dynamics data. It has the essential functions of ssb d with a browser based simple interactive 4D viewer and the same REST API for accessing data. Several groups have developed open source platforms that can manage numerical information of biological dynamics. The omer o platform was developed primarily to manage microscopy images but it can also manage quantitative data pertaining to regions of interest (ROIs) based on the 2D geometric models in OME (). However, a limitation of omer o is that it can not use 3D geometric models such as spheres and faces in bd ml. The open bis platform was developed to manage biological research data, including microscopy images, and numerical information from high content screening (). However, open bis is not suitable for managing spatiotemporal information about biological dynamics. All these other platforms do not provide an interactive 4D viewer for quantitative data because they are not specialized for storing and sharing quantitative data. Therefore, opens sbd is a unique software platform for managing quantitative biological dynamics data. opens sbd enables research groups to develop their own databases to store and share their quantitative data. The distribution of opens sbd could result in acceleration of data sharing with the 'data bazaar' approach (), although it could also lead to data scattering across the Internet. To avoid such data scattering, a community based effort for managing data integration is indispensable; for instance, a central database could be used to store and share at least the meta-information about all the quantitative data, including their download sites. If all quantitative data are managed under the control of the community, data storage, processing and download services can be dispersed throughout the databases managed by research groups in the community. ssb d can be viewed as a 'data factory' approach (). Currently, it uses a central database to store and share all quantitative biological dynamics data created by the Japanese scientific community. However, an international community based effort is required for efficient, effective and sustainable data sharing in the era of open science.

conclusions sbd is a unique database that enables scientists in a wide variety of fields to reuse the large amount of quantitative biological dynamics data obtained from biological experiments and computer simulations. ssb d will support, promote and contribute to advances in systems biology and various interdisciplinary research fields, and facilitate data driven biology.
