Motivation: Accurately predicting protein secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility is important for the study of protein evolution , structure and function and as a component of protein 3D structure prediction pipelines. Most predictors use a combination of machine learning and profiles, and thus must be retrained and assessed periodically as the number of available protein sequences and structures continues to grow. Results: We present newly trained modular versions of the ss pro and acc pro predictors of secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility together with their multi-class variants SSpro8 and ACCpro20. We introduce a sharp distinction between the use of sequence similarity alone, typically in the form of sequence profiles at the input level, and the additional use of sequence based structural similarity, which uses similarity to sequences in the Protein Data Bank to infer annotations at the output level, and study their relative contributions to modern predictors. Using sequence similarity alone, ss pros accuracy is between 79 and 80% (79% for acc pro and no other predictor seems to exceed 82%. However, when sequence based structural similarity is added, the accuracy of ss pro rises to 92.9% (90% for acc pro. Thus, by combining both approaches, these problems appear now to be essentially solved, as an accuracy of 100% can not be expected for several well known reasons. These results point also to several open technical challenges, including (i) achieving on the order of 80% accuracy, without using any similarity with known proteins and (ii) achieving on the order of 85% accuracy, using sequence similarity alone. Availability and implementation: ss pro SSpro8, acc pro and ACCpro20 programs, data and web servers are available through the SCRATCH suite of protein structure predictors at http://scratch.

introduction the prediction of protein structural features, such as secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility, are useful for the study of protein evolution, structure and function and as modular components of protein 3D structure prediction pipelines. Most of the best predictors use a combination of machine learning and evolutionary information, in the form of multiple alignment profiles, and thus must be retrained and assessed periodically as the available protein data continues to grow. Here we present the results obtained by modifying and retraining ss pro and acc pro (), two widely used predictors of secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility, respectively, and broadly assessing prediction performance in these fields. It has been known for two decades that evolutionary information in the form of profiles calculated on similar sequences helps predictors. In the case of secondary structure prediction, for instance, performance accuracy improves by roughly 2 percentage points when profiles are used in the input, as opposed to raw sequences alone. It is also known that using profiles in the output, by predicting the secondary structure of each sequence in an alignment and taking the 'majority' of each column, leads to a smaller improvement (51%) over using the raw sequences alone. Furthermore, using profiles in both the input and the output usually leads to no significant improvement over using profiles in the input alone. Machine learning based predictors developed during the past two decades have been almost exclusively focused and evaluated on their ability to predict the secondary structure or relative solvent accessibility from the sequence or the profile alone. The past decade of work has not produced major prediction improvements, resulting in a set of competing predictors with similar methods, training datasets, protocols and, most importantly, similar prediction performances for instance, roughly around 80% for secondary structure prediction. This is despite the number of experimentally solved structure deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (), which has significantly increased over the same period () and continues to increase faster each year (). However, besides using sequence similarity to create input profiles, there is potentially a second way of using sequence similarity to leverage the growth of the PDB and improve predictions. Namely, if a portion of a query sequence is similar to a sequence in the PDB, it may be possible to use the annotation of the PDB sequence to annotate the query sequence, in lieu or in combination with the prediction produced by the machine learning methods. This is what we call sequence based structural similarity. Although the correlation between sequence similarity and structure similarity is not perfect (), *To whom correspondence should be addressed. it is well known that two domains with similar sequences will in general have similar structures (). There are good reasons to suspect that sequence based structural similarity may be effective. A simple analysis of the PDB entries released between 1996 and 2013 (Figs 3 and 4) reveals that as of today, only 6% of the amino acids deposited in the PDB each month belong to protein regions with no similarity to sequences previously deposited in the PDB (). Furthermore, this percentage is decreasing year after year. Finally, when we examine the large, redundancy reduced and representative set of all proteins UNIREF50 (), we find that 62% of its sequences have at least one domain with a similarity of 30% to a sequence in the PDB. Thus, in short, the main purposes of this article, besides the upgrade of existing predictors, is to study in detail the effectiveness of sequence based structural similarity for secondary structure and relative solvent accessibility prediction alone, and how it can be combined with predictions derived by machine learning methods with profiles to improve the overall state of the art
