Motivation: The developmental stage of a cell can be determined by cellular morphology or various other observable indicators. Such classical markers could be complemented with modern surrogates, like whole genome transcription profiles, that can encode the state of the entire organism and provide increased quantitative resolution. Recent findings suggest that such profiles provide sufficient information to reliably predict the cells developmental stage. Results: We use whole genome transcription data and several data projection methods to infer differentiation stage prediction models for embryonic cells. Given a transcription profile of an uncharacterized cell, these models can then predict its developmental stage. In a series of experiments comprising 14 datasets from the Gene Expression Omnibus, we demonstrate that the approach is robust and has excellent prediction ability both within a specific cell line and across different cell lines. Availability: Model inference and computational evaluation procedures in the form of Python scripts and accompanying datasets are available at

introduction embryonic stem cells (ESCs) and other pluripotent cell types are increasingly being studied for their potential therapeutic use in regenerative medicine (). ESCs are isolated from the inner cell mass of the blastocyst, they replicate indefinitely, maintaining pluripotent characteristics and may differentiate in vitro to most of the somatic cell types present in the adult. In the early stages of mammal differentiation, the inner cell mass undergoes gastrulation. In this process, three specific germ layers mesoderm endoderm and ectoderm are formed. These layers ultimately give rise to specific tissues and organs. While the stages of ESC differentiation into a specific cell type have been broadly identified, numerous aspects of this process remain unknown or difficult to interpret. Differentiation is a complex, multiple steps process that presents a non-linear progression within a cell population. The stem status is not lost immediately, but it gradually decreases. This is true particularly at the very beginning when differentiation is induced (e.g. either by an internal or external signal) and cells own a heterogeneous status of differentiation being a mixture of diverse developmental stages. ESCs as well as embryonic carcinoma and induced pluripotent stem cells () own common and specific molecular signatures that define their pluripotent status. When differentiation is induced, this molecular signature is gradually lost in favor of one that defines a more differentiated type of cellular identity demonstrated that this cellular transition is due to a large number of transcription factors whose expression changes across different hematopoietic states. Other recent studies of various developmental processes have shown that they are governed by transcriptional programs in which genes are regulated in successive waves of transcriptions that mark the stages of differentiation (;Page: 2547 25462553

discussion the predictive accuracy of inferred models is very high when they are applied to data from the same cell lines as used in the training set (Tables 1 and 3). The reasonable range of C scores is from 0.5 (random predictor) to 1.0 (perfect prediction). The majority of C scores for the described methods are close to 0.9, a very high score indicating an excellent quality of predictions. The only notable exception is dataset GDS2688, where all methods achieved lower scores. This is not surprising as GDS2688 is substantially different from the other datasets both in the type of cells and the processes observed. pc a and MCE were here the only two methods that obtained reasonably good results. We can conclude that predicting the stage of development from transcriptional profiles is feasible and that the resulting prediction models can accurately predict developmental stages within a chosen cell line. The results of external validation are also interesting observed that the trajectories obtained from cells of different cell lines diverged to a large extent. We therefore expected that the predictions of models developed on one cell line would fail when applied to data from another cell line. Results on our selection of datasets from GEO () refute this expectation, and demonstrate that the tested predictive models can be applied across different cell lines. In addition, external validation on datasets from Aiba et al.) is also qualitatively similar, showing that prediction across different cell lines is indeed feasible and may be highly accurate. The scores we have obtained are surprisingly high, with only four 0.80 and 24 0.90 (out of 42). The results for all possible pairs of datasets shown in the Supplementary Material confirm the high accuracy of predictions even for data coming from different studies. Poor predictions were obtained only for training and test data from different species. Utility of stage prediction models across different cell lines was further confirmed in i pscs and MEF experiments. Projection of related transcription profiles on a pc a inferred differentiation scale highlighted the difference in plur i potency between the adult cells and the reprogrammed cell line. Among the tested methods, the differences in predictive quality were not statistically significant. pc a MCE, PLS and svm rank are all time efficient and construct corresponding models for the datasets in our study within seconds. path recon can be very slow with execution times of several hours or even days for datasets where construction of a pq tree and examination of all candidate orderings is required. PLS and svm rank are supervised and may focus too much on optimizing their respective goals. For example, while expression profiles taken after 18 and 24 h might be very similar, supervised algorithms will still try to separate the projections, because they know the samples come from different time points. While path recon is unsupervised, it only orders samples and does not provide a model for projection. MCE can be used for projection, but does not provide an explicit model for staging of new samples. At the present stage of evaluation, we thus prefer the pc a because of its simplicity, explicit prediction model and the added benefit of its informative differentiation scales (). The staging is easy to interpret by biologists, and the visualization uncovers the dynamics of the changes with phenotypically different stages being placed farther apart on the differentiation scale. As its non-linear counterpart, MCE looks very promising and should be considered along pc a in further studies of this kind. We have noticed some fluctuations of performance of several methods on different datasets. The differences could be arbitrary, or related to specific types of patterns hidden in the data that a particular method can or can not detect. This issue could be further studied once more datasets of the kind examined in this article will become available.

conclusion developmental biology is in need of devices that would accurately assess the progression of cells through development, and predict the developmental stages of cells observed under different physiological conditions. We have proposed and investigated the utility of approaches that can make such predictions. Experiments show that the differentiation stage prediction models inferred from transcription profiles are feasible, have high accuracy and that their results can be nicely mapped to simple, 1D differentiation scales.
