Motivation: Analyzing genome wide association data in the context of biological pathways helps us understand how genetic variation influences phenotype and increases power to find associations. However, the utility of pathway based analysis tools is hampered by under curation and reliance on a distribution of signal across all of the genes in a pathway. Methods that combine genome wide association results with genetic networks to infer the key phenotype modulating subnetworks combat these issues, but have primarily been limited to network definitions with yes no labels for gene gene interactions. A recent method ewd mg was incorporates a biological network with weighted edge probability by requiring a secondary phenotype specific expression dataset. In this paper, we combine an algorithm for weighted edge module searching and a probabilistic interaction network in order to develop a method, sta ms for recovering modules of genes with strong associations to the phenotype and probable biologic coherence. Our method builds on ewd mg was but does not require a secondary expression dataset and performs better in six test cases. Results: We show that our algorithm improves over ewd mg was and standard gene based analysis by measuring precision and recall of each method on separately identified associations. In the Wellcome Trust Rheumatoid Arthritis study, sta ms identified modules were more enriched for separately identified associations than ewd mg was sta ms p value 3.0x10-4; EW_dmGWAS-p-value=0.8). We demonstrate that the area under the precision recall curve is 5.9 times higher with sta ms than ewd mg was run on the Wellcome Trust Type 1 Diabetes data. Availability: sta ms is implemented as an R package and is freely available at https://simtk.org/projects/stams.

introduction genome Wide Association Studies g was are chronically underpowered because they interrogate millions of positions in the genome. In order to overcome the multiple testing burden, such analyses require either very large cohorts or a reduced number of tests performed. One way to reduce the number of tests is to aggregate the genetic information from the Single Nucleotide Polymorphism (SNP) level to the gene level, reducing the number of tests from ~1,000,000 to ~20,000. However, in cases when it is too expensive or impossible to collect a large sample (e.g. a very rare phenotype), aggregation to the gene level may not be enough. Our group () and others (Compared in ()) have shown that aggregating g was to the pathway level is useful for analyzing underpowered g was and finding associations between groups of genes and a phenotype. These pathway methods provide insights into biological function. The pathway approach has two major shortcomings. First, our present curation of genes into pathways covers only a small fraction of the genes that we measure. Second, most of the curated pathways are not designed to analyze g was. For instance, a metabolism pathway may contain mostly genes with no SNPs (due to stabilizing selection) but also one or two genes with significant variation. All of the genes are important to the metabolism, and so are considered part of the " pathway, " but only a couple have g was signal. In cases like this, traditional pathway analysis can not identify the entire pathway as significantly associated, because the noise dilutes the few genes with signal. " Dense module searching " , originally proposed for expression studies in 2002 (), has become a popular analysis method for analyzing genome wide measurements. By overlaying gene based p values on a graph of known biological interactions and identifying clusters of connected genes that have an enrichment of signal, dense module searching isolates clusters of concentrated signal within biologically related genes. These clusters range in size from two genes to complete pathway level associations without requiring predefined pathway lists. Like traditional pathway analysis techniques, dense module searching leverages known biological relationships to aggregate measured information. Unlike traditional pathway analysis techniques, such as g sea (), or GO enrichment (), dense module searching identifies clusters of biologically related genes that have the most enrichment for signal without requiring distribution of signal across all of the genes in a predefined list. Several researchers have published improvements to ide kers original algorithm.) proposed a different search technique, and made improvements to module scoring including control for multiple testing.) presented DMS, a method that uses a greedy search within a local neighborhood and incorporates three different kinds of significance testing to output modules. They demonstrate that significant modules in breast cancer gene expression data are better predictors of metastasis than individual markers. Based on dms built dmg was the first g was specific r based tool that allows users to easily incorporate dense module searching into their g was analysis workflow. dmg was uses a greedy search heuristic that iteratively adds nearby genes to a module if the p value of the considered gene improves the aggregate score by an appreciable amount (r) and is described further in sections 2.1.4 and 2.1.5. However, all of these methods are limited to searching on a network with yes no edge labels, and therefore prone to error due to false negative or false positive edges. Recently published edge weighted dmg was ewd mg was (Q.) allows users to input a co-expression matrix in order to weight edges in the input network before module searching. This is the first time that edge weights have been incorporated into dense module searching and allows the user to include information about a) the strength of evidence that two genes interact and or b) the strength of the interaction itself. Wang et. al. demonstrate that the addition of edge weight information is valuable by comparing ewd mg was performance on the GAIN schizophrenia g was to both standard dmg was (), and GiGa (). Although phenotype specific co-expression measurements may not be practical in every study, and many types of biological relationships are missed in coexpression analysis of eukaryotes, the expansion of the algorithm to incorporate edge weights improved performance of their algorithm, and creates an opportunity for exploring different kinds of gene gene interaction weighting schemes. The STRING database () aggregates gene gene and protein protein interactions into a network, with edges scored for their confidence. STRING combines information from co-expression analysis, databases such as MIPS (), high throughput experiments such as Chromatin Immunoprecipitation, phylogenetic co occurrence conservation of the genetic neighborhood (in prokaryotes), and literature co occurrence. Associations are assigned a confidence score based on benchmarking groups of associations against KEGG () pathways and generally correspond to the probability of finding the linked proteins within the same KEGG path. Although many other networks are available, STRING is notable because it consolidates many important interaction networks, has edge confidence scores based on a probabilistic framework, is very popular with more than 3,000 citations, and is easily usable with R. In this paper, we present a method, sta ms which incorporates general edge weights such as those provided by STRING, the search tool from ewd mg was and a new significance ranking method. sta ms allows users to use the edge weighted searching of ewd mg was without needing co-expression data. The resulting modules have high confidence biological relatedness and strong associations with phenotype. By leveraging the biological relationships in STRING, sta ms identifies modules that are more highly replicated in independent studies than standard analysis with a gene based p value or ewd mg was with a phenotype specific co-expression dataset.

discussion in this paper, we show that using the multimodal edge weights from the STRING database improves the performance of ewd mg was while eliminating the need for a secondary phenotype specific expression dataset. We demonstrate this improved performance in several ways. We compare sta ms performance to ewd mg was on two gold standards: genes that were identified in independent studies known genes and genes that were individually significant in the full dataset. We show that sta ms demonstrates high precision and recall on known genes and recovers more of the disease genes even with only 20% of the patients as input data the results from all g was analysis techniques are dataset dependent. We presented results on seven datasets in order to demonstrate the range of sta ms performance across varying levels of signal. In all datasets (excluding low signal Hypertension), sta ms performs better than ewd mg was. In two out of five wtc cc g was sta ms has notably better performance than a gene based test with a Bonferroni correction. For T1D, the recall of sta ms is better than the recall of VEGAS with a Bonferroni correction, but lower than recall of VEGAS with an FDR correction. In Bipolar Disorder and Type 2 Diabetes, sta ms has dramatically better precision and recall than either gene based test. In RA and Coronary Artery Disease, the performance of sta ms and the gene based tests are comparable. In BD and T2D, where sta ms identified genes that standard analysis techniques missed, the genes were found clustered together. The improvement of recall by sta ms shows that the addition of interaction data identifies genes that would otherwise be missed in an underpowered study, even though they are true associations. The improvement of precision demonstrates that the genes that belong to clusters of biologically related high scoring genes are more likely to be validated in independent studies than genes that have individual genome wide significance in a single study. When we examine sta ms and ewd mg was precision and recall on the genes that were individually genome wide significant in the full dataset, we predictably see that both methods fail to recover some of the individually significant hits. Both methods rely on strong gene gene interactions to identify modules, so neither method detects genes that have strong individual signal but no neighbors with good p values which are detectable by single gene based tests. However, sta ms maintains nearly full levels of precision and recall even with fewer patients included. As the p values for genes (based on patient data) become less significant, the edge weights from STRING remain constant, stabilizing sta ms performance in the reduced power datasets. In Type 1 Diabetes, the strong edge weights between members of the HLA region allows sta ms to perform well on only 20% of the patient data. Performance of sta ms on the reduced power datasets from Rheumatoid Arthritis shows nearly full precision and recall using 60% (n=1116 cases) or more of the patient data. These data indicate the utility of sta ms to rescue important gene associations that would otherwise be missed due to lack of power. Finding ways to increase power without requiring larger sample sizes is mandatory in some cases. For instance, in some rare drug events and populations, researchers have collected every known example, and are still underpowered to find associations. By demonstrating that sta ms has high precision and recall of significant genes even as less and less input data are used, we have demonstrated its utility for identifying candidate genes in a small g was. When comparing the performance of sta ms using different types of edges, we find that edges created from text mining give the best performance on the known genes in four out of the six wtc cc phenotypes. However, sta ms on the Combined Score edges outperforms the text mining edges on precision recall of individually significant genes (Combined Score shown in, text mining data not shown). We suspect that this is due to the greater number of edges in the Combined Score set than the text mining set, which allows more genes to be identified. Unlike the known genes validation list, the individually significant genes may or may not be replicated in other studies. Many of the edge modalities (Fusion, Co-expression, co occurance Neighborhood) had poor performance across phenotypes. We were not surprised to learn that these edges, based on prokaryotic features or cross species features, were less useful than the edge sets created from eukaryotic protein protein interaction databases (Experimental, Database). We tried combining some of the top performing edge modalities into new edge scores, but the results were not better than text mining alone. We recommend that researchers use the text mining and or Combined Score edge modalities. Notably, the sta ms performance correlates with number of edges included in a modality. As shown in, the best performing edge modalities are the ones that contain the most edges. In Supplemental, we illustrate sta ms performance as edges are randomly dropped or added to the input graph. Although performance drops as edges are removed, sta ms performance is not as sensitive to the added edges, indicating that it is robust to false positive gene gene links. The utility of the text mining based edges to find replicable results demonstrates the power of Natural Language Processing (NLP) for curating biomedical knowledge. The edges currently in STRING are based on two genes or proteins co occurring in PubMed abstracts or open source articles. As NLP techniques improve to include sentence parsing and modeling of more complicated gene gene relationships, this edge set will get less noisy and identifying modules based on it will improve. We should acknowledge that the publications mined could include those about the g was that we used for validation or candidate gene studies based on the initial wtc cc results. These papers may have listed the g was hits or candidate genes listed in the abstract, thus creating links between the hits in the STRING database. With those links, the modules containing the g was hits are easier to find. However, given the large corpus of PubMed abstracts, and the normalization calculations in STRING, we suspect that the contamination by publications about our validation set is very small. We improved on the significance testing and module ranking algorithm of ewd mg was by considering permutations of node weights over a fixed network topology. With randomly selected network topology and connectivity used in permutations as ewd mg was does, the background scores are almost certainly underestimated since they may not have connecting edges at all. By keeping the edges fixed, we focus on whether the weights of the nodes in the module are significant. Although we ranked the modules differently, we agree with the authors of ewd mg was that selecting the top 1% of modules for further investigation, although seemingly arbitrary, works well in practice. This was demonstrated by our validation against independently associated g was hits. However, because there are several ways to measure significance for dense modules, we do not rely heavily on the calculated p value. With only summary statistics rather than genotype data, the p values calculated in neither sta ms nor ewd mg was measure how associated the module is with the phenotype. Instead, the current implementations measure how densely clustered the high scoring genes are in the network. In order to get a more complete picture of significance, one would have to permute the case control labels on the g was data and redo the searching under those permutations to create a null distribution. We suggest that users use the p value to rank modules and identify candidate modules for follow up study through permutation of case control labels, or orthogonal biological methods. In our application to autism, we show that analyzing a common variant g was with sta ms identifies a module with a known rare variant association, demonstrating the power of sta ms to converge on true biological associations. Rare loss of function mutations in CTTNBP2, also known as CORTBP2, have been associated with autism () but have not been reported in common variant autism g was to date. The module also has overlapping genes with other gene groups presented in the autism literature. Six of the genes overlap with neocortical development coexpression modules from pari k shak et. al. (PPP2R5C, PPP2CB are M4; CTTNBP2 is M2; TCP1 and CCT6A are in M14; PPP2R2C is in M16) (). Additionally, PP2R1A was also classified by horm oz diari et. al. and as being part of two modules which are enriched for de novo mRNA mutations in autistic probands, Epilepsy and " M3: Extended autism spectrum disorder and intellectual disability " (). None of the genes in the module overlap with the copy number variation modules identified by the net bag method of Gilman et. al. (). Many of the edges in the identified autism module come from the strip ak complex described by goudreau lt et al (). They used an iterative affinity purification mass spectrometry approach to characterize the diversity of protein phospho tase 2A (PP2A) complexes. The protein products of PPP2R1A, PPP2R1B, STRN, PPP2R5C, PPP2CB, PPP2R2C, CCT6A, and TCP1 are all components of the strip ak assembly. strip ak interacts with CTTNBP2, which targets the assembly to dendritic spines and where it regulates dendritic spin o genesis. Since CTTNBP2's association with autism may be explained by problems in the regulation of dendritic spin o genesis (), it follows that mutations in members of the strip ak complex, which is also part of this process, may be associated with autism through the same mechanism. sta ms reveals meaningful association of the strip ak complex and this possible mechanism for autism by analyzing the g was data within its biological context. sta ms is limited by the underlying search mechanisms presented in ewd mg was. Notably, the search is entirely greedy, which means that genes with small contributions to the score have no chance of being added to a module, even if they provide a link to a higher scoring gene. Several other dense module searching methods exist which incorporate non greedy searching () and the expansion of a non greedy search method to include edge weighting would likely outperform sta ms in some cases. sta ms like other gene based methods, is also limited by including only SNPs that are mapped to genes. In our application to autism, we incorporated SNPs that are known e qtls for genes into the gene based score, but there are still many measured SNPs for which data are ignored. Expanding gene definitions to include more intragenic SNPs may help. However, some individual SNPs and genes will remain un discoverable by sta ms so we recommend running sta ms as a complement to snp based and gene based analysis techniques. Our validation method, which uses genes from independent g was that have SNP that meets a cut off of p value  1.0 x 10-5 in the initial + replication population is more relaxed than most genome wide SNP significance criteria. While 1.0 x 10-5 is a reasonable cut off for a gene based test, the results might change with a stricter validation list based on a p value  1.0 x 10-8 cut off which is more typical of a SNP study. There may be ways to improve these edge sets by making them more phenotype or tissue specific. For instance, augmenting the base STRING edge set with extra edges from phenotype specific co-expression data, or up weighting edges in STRING that have phenotype or tissue specific expression may increase performance. With the evaluation framework that we present in this paper, one could determine whether this kind of added information is useful. Understanding g was hits in the context of their biological interactions gives insight into mechanism of action. However, most dense mod-ule searching approaches rely on yes no edge classification, which creates errors due to arbitrary cutoffs for edge scores. As shown by comparison to their older binary edge algorithm, the inclusion of edge weights into the search algorithm of ewd mg was eliminates these errors and makes the algorithm more robust. We have shown that using the STRING confidence scores, along with appropriate changes to score normalization, improves the performance of dmg was even further. We provide an r package sta ms that integrates the string db package, the ewd mg was search function, and the sta ms specific score normalization and allows users to easily perform this analysis on their gene based p values with the edge types of their choosing. We are also happy to share our reusable validation and evaluation suite. This suite represents the first systematic way to evaluate and compare dense module searching methods and parameter choices across a range of g was
