Motivation: A growing body of literature has demonstrated the potential for non-invasive diagnosis of a variety of human genetic diseases using cell free DNA extracted from maternal plasma samples in early gestation. Such methods are of great significance to the obstetrics community because of their potential use as clinical standard of care. Proof of concept for such approaches has been established for aneuploidy and paternally inherited dominant traits. Although significant progress has recently been made, the non-invasive diagnosis of monogenic diseases that segregate in a recessive mendelian fashion is more problematic. Recent developments in microfluidic digital PCR and DNA sequencing have resulted in a number of recent advances in this field. These have largely, although not exclusively, been used for the development of diagnostic methods for aneuploidy. However, given their prevalence, it is likely that such methods will be utilized towards the development of non-invasive methods for diagnosing mono genetic disorders. Results: With this in mind, we have undertaken a statistical modeling of three contemporary (digital) analytical methods in the context of prenatal diagnosis using cell free DNA for monogenic diseases that segregate in a recessive mendelian fashion. We provide an experimental framework for the future development of diagnostic methods in this context that should be considered when designing molecular assays that seek to establish proof of concept in this field.

introduction during the past few decades, there has been great interest in the search for definitive, yet minimally invasive, low risk procedures for the prenatal diagnosis of fetal genetic disease. Although sophisticated evolution of serum based screens has occurred, in which concentrations of specific protein markers associated with fetal malformations are determined in combination with ultrasonography; these do not achieve definitive diagnosis (). Recently, there has been rapid development of non-invasive and potentially definitive diagnostic approaches that utilize circulating * To whom correspondence should be addressed. cell free fetal DNA as a substrate. This circulating fetal DNA is thought to be of trophoblast origin and is present in maternal plasma at a genome equivalent frequency of between 310% (). Practical applications of the analysis of fetal DNA in maternal plasma are growing and are perhaps best exemplified by successful non-invasive prediction of fetal Rhesus D blood group status (), the diagnosis of other paternally inherited mutations causing, for example, thalassemia and achondroplasia () and the detection of trisomy 18 via methylation specific PCR of polymorphic fetal alleles. Despite the rapid progress towards the development of diagnostic methods for fetal disease using cell free DNA in maternal plasma, there are still a number of obstacles to overcome before this can be used in routine clinical practice. Most significant is the fact the maternally inherited fetal alleles are identical in primary sequence to their endogenous maternal counterparts. One approach to overcome this has been to exploit the fact that the nucleated portion of the maternal hematopoietic system and apoptotic bodies derived from the placental villus are the primary sources of the maternal and fetal components of cell free plasma nucleic acids, respectively. Therefore, functional genomic differences between these tissues can be exploited to identify biomarkers for the selective enrichment of fetal nucleic acids () and it has been shown that differentially transcribed and or methylated loci on informative chromosomes can be used for the diagnosis of aneuploidy (). Recently it has been demonstrated that microfluidic digital PCR approaches have utility for the diagnosis of aneuploidy using functional biomarkers (). Digital PCR has also been used for the diagnosis of monogenic disease () in which allelic ratios are quantified in maternal plasma DNA samples. In the context of a recessive mutation that segregates in a Mendelian fashion, an affected fetus would be distinguished from a heterozygous carrier by deviation from a 1:1 allelic ratio to a state in which the recessive allele is over-represented as a consequence of its increased fetal contribution and concomitant absence of the wild type fetal counterpart. It has also recently been shown that high throughput whole genome DNA sequencing can be used for the detection of fetal aneuploidy (). This is an exciting development with great potential because it is a direct method that requires no gene or chromosome specific biomarkers and provides chromosome wide insight into karyotype. Significantly, high throughput DNA sequencing allows page 2864 28632866

discussion this article provides a statistical background to three approaches for the non-invasive prenatal genetic analysis of fetal disease using it should be noted that our analyses are based on statistical models of allele counts under the assumption that the experiments are performed perfectly without the introduction of any bias and extra noise. In practice, this assumption is always more or less violated. In particular, the difference in the sequences between two DNA fragments may lead to slightly different PCR efficiency and noticeable difference in the number of copies generated from each DNA fragments after many PCR cycles. Therefore, we suggest that a large number of experiments should be performed to establish empirically, after PCR, the ratio of the number of copies generated from a DNA fragment carrying allele A, to the number of copies generated from a DNA fragment carrying allele B. Call this ratio the A/B bias factor. We can drive a new allele count ratio table corrected by this factor, and design statistic tests based on the new table (). Finally, we would like to point out that, while the focus of this article is the diagnosis of recessive Mendelian diseases, the methods discussed in this article can be easily applied to other the diagnosis of other type of Mendelian diseases. For example, suppose a dominant Mendelian disease is caused by the presence of allele A. When the maternal genotype is AA, the fetus must be affected. When the maternal genotype is BB, the fetus is affected if and only if allele A can be detected from the maternal plasma. (Note that this is also true for the diseases caused by de novo dominant mutation.) When the maternal genotype is AB, the fetus carries the benign genotype BB if and only if the ratio of allele A to B is less than or equal to (1p)/(1+p), the fetus has the disease causing genotype AB or AA if and only if the ratio is greater than or equal to 1. Thus, we can determine if the fetus is affected when the maternal genotype is AB by testing the null hypothesis that the ratio of allele A to allele B is less than or equal to (1p)/(1+p), against the alternative hypothesis that the ratio is greater than or equal to 1. For diseases caused by compound heterozygous mutations, our methods can be used to determine the fetal genotype at all relevant loci. Of course, when multiple tests are conducted simultaneously, we need to use the Bonferroni correction to control the family wise error rate. In conclusion, we provide a statistical foundation for the development of digital methods including PCR and DNA sequencing for the non-invasive diagnosis of recessive Mendelian human disease. The methods we provide should guide the future design of studies in this realm and be considered when establishing proof of concept for such methods. Funding: magee womens Research Institute and Foundation (to D.G.P.).
