Motivation: Several tools exist to identify cancer driver genes based on somatic mutation data. However, these tools do not account for subclasses of cancer genes: oncogenes, which undergo gain of function events, and tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) which undergo loss of function. A method which accounts for these subclasses could improve performance while also suggesting a mechanism of action for new putative cancer genes. Results: We develop a panel of five complementary statistical tests and assess their performance against a curated set of 99 hi conf cancer genes using a pan cancer dataset of 1.7 million mutations. We identify patient bias as a novel signal for cancer gene discovery, and use it to significantly improve detection of oncogenes over existing methods a uroc ¼ 0.894). Additionally, our test of truncation event rate separates oncogenes and TSGs from one another a uroc ¼ 0.922). Finally, a random forest integrating the five tests further improves performance and identifies new cancer genes, including CACNG3, HDAC2, HIST1H1E, NXF1, GPS2 and HLA-DRB1.

introduction since the first cancer genome was sequenced in 2008, large scale studies surveying multiple tumor types have been released (). By sequencing paired tumor normal exo mes and genomes, these studies generate catalogs of tumor specific mutations, such as single nucleotide variants and small insertions deletions (indels). Mutation data can be used to detect evidence of positive selection and new potential cancer genes, defined here as genes that exert a pro tumor influence as either oncogenes or tumor suppressors genes (TSGs). However, tumor mutation rates vary by several orders of magnitude, increasing from acute myeloid leukemia to melanoma (). Particularly in tumors with high mutation rates, it is likely that most mutations occur incidentally to tumor development. Therefore, mutations and genes must be experimentally characterized to identify biologically relevant mutations; however, due to the number of background mutations, these experiments pose a high risk, low reward opportunity. In general, only genes with strikingly nonrandom mutation patterns or new mutations in known cancer genes prompt further investigation (). Computational solutions can alleviate this problem by directing investigators to genes that are more likely to be cancer causing. Existing methods detect several signals of cancer gene positive selection, including: mutation rate (), functional impact scores (Gonzalez), intra gene mutation clustering and recurrence (), post-translational modifications (), or DNA lesion likelihood (). Earlier work also demonstrated the importance of patient specific mutation rates in detecting cancer genes (). Furthermore, integrating these complementary approaches can lead to improved performance (). One shortcoming of these methods is that they identify cancer genes, but can not separate likely oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Oncogenes are of particular interest to biologists, as they can provide a direct target for small molecule inhibitors. However, recent studies show that tumor suppressors and oncogenes are separable using rates of truncating mutations, mutation clustering and copy number data () (see supplementary for representative examples). It is possible that an ensemble method that treats oncogenes and TSGs as separate classes would improve performance over existing methods, in addition to suggesting whether new putative cancer genes operate through gain of function (oncogene) or loss of function (TSG). In this study, we use a pan cancer dataset of 1.7 million mutations and manually curated set of 99 high confidence hi conf cancer genes to develop a panel of five statistical tests. The tests detect different signals of positive selection and are designed to detect putative oncogenes and TSGs. In particular, we identify patient and cancer type bias as new cancer gene signals, and leverage them to markedly improve detection of oncogenes. We then integrate these tests into a random forest model which can simultaneously identify new putative cancer genes, and classify them as likely oncogenes and tumor suppressors. We validate by assessing the performance of previous tools and our new methods against several independent panels of known and putative cancer genes. Finally, we explore the performance of these methods in specific cancer types and suggest new putative cancer genes.

discussion one use of cancer genome sequencing results is the identification of novel cancer genes. This problem has two stages: first, cancer genes must be separated from genes bearing only passenger mutations; second, cancer genes must be sorted into likely tumor suppressors and oncogenes. Both stages are crucial because mechanism specific predictions are needed to guide downstream analyses and experiments. In this study we gathered a pan cancer dataset of 1.7 million variants and a manually curated set of 99 known cancer genes hi conf panel). Using these data, we designed and assessed a panel of statistical tests which identify cancer genes using several signals of positive selection, as well as separate cancer genes by mechanism of action. We also compared the performance of these tests to previous tools in accomplishing these tasks. In general, we found that hi conf TSGs were easier to detect than hi conf oncogenes. Several methods had au rocs of 0.9 or higher, including the published tool on co drive fm and our tests of patient and cancer type bias ('Patient Distribution', 'Cancer Type Distribution'). However, the best single method for detecting TSGs was our test of functional impact bias, 'VEST Mean', with an a uroc of 0.938. In contrast, hi conf oncogenes were less easily identified. This is concerning because oncogenes provide more direct targets for drug development. The best performing existing tool for detecting the hi conf oncogenes was on co drive clust with an a uroc of 0.808. With the exception of 'Truncation Rate', all of the tests in our panel had au rocs of 0.80 or greater when detecting hi conf oncogenes. Particular improvement was observed with 'Unaffected Residues', which tests for mutation clustering recurrence and had an a uroc of 0.855, and 'Patient Distribution', which was the best performer with an a uroc of 0.894. Two of our tests warrant emphasis. 'Patient Distribution' uses a novel signal of positive selection. It identifies genes with mutations that occur in nonrandom sets of patients, particularly genes with mutations that occur in relatively hypo mutated tumors, as would be anticipated of genes bearing driver mutations. For identifying the hi conf panel as a whole (TSG  on c 'Patient Distribution' is the strongest performer with a uroc of 0.900. Another important member of our statistical panel is 'Truncation Rate'. This test is a formalized version of the 20/20 rule for TSGs put forward by, and uses the binomial distribution to model the expected number of truncation events per gene. 'Truncation Rate' can be used to separate TSGs and oncogenes with an a uroc of 0.922. It is the only method that usefully accomplished this task. Because the individual tests of our panel offered complementary strengths, we also integrated them into a single model. We found that a random forest built on our five tests (RF5) was effective at separating hi conf oncogenes and TSGs from passenger genes, and from one another. Moreover, this integration did not require any loss in performance: RF5 is as good as or better than the individual methods at every classification tasks we assessed. We also confirmed these results in several independent validation gene panels. RF5 identifies many potential pan cancer cancer genes. These include the predicted oncogenes CACNG3 and HIST1H1E, and the predicted TSGs HDAC2, GPS2, NXF1 and HLA-DRB1. It also identifies several known cancer genes through genome sequencing for the first time, including SGK1, TMEM30A, CHD2, CHD4 and RBM5. Many RF5 predictions are potentially drug gable. Furthermore, additional cancer genes can be identified when focusing on single cancer types. In fact, we found that half of RF5 predictions within tumor types were cancer specific. These results illustrate the importance of searching for cancer genes in both the pan cancer and specific cancer settings and suggest many new potential avenues of research. However, there remains room for improvement. as illustrates some oncogenes and TSGs could not be detected by RF5, and some were not detectable by any individual test or pre-existing tool (Supplementary). There are two major explanations. Foremost, cancer genes will be undetectable if they are primarily altered through means other than somatic mutations in the exo me. Additionally, our cancer gene panels may include genes that are involved in later stages of disease progression, such as metastasis and drug resistance. These are true cancer genes, but may be undetectable in the available data as tumor samples largely come from newly diagnosed patients (). Fortunately, our methods are highly expandable, and multiple strategies could improve performance, such as: (i) Introduction of additional, heterogeneous data types. (ii) Improved tests. (iii) Improved model design and training. (iv) Expansion of the hi conf cancer gene panel.
