Motivation: As cancer progresses, DNA copy number aberrations accumulate and the genomic entropy (chromosomal disorganization) increases. For this surge to have any on co genetic effect, it should (to some extent) be reflected at other molecular levels of the cancer cell, in particular that of the transcriptome. Such a coincidence of cancer progression and the propagation of an entropy increase through the molecular levels of the cancer cell would enhance the understanding of cancer evolution. Results: A statistical argument reveals that (under some assumptions) an entropy increase in one random variable (DNA copy number) leads to an entropy increase in another (gene expression). Statistical methodology is provided to investigate the relation between the genomic and transcript omic entropy using high throughput data. Analyses of multiple high throughput datasets using this methodology show a close, concordant relation among the genomic and transcript omic entropy. Hence, as cancer evolves, and the genomic entropy increases, the transcript omic entropy is also expected to surge.

introduction dna copy number aberrations are one of the key characteristics of cancer (). In fact, the accumulation of DNA copy number aberrations is the most consistent feature of cancer progression (). The entropy at the genomic level (chromosomal disorganization) of cancer cells thus exceeds that of healthy cells and tends to surge as cancer progresses. DNA copy number aberrations affect mRNA expression levels as the central dogma of molecular biology suggests and numerous high throughput studies have shown (e.g.). Aberrations need not only affect the expression of its driver gene, but may also alter expression levels of the other genes that map to the aber rated segment (). In fact, genomic aberrations also affect expression levels of other transcripts like microRNAs (e.g.). The close relation between the genome * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and transcriptome suggests that the entropy increase spreads to other molecular levels of the cell's regulatory system, and is expected to manifest itself most prominently in the transcriptome. Indeed, for this surge in genomic entropy to have any phenotypic on co genetic effect, it needs (to some extent) to propagate to the transcript omic level and beyond. Cancer may be considered an evolutionary process, driven by random variation and natural selection (). During its life a cell may undergo heritable genetic alterations (e.g. DNA copy number aberrations). Such alterations may be neutral but may also affect the cell's phenotype. Irrespective of the type of alteration, any cell is subject to natural selection: it has to survive in the environment of the organism's tissue. Within this framework, a cancer cell can be thought of as having acquired alterations that resulted in beneficial traits to survive, proliferate and metastasize (). Evolution explores different paths via random variation, and the path that leads to a faster entropy increase is naturally selected (). As cancer evolves progresses the entropy at the genomic level increases (). Here we investigate, using high throughput studies, whether this is reflected at the transcript omic level (as suggested by). If so, this may shed light on the path of evolution of the cancer cell. Before we facilitate the study of the propagation of increased entropy of genome to transcriptome in the cancer cell, we first provide a statistical argument that suggests this indeed seems plausible. We then present statistical methodology to analyze high throughput genomic experiments in order to answer the following related questions: @BULLET Is the entropy of a cancer sample's transcriptome higher than that of a normal sample bullet Is a cancer sample's genomic entropy associated to that of its transcriptome these questions are portrayed schematically in. We illustrate how the discussed methodology may be utilized by application to multiple datasets.
