Motivation: Stochasticity is an indispensable aspect of biochemical processes at the cellular level. Studies on how the noise enters and propagates in biochemical systems provided us with non-trivial insights into the origins of stochasticity, in total, however, they constitute a patchwork of different theoretical analyses. Results: Here we present a flexible and widely applicable noise decomposition tool that allows us to calculate contributions of individual reactions to the total variability of a systems output. With the package it is, therefore, possible to quantify how the noise enters and propagates in biochemical systems. We also demonstrate and exemplify using the jak stat signalling pathway that the noise contributions resulting from individual reactions can be inferred from data experimental data along with Bayesian parameter inference. The method is based on the linear noise approximation, which is assumed to provide a reasonable representation of analyzed systems. Availability and implementation: http://sourceforge.net/p/stochde comp/

introduction the question which molecular species or parts of a network contribute most of the variability of a system or are responsible for most of the information loss has attracted much attention in recent years. Numerous studies have analyzed noise in signalling networks in detail and decomposed the noise into contributions attributable to fluctuations in messenger RNA and protein. Current software implementations offer a broad range of stochastic modeling methods to analyze stochastic properties of biochemical dynamics (). These tools, however, focus only indirectly on origins and propagation of stochasticity. To our knowledge, a software package to provide decomposition of noise into individual sources has been lacking. Recently, we developed () a flexible and simple method to analyze how the structure of biochemical networks gives rise to noise in its outputs. In principle, this allows us to efficiently calculate the contribution each reaction makes to the variability in all concentrations for any network, which can be modelled within the linear noise approximation (LNA) framework. Origins of variability can be therefore assigned to individual reactions and arbitrarily defined network components. Moreover, if experimental data are available and a posterior of model parameters can be generated, the contribution of individual reactions can be estimated from data along with the parameters. Later in the text we provide a general description of the package. Details are presented in the Supplementary Information, which includes theoretical foundations of the method, user manual and examples. In a comprehensive analysis of the jak stat signalling pathway, we infer individual contributions from experimental data published in).
