Motivation: Studying biological systems, not just at an individual component level but at a system-wide level, gives us great potential to understand fundamental functions and essential biological properties. Despite considerable advances in the topological analysis of metabolic networks, inadequate knowledge of the enzyme kinetic rate laws and their associated parameter values still hampers large scale kinetic modelling. Furthermore, the integration of gene expression and protein levels into kinetic models is not straightforward. Results: The focus of our research is on streamlining the construction of large scale kinetic models. A novel software tool was developed, which enables the generation of generic rate equations for all reactions in a model. It encompasses an algorithm for estimating the concentration of proteins for a reaction to reach a particular steady state when kinetic parameters are unknown, and two robust methods for parameter estimation. It also allows for the seamless integration of gene expression or protein levels into a reaction and can generate equations for both transcription and translation. We applied this methodology to model the yeast glycolysis pathway; our results show that the behaviour of the system can be accurately described using generic kinetic equations. Availability and implementation: The software tool, together with its source code in Java, is available from our project web site at

introduction the current availability of annotated genomes and detailed '-omics' data makes it possible to construct stoichiometric genome scale metabolic networks that include all reactions, metabolites and proteins. Systems biology aims to examine the properties and dynamics of cellular processes as a whole rather than in isolated parts of a cell or an organism (). Integrating cellular components is essential for our understanding of how interactions * To whom correspondence should be addressed. between these components influence cellular functions. One aspect of this integration is the need to integrate proteins and other cellular components into metabolic networks. For example, fr ster and Palsson (2003) manually reconstructed a genome scale integrative model of gene expression and metabolism of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (1175 metabolic reactions, 584 metabolites and 708 open reading frames). Stoichiometric models, which describe the topology of a metabolic network, provide limited insights into the functioning of cellular processes. To understand the detailed dynamics of cellular functions and their regulation, it is necessary to advance toward kinetic models where the behaviour of a system can be perturbed. The construction of a genome scale kinetic model of a biological cell requires the integration of genomic, proteomic, meta bolo mic and flux omic data along with thermodynamic information (). Attempts for building such large scale kinetic models are now starting to emerge provided a systematic method for constructing large scale kinetic metabolic models and addressed the problem of estimating kinetic parameters described a framework for building and analysing large scale kinetic models and presented the mathematical challenges associated with the construction of such models. In a cell scale model, the number of reactions, metabolites and proteins can reach several thousands, making it time consuming and costly, if not impossible, to accurately measure individual concentrations of metabolites, fluxes and kinetic parameters. There is often inadequate knowledge of enzymatic kinetic laws and their associated parameter values, and usually parameters obtained from the literature are dependent on specific in vitro or in vivo experimental conditions. Yet, there is growing awareness that exact rate equations and parameters are often not crucial in determining the dynamic properties of large systems. This principle has been illustrated by the development of methods for 'bridging the gap' between structural and kinetic modelling proposed a method that aimed to give account of the dynamical capabilities of metabolic systems without requiring explicit information about the rate equations, and they showed that it was possible to acquire a detailed quantitative representation of metabolic systems without explicitly referring to a set of differential equations presented a method for building kinetic models solely based on reaction stoic hio me tries of a network using l inlog kinetics. Their results showed good agreement between the real dynamics and their approximation in a yeast glycolysis model also acknowledged that the scarcity of experimental data for rate equations and parameters is a major
