Motivation: Evaluating alternative multiple protein sequence alignments is an important unsolved problem in Biology. The most accurate way of doing this is to use structural information. Unfortunately, most methods require at least two structures to be embedded in the alignment, a condition rarely met when dealing with standard datasets. Result: We developed STRIKE, a method that determines the relative accuracy of two alternative alignments of the same sequences using a single structure. We validated our methodology on three commonly used reference datasets bali base homes trad and Prefab). Given two alignments, STRIKE manages to identify the most accurate one in 70% of the cases on average. This figure increases to 79% when considering very challenging datasets like the RV11 category of bali base. This discrimination capacity is significantly higher than that reported for other metrics such as Contact Accepted mutation or Blosum. We show that this increased performance results both from a refined definition of the contacts and from the use of an improved contact substitution score. Contact: cedric notre dame crg eu Availability: STRIKE is an open source freeware available from

introduction the assembly of accurate multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) is one of the most important tasks in Biology. Judging from citation index, MSA packages have become the most widely used tools for biological sequence modeling. This should not come as a surprise given their wide range of applications that include phylogenetic tree reconstruction, profile building and structural modeling. These diverse modeling schemes are becoming increasingly important in defining the way experimental information is being transferred across uncharacterized sequences. Yet, trees, profiles and structural models all have one thing in common: their strong dependency on the MSA framework they are based upon. For instance, it is well established that homology modeling is very dependent on MSA accuracy (). In a similar fashion have recently described the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. influence of MSAs onto phylogenetic tree topologies, showing how minor variations across different aligners can lead to significantly different tree topologies. Albeit these authors have not formally established a direct dependency between MSA accuracy and proper phylogenetic tree reconstruction, they have nonetheless shown the existence of a strong methodological bias induced by the aligner's choice. More recently, markova have used a different set up to show how the use of different aligners can result in significantly different estimates for positive selection rates. These observations confront biologists with a complex situation. On the one hand, it is clear that the choice of an alignment strategy will have an impact on any result drawn upon the MSAs; on the other hand, there is no simple way to quantify this impact and determine its positive or negative nature. Using sequence information alone, it is very hard to decide which one is the best among two or more alternative MSAs of the same sequences. This difficulty stems from the impossibility of accurately aligning proteins with 25% sequence identity using sequence information only. Sequence similarity is only a useful indicator of alignment accuracy for closely related sequences. The most biologically relevant alignment (defined with respect to structural information in standard datasets) is rarely the one having the highest possible score (). The practical consequences of these observations are important as they imply the need for external evaluation criteria in order to evaluate MSAs in a biologically meaningful way. The problem of estimating the biological relevance of an alignment is particularly acute considering alternative MSA methods. As shown in m coffee (), different packages tend to deliver significantly different MSAs. Most scientists address this problem by ignoring it and using a single aligner [most frequently ClustalW (. However, for those ready to consider the aligner as yet another parameter in a complex modeling pipeline, at least two sequence based solutions exist. The first one involves combining all the alternative alignments into one unique consensus MSA. This approach has been shown to improve slightly on all the combined methods (). Along the same lines, it has also been shown that regions showing a high agreement across methods are also more likely to be correctly aligned, as estimated by comparison with a reference MSA (). The second approach is to evaluate the alignment for specific features difficult to take into account while building the MSA, but measurable on a complete model (e.g. completely conserved positions) (). The AlexSys () strategy is built on this approach and combines features measured on the unaligned sequences (length, divergence, etc.) to determine

discussion in this work, we present the STRIKE score, a new metric using a single structure to estimate the structural correctness of MSAs. We show that using STRIKE, one can distinguish between alternative MSAs of the same sequences more reliably than when using similarity based scoring schemes, like Blosum or PAM. STRIKE is not the first attempt to compare alternative MSAs using the information from a single sequence, and in this work we have extensively compared our approach with that developed in CAO, which is conceptually similar albeit more complex in its implementation. Our results suggest that comparisons based on STRIKE result are more likely to reveal the most trustworthy MSA than those using CAO. Two reasons explain this difference. First, the STRIKE matrix is not estimated on structural alignments but on single structures. Consequently, the STRIKE matrix could be estimated on a much larger reference dataset. In comparison, the CAO matrix that considers the substitution cost for every contact pair of amino acids was probably underdetermined. The second reason for the reported improvement is the all atom definition of contacts. While CAO was determined using coarse grained C  side chain contacts, STRIKE uses a more sophisticated definition of contacts discriminating between side chains and backbone. We showed that this choice accounts for the largest part of the difference between CAO and STRIKE. We also explored the factors influencing STRIKE's capacity to discriminate between accurate and inaccurate MSAs. Against our expectation, we found the protein class to have only a weak influence on the trustworthiness of STRIKE. On the datasets analyzed here, the variations between all , all  and  structures are 5 percentage points. We found that the differences in STRIKE scores are most useful when considering datasets with low average identity, and unsurprisingly when the difference in the scores is high. For instance, a STRIKE difference of 1 nat on a dataset with 30% average sequence identity makes it possible to identify with a reliability close to 90% the most correct of the two considered. This makes STRIKE a potentially very useful tool to evaluate the alternative MSAs. Indeed, following the work of on the uncertainty of phylogenetic trees, biologists are now confronted with a complex situation. On the one hand, it has now been established that alternative alignments can result in significantly different phylogenetic trees. On the other hand, no solution has yet been provided as to how biologists should proceed to select the most useful aligners or alignments. The method we introduce here could conveniently address this issue by providing users with an objective criterion to select the MSAs that are most likely to be structurally correct. Such a criterion would also be useful in the context of homology modeling.
