Motivation: Tyrosine sulfation is a type of post-translational modification (PTM) catalyzed by tyrosyl protein sulfotransferase s t pst. The modification plays a crucial role in mediating protein protein interactions in many biologically important processes. There is no well defined sequence motif for t pst sulfation, and the underlying determinants of t pst sulfation specificity remains elusive. Here, we perform molecular modeling to uncover the structural and energetic determinants of t pst sulfation specificity. Results: We estimate the binding affinities between t pst and peptides around tyrosines of both sulfated and non sulfated proteins to differentiate them. We find that better differentiation is achieved after including energy costs associated with local unfolding of the tyrosine containing peptide in a host protein, which depends on both the peptides secondary structures and solvent accessibility. Local unfolding renders buried peptide with ordered structures— thermodynamically available for t pst binding. Our results suggest that both thermodynamic availability of the peptide and its binding affinity to the enzyme are important for t pst sulfation specificity, and their interplay results into great variations in sequences and structures of sulfated peptides. We expect our method to be useful in predicting potential sulfation sites and transferable to other t pst variants. Our study may also shed light on other PTM systems without well defined sequence and structural specificities.

introduction after their synthesis in the ribosome, many proteins undergo post-translational modifications (PTM) such as glycosylation, phosphorylation and peptide hydrolysis before reaching their fully functional forms. Tyrosine sulfation is a common PTM occurring on many proteins that transit through the Golgi apparatus, such as extracellular matrix proteins, serine protease inhibitors and g protein coupled receptors (). So far hundreds of tyrosine sulfated proteins have been identified, and more are likely to be discovered. A list of sulfated proteins can be obtained from the UniProt database (). A major functional role of tyrosine sulfation is to mediate protein protein interactions (). Sulfation is vital for many biological functions as indicated in studies showing that postnatal viability, vision, fertility and growth are affected in mice in the absence of sulfation (). The functioning of many proteins, including p select in glycoprotein ligand 1 (), chemokine receptors (), platelet glycoprotein Ib (), depends on tyrosine sulfation. For example, the sulfation of tyrosine in the chemokine receptor CCR5 is necessary for HIV-1 gp120 mediated entry of HIV into CD4+ t lymphocytes (). A detailed understanding of the molecular mechanism of tyrosine sulfation is therefore important for manipulating such modifications, regulating cell signaling and drug development. Sulfation is catalyzed by the tyrosyl protein sulfotransferase t pst enzymes, which reside inside the Golgi apparatus. The process involves the transfer of a sulfo group from a bound 3 0-phosphoadenosine-5 0 phospho sulfate (PAPS) to the phenol group of tyrosine. In humans, two isoforms, TPST-1 and TPST-2, are found with 64% sequence identity between them (). The functional differences between the isoforms or the necessity of two such isoforms are not well established. Sulfation occurs only on specific tyrosines in proteins. Even though up to 1% of tyrosines in a cell's proteome can be sulfated ( ), the location of sulfated tyrosines are not known for many proteins. Hence, neither the exact role of sulfated tyrosines in these proteins nor the mechanism by which the tyrosines are selected for sulfation is fully understood. Analysis of the amino acid sequences flanking sulfated tyrosines suggested some general features such as the presence of acidic and small residues, absence of disulfide bonds or glycosylated residues and a reduced number of hydrophobic residues in the vicinity of sulfated tyrosines (). However, there are also many exceptions to these general characteristics of sequence specificity. For example, mutational studies reported an enhanced sulfation efficiency when tyrosines were flanked by basic residues (). Therefore, in contrast to other PTMs such as n glycosylation which recognizes structurally available nxt s triplets (), a well defined sequence specificity for tyrosine sulfation can not be established. Owing to the lack of obvious sequence patterns, sophisticated statistical tools have been developed to predict potential *To whom correspondence should be addressed. locations of sulfation sites in a given protein. sulf in at or () constructed four different hidden Markov models to recognize sulfated tyrosine residues depending on their locations in the sequence: near n terminal near c terminal in the center of a window of at least 25 amino acids and in windows containing multiple tyrosines. In pred sul site (), physicochemical properties of amino acids along with predicted secondary structures and amino acid sequence order are considered in a supported vector machine (SVM). The SVM algorithm has also been applied in another predictor based on predicted secondary structures and solvent accessible surface area (). These statistics based tools work satisfactorily in their test cases and have been useful in experimental studies of protein sulfation (). However, these training based statistical methods depend heavily on the quality of the training set, such as the coverage and completeness, which is not the case for the increasing list of sulfated proteins identified experimentally. As a result, many exceptions were observed in cases beyond the training sets (), and these methods are also not transferable to other t pst variants, such as recently discovered bacterial tp sts (). Most importantly, many of these methods are sequence based and the constructed predictors lack structural or physicochemical insights to the molecular mechanism of tyrosine selection by t pst enzyme. Recently, a high resolution structure of human TPST-2 () has been solved at 1.9 A  resolution in complex with a high affinity peptide using X-ray crystallography (), making it possible to study the structural and energetic determinants of t pst sulfation specificity. In this work, we adapt Eris (), a method developed to compute protein stability changes on mutations, to estimate the binding affinities between TPST-2 and various peptide substrates to differentiate sulfated and non sulfated sequences that have been experimentally verified. We find that the peptide t pst binding affinities can not separate the sulfated and non sulfated sequences satisfactorily. Better differentiation is achieved after including energy costs associated with local unfolding of the tyrosine containing peptides in the host protein, which depends on both the peptide's secondary structures and solvent accessibility. The thermodynamic population of the locally unfolded peptides determines the availability of the peptide for t pst binding and subsequent catalysis. Therefore, our study suggests that both the thermodynamics accessibility of a peptide and its binding affinity to t pst are important for sulfation. The interplay of these two factors allows a great variety in sequences and structures of sulfated peptides, where a buried peptide with well defined secondary structure might be sulfated if the peptide undergoes local unfolding, making itself available for enzyme binding.
