Motivation: Structural variation including deletions, duplications and rearrangements of DNA sequence are an important contributor to genome variation in many organisms. In human, many structural variants are found in complex and highly repetitive regions of the genome making their identification difficult. A new sequencing technology called strobe sequencing generates strobe reads containing multiple sub reads from a single contiguous fragment of DNA. Strobe reads thus generalize the concept of paired reads, or mate pairs, that have been routinely used for structural variant detection. Strobe sequencing holds promise for unraveling complex variants that have been difficult to characterize with current sequencing technologies. Results: We introduce an algorithm for identification of structural variants using strobe sequencing data. We consider strobe reads from a test genome that have multiple possible alignments to a reference genome due to sequencing errors and or repetitive sequences in the reference. We formulate the combinatorial optimization problem of finding the minimum number of structural variants in the test genome that are consistent with these alignments. We solve this problem using an integer linear program. Using simulated strobe sequencing data, we show that our algorithm has better sensitivity and specificity than paired read approaches for structural variation identification.

introduction identifying the DNA sequence differences that distinguish individuals is a major challenge in genetics. Recent whole genome sequencing and microarray measurements have shown that copy number variants (insertions, duplications and deletions) and balanced rearrangements, such as inversions and translocations, are common in most organisms including human (), mouse (), fly () and yeast (). These larger differences in DNA sequences are commonly referred to as structural variants. The Database of Genomic Variants () currently (winter 2010) lists nearly 30 000 copy number variants and nearly 900 inversion variants in the human genome. Although some of these variants are redundant and or erroneous, it is clear that structural variation is an important component of human genome variation. In fact, there are more total base pairs in human genome affected by structural variants than single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP;). Both common and inherited structural variants and de novo structural variants have recently been linked to a number of human diseases (). Moreover, somatic structural variants are common in cancer genomes and lead to altered regulation of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes () and the creation of novel fusion genes (). Much of the recent excitement surrounding structural variation stems from better measurement technologies. In particular, End Sequence profiling (), also known as paired read mapping (), has been used to identify structural variants in both normal and cancer genomes. In paired read mapping, DNA fragments from a test genome are sequenced from both ends, and these sequences (reads) are mapped to a reference genome. Paired reads, or mate pairs, with discordant alignments identify inversions, translocations, transpositions, insertions, deletions and other rearrangements that distinguish the test genome from the reference genome. A number of methods have been introduced to identify structural variants from paired read sequencing data (). Structural variants vary widely in size and complexity, and are more difficult to characterize than SNPs. Many are associated with repeated sequences in the genome (), complicating their detection and characterization. In extreme cases, the variants themselves have highly repetitive or complex organization relative to the reference genome. For example, different lists of variants have been identified in the same individual using older clone based sequencing () and various next generation sequencing platforms (). Characterizing these complex variants requires longer reads, longer fragments, or both. Pacific Biosciences recently demonstrated strobe sequencing technology (). A strobe read, or strobe, consists of multiple sub reads from a single contiguous fragment of DNA. These sub reads are separated by a number of 'dark' nucleotides (called advances), whose identity is unknown (). A strobe with two sub reads is analogous to a paired read, while strobes with more than two sub reads provide additional information for structural variant detection. Thus far, Pacific Biosciences has demonstrated strobe reads with lengths up to 10 kb with. A strobe read is a sequence of sub reads and advances. When aligned to a reference genome, pairs of adjacent sub reads can either be labeled as concordant or discordant, according to a derived minimum and maximum allowed length of an advance strobe sequencing provides reads from long, contiguous fragments of DNA with low input DNA requirements, a feature missing from current short insert sequencing technologies. However, a consideration with strobe reads are the per base error rates. While the capabilities of the Pacific Biosciences commercial machine (expected later in 2010) are not yet known, we conservatively assume that this error rate will be higher than existing next generation sequencing technologies. Thus, realizing the advantages of strobe reads for structural variation detection demands new algorithms that utilize information from multiple sub reads while allowing higher single base error rates. We introduce an algorithm to identify and characterize complex structural variants with strobe reads by considering multiple possible alignments for each sub read. We formulate the combinatorial optimization problem of selecting an alignment for each sub read of every strobe read so that the total number of structural variants in the test genome is minimized. This generalizes a formulation that has proved successful for paired read analysis (). We show how to reduce the problem to an optimization problem on directed graphs, and derive an integer linear program (ILP) for the problem. We apply our method to simulated strobe read sequencing data. We find that strobe reads outperform paired reads for structural variation detection. In particular, at a fixed sensitivity level strobe reads have nearly double the specificity of paired reads.

discussion structural variants vary widely in size and complexity, and thus are generally more difficult to characterize than SNPs. Sensitive and specific detection of structural variation in human genomes from next generation sequencing data remains a challenge. This is due to both technological limitations (in read length, error rates and insert sizes) and biological factors. Structural variants in human are: (i) enriched for repetitive sequences near their breakpoints (); (ii) may overlap or have complex architectures; and (iii) recurrent (but not identical) variants may exist at the same locus (). We have shown that strobe reads have advantages in sensitivity and specificity over paired reads for structural variant detection. Since a single strobe can resolve multiple breakpoints, inference of duplications and rearrangements become more direct. The method handles both intra chromosomal (Section 4.2) and inter chromosomal (Section 4.3) events, making it suitable for genome wide analyses. While we have examined deletions, inversions and translocations in simulated strobe read data, explicitly testing the detection power of insertions using strobe reads remains future work. An interesting question is whether strobe reads will detect more complex variants that are beyond the abilities of current sequencing technologies. We showed a preliminary comparison of simulated strobe sequencing versus simulated short read, short insert sequencing. Although this comparison demonstrates an advantage for strobes, a more rigorous assessment with real sequencing data is required to obtain a definite comparison of these technologies. An inherent limitation in any approach is the accuracy of the underlying alignments. Most second generation sequencing technologies produce short reads with increasing error rates near the end of the reads and few insertions. The Pacific Biosciences technology differs in that it has predominantly long reads, uniform error over the entire read and an insertion deletion heavy error model (). For these reasons, different alignment approaches have been suggested that use km er seeding followed by alignment extension (). In our study, mappings were ranked using a naive smith waterman score, assuming uniform quality of all sequenced bases. As mapping and scoring for single molecule sequencing technologies mature, the proposed ILP can be changed to use more sophisticated scoring functions, increasing sensitivity (by ensuring true alignments are included) and specificity (by reducing spurious alignments). Current and new technologies are continually increasing the read length (or sub read length in the case of strobe reads). Longer sub reads imply a higher frequency of split reads sub reads which span a breakpoint). Such events can be readily incorporated into the ILP by converting sub reads with non-overlapping mappings (relative to the sub read into psuedo strobe reads, leading to paths of variable length from source to sink for a given strobe read. The advance in this case becomes the distance between the end of the first alignment and the start of second alignment on the sub read. This allows the method to be used as a generic framework for evaluating genome wide structural variation given any form of sequencing data. The suggested model is designed to handle germ-line mutations. In scenarios with heterogeneous data or when somatic mutations are abundant, such as in cancer, the assumptions in our model could be limiting. For example, the notion of minimizing breakpoints and clustering breakpoint junctions may be incorrect. In areas of elevated chromosome instability, each individual cancer cell may undergo different mutations leading to slightly (or greatly) different breakpoint boundaries. Additionally, breakpoint clustering is significantly more challenging as some genomic aberrations may only be present in a small fraction of cells. Integrating copy number information on a per breakpoint basis could provide added power in detecting these lower frequency events.
