Motivation: Mutations in human genome are mainly through single nucleotide polymorphism, some of which can affect stability and function of proteins, causing human diseases. Several methods have been proposed to predict the effect of mutations on protein stability; but most require features from experimental structure. Given the fast progress in protein structure prediction, this work explores the possibility to improve the mutation induced stability change prediction using low resolution structure modeling. Results: We developed a new method (STRUM) for predicting stability change caused by single point mutations. Starting from wild type sequences, 3D models are constructed by the iterative threading assembly refinement it asser simulations, where physics and knowledge based energy functions are derived on the it asser models and used to train STRUM models through gradient boosting regression. STRUM was assessed by 5-fold cross validation on 3421 experimentally determined mutations from 150 proteins. The Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) between predicted and measured changes of Gibbs free energy gap, DDG, upon mutation reaches 0.79 with a root mean square error 1.2 kcal mol in the mutation based cross validations. The PCC reduces if separating training and test mutations from non-homologous proteins, which reflects inherent correlations in the current mutation sample. Nevertheless, the results significantly outperform other state of the art methods, including those built on experimental protein structures. Detailed analyses show that the most sensitive features in STRUM are the physics based energy terms on it asser models and the conservation scores from multiple threading template alignments. However, the DDG prediction accuracy has only a marginal dependence on the accuracy of protein structure models as long as the global fold is correct. These data demonstrate the feasibility to use low resolution structure modeling for high accuracy stability change prediction upon point mutations. Availability and Implementation

introduction mutation and evolution in the human genome are mainly through single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). With the developments of high throughput array based genotyping methods and the next generation sequencing technologies, a large volume of SNP data has been recently accumulated. It is estimated that around 58% of the exonic SNPs in the human genome can result in change in protein amino acid sequences, called 'non-synonymous' SNP or ns snp (). In many cases, the ns snp mutations have little or no discernible effect on protein functions, but others are known to be responsible for many human diseases (). Experimental measurements showed that nearly one third of ns snp mutations are deleterious to human health (). Recognizing such deleterious ns snp mutations is of critical importance to both protein function annotation and disease diagnosis. In the viewpoint of thermodynamics, the effects of the mutations can be assessed through changes on the thermal stability of protein systems. The stability of proteins can be quantitatively characterized by a simple two state model (folded and unfolded,), where the difference in Gibbs free energy between the unfolded (G u ) and the folded (G f ) states, DG  G u  G f , is used to specify the fold stability. The higher and more positive DG is, the more stable the protein is against denaturation. When a mutation occurs, the free energy landscape and the stability can change, where the free energy gap difference between wild type (DG m ) and mutant protein (DG w ), DDG  DG m  DG w , is a measure of how mutation affects protein stability illustrates an example where the mutation destabilized the protein by reducing the free energy gap between folded and unfolded states. In general, a DDG below zero means that the mutation causes destabilization; otherwise, it induces stabilization. Although mutagenesis studies are important approach to experimentally characterizing the thermodynamic and physiological effects of ns snps it is often too expensive and time consuming for large scale mutation studies. Computational mutation prediction becomes increasingly important with the rapid accumulation of sequence mutation data. Current computational approaches can be generally categorized into sequence based and structure based methods. One of the most popularly used sequenced based methods is SIFT, which predicts whether an amino acid substitution affects protein function based on the degree of conservation of amino acid residues in multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) that are derived from closely related sequences. A Pearson correlation coefficient (PCC) of 0.55 was obtained by SIFT between the residue conservation and the number of experimentally determined deleterious mutations (). in ps () is another sequence based method recently developed on SVM regression. By appropriate combination of evolutionary information, a PCC of 0.52 was obtained by INSP when tested in the protein level cross validations. Recent studies have demonstrated considerable advantages in exploiting information of protein 3D structures in the mutation induced stability change prediction. For instance, fold x used a full atomic description of protein structure to estimate the importance of the interactions contributing to the stability of proteins and protein complexes, which generated DDG predictions with a correlation 0.73 to the experimental data for 625 single point mutations (). fold x was recently exploited by bind prof (), which shows that it can improve the prediction accuracy of mutation effects on protein binding interactions when combined with structure based interface profiles. i mutant trained the stability models on the neighboring residue types within a 9 A  radius sphere and achieved an increase in the correlation of predicted and measured DDG by 14% compared with the model based on sequence features alone (). pop music went further to take the spatial descriptors from the native structure of the wild type protein and had the DDG calculated by a linear combination of 13 knowledge based terms on the protein structure, which resulted in a correlation of 0.8 between predicted and measured stability changes after exclusion of 10% outliers (). pro maya considered a meta server approach to combine the structure features with DDG predicted from different programs, which resulted in improved correlation of 0.79 on the validation datasets (). More recently, neem o used residue connection networks in 3D structure to assess residue stability, achieving a PCC of 0.77 (). mcs m considered a similar idea of distance maps of vicinity atoms from the wild type protein structure, which was combined with the pharmacophore counts to estimate the impact of mutations and achieved improved correlation over several competing methods (). Despite the advantage of the structure based prediction, the majority of the methods were trained and benchmarked on the experimental structure of the target proteins. Some methods, e.g. pro maya (), require specifically the X-ray crystal structures as crystallography features such as b factor are used. However, experimental structures are often not available for proteins; in fact, only 0.2% of proteins in the UniProt have a 3D structure in the PDB library. The lack of experimental structures renders many of the structure based methods unfeasible for the practical application. Given the fast progress in protein structure prediction as witnessed by the community wide CASP experiment (), here we explore the possibility to use low resolution models from nonhomologous structure prediction to improve the mutation induced stability change predictions. A new structure modeling approach, STRUM, is developed to combine various physics based and knowledge based energy terms, built on the it asser predicted models, with the various sequence and template based conversation scores to generate the stability change predictions. To examine the strength and weakness of the proposed method, multiple datasets are collected from experimental mutation databases, which will be used to carefully benchmark STRUM with other state of the art methods. The online server and standalone package of STRUM are freely available at http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich.edu/STRUM/.

conclusion prediction on the SNP mutation induced stability changes (DDG) is of critical importance to protein function annotation and human disease diagnosis. Recent studies have showed advantage for the methods that use experimental protein structure information to improve the DDG prediction accuracy over the sequence based approaches. However, the experimental structure is often unavailable to protein sequences, which compromises the usefulness of the structure based prediction methods in practical applications. We developed a new algorithm, STRUM, to explore the possibility to improve the DDG prediction based on low resolution models from the iterative assembly refinement it asser simulations, in which three groups of features from sequence profile, multiple template threading, and it asser atomic models are combined through the gradient boosting regression tree training. The algorithm was tested on a set of 3421 experimentally characterized mutations from 150 proteins. After homologous templates with sequence identity 30% to the target or detectable by PSI-BLAST with E-value 0.05 were excluded, it asser was able to build structure model of correct fold with a tm score 0.5 for 109 (83%) proteins. Using the it asser model, STRUM generated DDG prediction for all proteins with a PCC 0.79 and RMSE 1.2 kcal mol in the mutation level 5-fold cross validation compared with the experimental mutation data. But the performance can be reduced when tested on the protein level cross validation probably due to the correlation among mutation samples that are from the same proteins. The detailed data analysis showed that the most predictive features are those from the physics based energy terms on the it asser structural models and the conservation score based on multiple threading alignments, demonstrating the importance and usefulness of the low resolution structure predictions in the DDG predictions. Interestingly, features built on the mutated amino acids are generally more sensitive to the DDG prediction accuracy than those on the wild type amino acids. This is understandable considering the fact that the wild type amino acids are usually more stable and adoptable to the protein environments due to the long term evolution than the new mutations. Thus, compared with the relatively uniform stability from the wide type amino acids, the identity of the mutated amino acids should provide more information with regard to the stability changes upon new mutations. This insight that the wild type amino acids have a uniformly higher stability than the mutant ones is partly supported by the fact that the majority of the mutations in the database destabilize the protein fold (see). STRUM was also examined in four other datasets (S2648, S350, Q306 and p35) in control with four state of the art algorithms, including imu tent in ps mcs m and pop music which have the web server available for exacting on-line DDG predictions. The results showed that STRUM based on predicted structural protein models are comparable with or outperform most of the methods that are built on the experimental structures. One reason for the advanced performance by STRUM is probably due to the combination of multiple complimentary features extracted from a wide range of resources. The gradient boosting regression training also helps to improve the robustness of the training procedure by the reduction of the over-fitting effect. Finally, the data results show that the DDG prediction is not sensitive to the accuracy of protein structural models as long as the global fold is correct (i.e. with tm score 0.5). However, when the target structure model has an incorrect fold, the structure based DD G prediction can be obviously degraded, which highlights the importance of further improvement of protein structure prediction for mutation change modeling, especially for the targets in the 'twilight zone' where the creation of correct fold remains a challenge to most structure prediction algorithms ().
