Motivation: Enzyme catalysis is involved in numerous biological processes and the disruption of enzymatic activity has been implicated in human disease. Despite this, various aspects of catalytic reactions are not completely understood, such as the mechanics of reaction chemistry and the geometry of catalytic residues within active sites. As a result, the computational prediction of catalytic residues has the potential to identify novel catalytic pockets, aid in the design of more efficient enzymes and also predict the molecular basis of disease. Results: We propose a new kernel based algorithm for the prediction of catalytic residues based on protein sequence, structure and evolutionary information. The method relies upon explicit modeling of similarity between residue centered neighborhoods in protein structures. We present evidence that this algorithm evaluates favorably against established approaches, and also provides insights into the relative importance of the geometry, physicochemical properties and evolutionary conservation of catalytic residue activity. The new algorithm was used to identify known mutations associated with inherited disease whose molecular mechanism might be predicted to operate specifically though the loss or gain of catalytic residues. It should, therefore, provide a viable approach to identifying the molecular basis of disease in which the loss or gain of function is not caused solely by the disruption of protein stability. Our analysis suggests that both mechanisms are actively involved in human inherited disease. Availability and Implementation: Source code for the structural

introduction enzymes are critically important macromolecules that accelerate chemical reactions with high efficiency and rate enhancement (). Driven by accumulating structural and functional data as well as by increasing computational power, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. various general mechanisms to account for the molecular basis of enzyme catalysis have been proposed (). Despite this, many enzymes have still not been functionally annotated and many aspects of enzyme catalysis remain unclear, including the precise details of reaction chemistry or the geometry of the active sites (). Thus, computational methods for the identification of active sites and their catalytic residues have the potential to identify novel catalytic pockets, aid the design of more efficient enzymes and in some instances predict the molecular basis of disease. Catalytic residues are typically defined as amino acid residues directly involved in the chemistry of catalysis (). Hence, those residues involved in substrate binding and protein stability, or simply supporting the geometry of the active site are not regarded as catalytic residues sensu stricto, despite being vital for catalytic function. Aided by the growing number of annotated enzymes (), the signatures of catalytic sites have been extensively studied, yielding new insights into protein structure to function principles (). Catalytic residues are known to be enriched in polar residues and depleted in hydrophobic residues, but most are not directly exposed to water (83%), resulting in below average relative accessible surface areas and b factors (). Catalytic residues have also been highly conserved over evolutionary time, both structurally and sequence wise (). As a result, their disruption is expected to result in greatly reduced or complete loss of catalytic activity. Various computational methods have been proposed to facilitate the task of predicting catalytic residues from protein structure. The earliest published work employed spherical neighborhoods around catalytic residues to define structural neighborhoods, and used conservation of both sequence and structure to investigate the properties of catalytic residues (). Although this study was only based on the structures of 17 proteins (36 catalytic residues), its conclusions were supported by subsequent work. Indeed, to this end, other groups have exploited the increasing number of annotated catalytic residues and more advanced computational techniques ([). These methods are all based on vector representations of various sequence, structural and evolutionary features, from which a machine learning model is trained. Catalytic residue prediction is bound up with the broader issue of residue function prediction from protein structures; therefore, in principle, other approaches can also be used for this task. Most of these methods can be categorized into template based (), residue microenvironment based (), or graph theoretic methods (). In addition, structural alignment programs can provide baseline annotation of catalytic sites. Such methods can readily incorporate the structural similarity of larger and non spherical neighborhoods. However, they may be less sensitive to evolutionary conservation or to changes in physicochemical properties than the geometry of the sites. Finally, whole molecule protein function prediction algorithms (), combined with methods for predicting functional residues in general (), can also be exploited. From the machine learning perspective, kernel based methods have recently gained importance in computational biology, in part because of their solid theoretical foundations (). In kernel based methods, a similarity function is created between pairs of objects such as amino acid sequences (), secondary structure elements () or residue neighborhoods (), and then used in a supervised learning scenario. Kernel methods can be advantageous in cases where a relationship between pairs of objects can be hypothesized to explicitly incorporate prior knowledge into the similarity function. In contrast, non kernel based classification models (e.g. neural networks) typically construct features that are considered important for the prediction step. These models do not naturally permit the explicit encoding of prior knowledge such as pairwise object similarities. Furthermore, kernel based approaches can benefit from the large margin classification algorithms such as support vector machines (SVMs), but can also be used in combination with simpler methods such as k nearest neighbors. In this study, we developed a novel kernel based approach for the prediction of catalytic residues, and functional sites in general. The predictor was extensively evaluated against established approaches and used to identify instances where the loss or gain of catalytic residue activity could plausibly represent the molecular basis of disease. Our results suggest that the loss, and interestingly also the gain of catalytic residues, may be actively involved in human inherited disease.
