Motivation: Bacterial luciferase s are heterodimeric enzymes that catalyze a chemical reaction, so called bioluminescence, which causes light emission in bacteria. Bioluminescence is vastly used as a reporter system in research tools and commercial developments. However, the details of the mechanisms that stabilize and transform the reaction intermediates as well as differences in the en-zymatic kinetics amongst different bacterial luciferase s remain to be elucidated. Results: Amino acid sequences alignments for 21 bacterial luciferase s (both a and b subunits were analyzed. For a subunit containing the enzyme active center, 48 polymorphic amino acid positions were identified. According to them, the sequences fell into two distinct groups known as slow and fast based on the decay rate of the bioluminescence reaction. The differences in the enzyme active site induced by structural polymorphism are analyzed. Availability and implementation: three dimensional models of Photobacterium lei ogn at hi lucifer-ase and Vibrio harvey i luciferase (with reconstructed mobile loop) are freely available at pm db database: PM0080525 and PM0080526, respectively.

introduction luminous bacteria are known as the most abundant and ubiquitous bioluminescent organisms. Their traditional classification was rooted in the morphological peculiarities, metabolism and ecological distribution of light emitting species. Currently, according to the sequence analysis of 16S rRNA and gyrB genes, all known luminous bacteria are assigned to three Gammaproteobacteria families: vibrio nace ae shewanella cea e and Enterobacteriaceae (). In spite of several studies, many details about the mechanism of bacterial bioluminescence including the differences in reaction kinetics are yet to be known. Although the investigations has identified the sequence of about 21 bacterial luciferase s but could only solve the crystal structure of luciferase from Vibrio harvey i (). Bacterial luciferase consists of a and b subunit folded into the same type of (b/a) 8 or TIM barrel structure and encoded by lux a and lux b genes. In addition to the structure similarities, a and b subunits share about 32% of sequence identity, indicating that lux b gene might have evolved as a result of lux a gene duplication (). However, a subunit is larger due to additional 29 amino acid residues, which constitutes a mobile loop flanking the active site of the enzyme and playing an important role in binding to the substrates (). All known bacterial luciferase s catalyze the same oxidative reaction (), where r cho and r cooh are a long chain aliphatic aldehyde and corresponding carboxylic acid, FMNH

conclusion study of the conservative motifs critical for the interaction of the bacterial luciferase with substrates and intermediates stabilization is far reaching in terms of understanding the mechanism of bioluminescence. In this study, we presented a phylogenetic analysis of amino acids important for light emitting reaction. Our data suggested the conservative positions in structure of all known bacterial luciferase s and amino acids causing the division into fast and slow types of this enzyme. We found two sets of critical amino acids exactly matching each types of luciferase s and probably responsible for kinetic decay rate. Through protein structure homology modelling, we observed the formation of two different binding platforms that probably stabilize the reaction intermediates. Two evolutionary fixed types of reaction kinetics could indicate the appearance of two different functions carried by bacterial luciferase s that never been discussed before from the structural point of view.
