Lysine succinyl ation orchestrates a variety of biological processes. Annotation of succinyl ation in proteomes is the first crucial step to decipher physiological roles of succinyl ation implicated in the pathological processes. In this work, we developed a novel succinyl ation site online prediction tool, called succ find which is constructed to predict the lysine succinyl ation sites based on two major categories of characteristics: sequence derived features and evolutionary derived information of sequence and via an enhanced feature strategy for further optimizations. The assessment results obtained from cross validation suggest that succ find can provide more instructive guidance for further experimental investigation of protein succinyl ation. Availability and implementation: A user friendly server is freely available on the web at: http://bio

introduction lysine succinyl ation is a novel identified PTMs pathway present in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, which orchestrates a variety of biological processes. succinyl ation was first discovered to occur at the active site of homoserine trans succinyl ase (). With an antibody based enrichment strategy and ms based proteomics identified several dozens of succinyl ation sites in bacteria in 2011. Subsequent work recognized a number of succinyl ation sites in animal tissues () and on histones (). Recently, plenty of lysine succinyl ation sites were also identified in extracellular toxoplasma tachyzoites (). As the rapid development of sequencing techniques, identification and functional study of succinyl ation has emerged to be an intriguing topic and attracted much attention. But it is still unknown about the mechanism of succinyl ation as well as the succinyl donor to lysine remains, a global analysis of lysine succinyl ation in diverse organisms is still lacking. Yet annotation of succinyl ation in proteomes is a first crucial step toward decoding protein function and understanding of their physiological roles that have been implicated in the pathological processes. For systematically investigating the lysine succinyl ation and its relevant function, a prerequisite is to establish a reliable and comprehensive dataset. However, while only a small amount of known succinyl ation sites was detected, experimental verification of succinyl ated substrates is labor intensive time consuming and biased toward abundant proteins and proteo typic peptides. Thus, in silicon prediction of succinyl ation sites can serve as an alternative strategy for whole proteome annotation. We thus developed the succ find to determine whether a fragment which contains lysine residues can be succinyl ated or not, which is constructed to predict the lysine succinyl ation sites based on sequence derived features, and evolutionary derived information of sequence and via a enhanced feature strategy for further optimizations. Coincidentally, when we built succ find to predict protein succinyl ation sites, another protein succinyl ation site predictor called suc pred was reported as well (). But when we try to visit the web server of suc pred the website is not accessible. So there is no way to compare with it. Since suc pred only considered unilateral features with no further optimization to build prediction models, features might contain redundant and noisy information and some other potential value information will inevitably lose. Here, we have considered different aspects of the features and via a two step feature selection strategy to carry further optimizations when developed the model so our system can provide a more accurate and comprehensive prediction performance as well as a more stable and sustained online service.
