Motivation: Phylogenetic tree building methods use molecular data to represent the evolutionary history of genes and tax a. A recurrent problem is to reconcile the various phylogenies built from different genomic sequences into a single one. This task is generally conducted by a two step approach whereby a binary representation of the initial trees is first inferred and then a maximum parsimony (MP) analysis is performed on it. This binary representation uses a decomposition of all source trees that is usually based on clades, but that can also be based on triplets or quartets. The relative performances of these representations have been discussed but are difficult to assess since both are limited to relatively small datasets. Results: This article focuses on the triplet based representation of source trees. We first recall how, using this representation, the parsimony analysis is related to the median tree notion. We then introduce super triplets a new algorithm that is specially designed to optimize this alternative formulation of the MP criterion. The method avoids several practical limitations of the triplet based binary matrix representation, making it useful to deal with large datasets. When the correct resolution of every triplet appears more often than the incorrect ones in source trees, super triplets warrants to reconstruct the correct phylogeny. Both simulations and a case study on mammalian phylo genomics confirm the advantages of this approach. In both cases, super triplets tends to propose less resolved but more reliable super trees than those inferred using MATRIX REPRESENTATION with PARSIMONY. Availability: Online and JAVA standalone versions of super triplets are available at http://www.supertriplets.univ-montp2.fr/ Contact: vincent ranwezunivmontp2fr
introduction representing the evolutionary history of a set of tax a is usually performed by using a phylogenetic tree. External nodes (leaves) correspond to operational units, and the root corresponds to its origin. The whole branching order from the root to each leaf provides a representation of the evolutionary relationships among the operational units studied. However, one could readily observe variations among different trees inferred for a given phylum, depending on stochastic errors due to site and tax on sampling, systematic errors induced by model mis specifications during probabilistic inferences, and biological errors due to hidden paralogy, lateral gene transfer and incomplete lineage sorting of ancestral polymorphism (see, for a discussion * To whom correspondence should be addressed. on the causes of incongruence). Summarizing various trees obtained from independent inferences into a single tree is therefore a recurrent issue in molecular systematics and phylo genomics. Having a single tree at hand is not just a simplification facilitating the management of topological information; it is in most cases a necessity to enable further analyses (see). Pooling a collection of phylogenetic trees when all of them are defined on the same leaf set can be done with a consensus tree (), such as the widely used strict or majority one (see, for an overview). Actually, the consensus tree is a particular case of the more general problem of combining trees defined on partially overlapping leaf sets. The latter case is known as the super tree problem (), whereby the aim is to build a tree (the super tree summarizing the topological information induced by a collection of source (input) trees as well as possible. It has long been proposed that the median tree, i.e. the tree minimizing the sum of distances to the source trees, could be considered as an adequate super tree candidate (). Defining the super tree as a median turns out to be not only an intuitive definition but also a guarantee of the consistency of so defined super tree methods (). Even though this ensures the consistency of any median super tree these authors stressed the importance of choosing appropriate metrics with regards to the biological setting and expected computing times. The triplet distance, based on rooted, binary, three leaf topologies, has the advantage of being fine grained and easy to compute in polynomial time (see Methods section for more formal definitions). We thus worked on designing a super tree method that seeks the triplet median super tree (TMS). Among the numerous super tree techniques that have been proposed over the past 20 years, Matrix Representation with Parsimony (MRP;) is the most widely used. In brief, MRP first encodes the whole topological signal induced by the source trees into a matrix of binary pseudo characters (i.e. the Matrix Representation of the source trees, here noted MR), and secondly considers the optimal super trees as the most parsimonious (MP) tree(s) reconstructed from the MR. If there is more than one MP tree, the standard approach is to consider the super tree as the strict consensus of these MP trees eg for some combinatorial properties). Although alternative consensus methods are available to merge the topological information of all optimal MP trees into a super tree (), considering their strict consensus is a standard way for inferring a non ambiguous super tree from a collection of source trees. For these reasons, all mrp based super trees considered in this manuscript. Matrix representation based on triplets (t-MR). Topology T is decomposed into its set of triplets. The closer phylogenetic affinities of A and B relative to C, or D or E are indicated by the AB|C, AB|D and AB|E triplets. This correspondence is also indicated by black circles. Rooting is ensured by an artificial all zero tax on
discussion summarizing various trees obtained from different inferences into a single one is a frequent task in phylogenetic analysis of multigene datasets. super tree methods are able to achieve this task even when the source trees only have partially overlapping tax on sets. A natural candidate super tree is the tree that is the closest to the source trees in terms of a given dissimilarity measure. super triplets is a method specially designed to find the asymmetric median super tree according to triplet dissimilarity  t , and that has several advantages over the closely related t mrp method. In the first step of the t mrp approach, the t-MR of the source trees depicts them as a set of binary sequences (one sequence per tax on plus an extra one consisting only of '0' for an artificial out group leaf corresponding to the root of all source trees). Given a fully i121

conclusion we propose super triplets a method that first constructs a super tree using a polynomial agglomerative scheme, and, secondly, performs fast local search to find the asymmetric median super tree according to a triplet dissimilarity. We point out that, by using triplet representation (i.e. t-MR), this median super tree is one of the MP binary trees. Computer simulations and a biological case study indicate that super triplets tends to propose more reliable but less resolved super trees than MRP methods. We think that this work provides new prospects for designing super tree methods. On the one hand, super triplets could certainly be significantly improved. Heuristics searching for the MP tree(s) have strongly benefited from more than 20 years of improvements, and have a considerable advantage with respect to method tuning and implementation tricks (e.g.) as compared to recently proposed approaches. On the other hand, the confidence values displayed by super triplets at the super tree edges are well founded and having an indication of the super tree branch support is an important feature. Several related confidence values dedicated to super tree based comparative studies have already been proposed (). Comparing their relevance and accuracy is far from easy, as pointed out by, who concluded: 'Our example at least shows that there is no single correct view of support for super trees. This remark is relevant for super tree approaches but also reflect the intrinsic difficulty of comparing any clade support value in the super tree or super matrix context ().
