Motivation: high throughput sequencing technologies have recently made deep interrogation of expressed transcript sequences practical, both economically and temporally. Identification of intron exon boundaries is an essential part of genome annotation, yet remains a challenge. Here, we present super splat a method for unbiased splice junction discovery through empirical rnase q data. Results: Using a genomic reference and rnase q high throughput sequencing datasets, super splat empirically identifies potential splice junctions at a rate of ∼11.4 million reads per hour. We further benchmark the performance of the algorithm by mapping Illumina rnase q reads to identify introns in the genome of the reference dicot plant Arabidopsis thaliana and we demonstrate the utility of super splat for de novo empirical annotation of splice junctions using the reference monocot plant brach y podium dis tachyon. Availability: Implemented in C++, super splat source code and binaries are freely available on the web at

introduction recent advancements in high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies (reviewed in) have made deep interrogation of expressed transcript sequences both economically and temporally practical, resulting in massive quantities of sequence information using the rnase q approach (). Extracting comprehensible genic models from this sea of data depends upon the identification of intron exon boundaries. One current method used to identify intron exon boundaries, q palma (), utilizes a machine learning algorithm to identify splice junctions, training a large margin classifier on known splice junctions from the genome of interest. This method depends upon the availability of previously known splice junctions on which to train the algorithm, and, when finding novel potential splice junctions, is biased toward those which are similar to its training data. In scoring novel potential splice junctions, the algorithm is biased toward canonical terminal dinucleotides, scoring those which conform to these biases higher than ones that do not. While, in general, these biases may prove to be correct, many potential splice junctions which do not conform to these rules threaten to remain unidentified. A second method, top hat (), works by first creating exonic coverage islands from short reads and then, based on canonical intron terminal dinucleotides it dn which exist in these islands, identifies possible splices between neighboring exons. Like q palma top hat is strongly built around the idea of canonical it dn resulting in similar issues to q palma. Further, since top hat bases its predictions on coverage islands, a sufficient number of short rnase q reads must be used as input such that reliable exon islands may be identified. Here, we present our algorithm implemented in C++, super splat which identifies all locations in a genomic reference sequence that indicate potential introns supported by empirical transcript evidence derived from rnase q data. Our approach does not include bias for canonical it dn but rather finds every potential splice junction supported by empirical evidence, doing so in a straightforward, transparent manner and guided only by user provided values for minimum intron size and maximum intron size, and by the minimum number of matching short read nucleotides allowed on each flanking exon. Further, any number of short reads may be used as input, since super splat does not need or attempt to generate exon coverage islands.

discussion super splat aligns rnase q data to a reference genome as a gapped alignment in order to empirically define locations representing spurious alignments. In the event that an annotation exists for the genome of interest, reads matching annotated splice junctions can be filtered out of the input in order to focus the super splat analysis only on the identification of potential novel introns. Sensible selection of runtime options and post-processing steps are good precautions to control false discoveries. For example, users may want to choose reasonable limits for minimum and maximum intron lengths guided by prior data. In addition, as described in our examples, super splat output can be filtered to retain only those intron predictions supported by some minimum chunk size, multiple independent overlapping rnase q reads, introns supported by reads mapping to only a single genomic location, validation by rnase q data from independent biological replicates, multiple different overlap lengths for the read fragments on the flanking exons and additional transcript evidence supporting the predicted exons. Despite these precautions factors such as read lengths, sequencing error rates, target genome complexity and gene duplications contribute to the likelihood of false discoveries with super splat. Some of these issues will no doubt be resolved by improvements to HTS technologies such as increased read lengths, reduced error rates and routine use of paired end reads. Using our test set of reads matching known a thaliana splice junctions, we performed an analysis of super splats precision while focusing on two of these standard filters independently, including minimum chunk size and number of overlapping reads. Precision, also known as positive predicted value (PPV), is defined as true positives (TP) divided by the sum of TP and false positives (FP), PPV = TP/(TP + FP). It is worth noting that an algorithm's PPV can be skewed by generating only a small number of very cautiously declared positives, resulting in a very small but highly confident output set. super splat in contrast, generates exhaustive output that is not filtered according to confidence. As a result the pp vs presented here are computed using large denominators ensuring that this metric is an accurate reflection of super splats performance. In our analysis, a true positive prediction is one that correctly identifies a location in the genome at which there exists The Arabidopsis Information Resource tair annotated splice junction. A FP prediction is one that incorrectly identifies a location in the genome at which there is no such TAIR annotated splice junction. PPV was calculated as minimum chunk size was varied from 6 to 15 with results shown in, filtering in this case for intron predictions in the super splat output which had the minimum chunk size shown. From these results, we see that even at a minimum chunk size of six, the precision of super splat is nearly 70%. As minimum chunk size increases this precision value rapidly approaches and exceeds 90%. PPV was then calculated as the number of reads overlapping each splice junction was varied from 1 to 21 with results shown in. In this case, we filtered for intron predictions in the super splat output that had the respective number of intron overlaps shown. From these results, we see with six overlapping reads a PPV of 90%, with PPV reaching 97% at 21 overlapping reads. Runtime performance of super splat is closely tied to how deeply the genomic reference is indexed, dictated by the MICS value. super splat repeatedly queries its index for the genomic locations of various sized km ers which represent potential short read fragment alignments. Since the probability of any specific km er existing at a particular genomic location, under the assumption that all bases occur with equal probability, is 0.25 k , as k increases the probability of any specific km er occurring decreases. Thus we expect, on average, that the list of all locations in a genomic reference sequence of a specific km er to be longer by a factor of four than a similar list of a specific (k + 1)-mer. As super splat processes short reads from its input, it repeatedly iterates over these location lists. As the MICS value increases the lengths of these lists decrease, reducing runtimes by about a factor of four for each increase in the MICS value. When the MICS value becomes sufficiently large, which for these data was around 15, any particular mics sized km er occurs
