Motivation: Autism spectrum disorders (ASD) are a group of neurodevelopmental disorders with clinical heterogeneity and a substantial polygenic component. high throughput methods for ASD risk gene identification produce numerous candidate genes that are time consuming and expensive to validate. Prioritization methods can identify high confidence candidates. Previous ASD gene prioritization methods have focused on a priori knowledge, which excludes genes with little functional annotation or no protein product such as long non-coding RNAs ln crnas. Results: We have developed a support vector machine (SVM) model, trained using brain developmental gene expression data, for the classification and prioritization of ASD risk genes. The selected feature model had a mean accuracy of 76.7%, mean specificity of 77.2% and mean sensitivity of 74.4%. Gene lists comprised of an ASD risk gene and adjacent genes were ranked using the models decision function output. The known ASD risk genes were ranked on average in the 77.4th, 78.4th and 80.7th percentile for sets of 101, 201 and 401 genes respectively. Of 10,840 l ncrna genes, 63 were classified as asd associated candidates with a confidence greater than 0.95. Genes previously associated with brain development and neurodevelopmental disorders were prioritized highly within the l ncrna gene list.

introduction autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is the umbrella term for the neurodevelopmental disorders: autistic disorder, Asperger's syndrome, pervasive developmental disorder not otherwise specified, Rett syndrome and childhood disintegrative disorder. It is generally diagnosed at an age greater than four years old based predominantly on the behavioral phenotype described as delayed communication, difficulty acknowledging social cues, and engaging in repetitive behaviors (). In 2010, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) estimated the prevalence of ASD at 1 in 68 children aged 8, and this was an increase from the 2007 estimate of 1 in 150 (). The increase in prevalence may be attributable to more public awareness and implementation of prescreening technology (). Twin and sibling studies indicate that ASD etiology is influenced heavily by genetics and to a lesser extent environmental factors (). The actual physiological cause of ASD is currently unknown, but leading theories include imbalance between excitatory and inhibitory synapses and substandard signaling between brain structures due to poor axonal growth (). It is possible that a myriad of genetic and environmental factors could lead to distinct physiological conditions convergent on the behavioral phenotype. ASD is complex with hundreds of genes implicated in its etiology. The predominant focus of previous research has been on protein coding genes, and there is the potential of more genes such as non-coding genes being implicated as well. Disease gene identification studies are usually large scale and high throughput. Examples include genome wide association studies g was copy number variation studies (CNV) and whole exo me sequencing (WES). These studies in themselves are time consuming and expensive especially when considering the sample size required for an effective study. The output can contain numerous potential candidate genes, which are also expensive and time consuming to validate, with minimal impact on risk of the disease itself. g was studies have been shown to be particularly susceptible to weak SNP associations for ASD (). Disease gene prioritization systems seek to determine the confidence for disease association amongst gene lists. While disease gene prioritization methods have become somewhat ubiquitous, they generally do not have methodologies accounting for prioritization of non-coding genes. Support vector machine (SVM) approaches have previously been applied to ASD research provided support for a phenotype genotype relationship by using symptom profiles as features and genetic disorders as classes for a multi-class extension of SVM. Magnetic resonance image (MRI) offers one of the most potentially fruitful routes for ASD diagnostics, and SVM approaches have been applied to MRI data to classify and further characterize the morphology of the disorder used SVM to determine differences in the morphologies between young male and female patients with ASD. A similar method was employed by on whole brain structural imaging to reveal a correlation for the distance from the decision boundary and the severity of the disorder. In this study, we have developed a machine learning method to prioritize genes for ASD risk. Based on domain specific knowledge of ASD, it is hypothesized that expression patterns offer a potential means of prioritization for all gene types for ASD risk. In particular, we design the novel approach of using the normal developmental brain expression patterns found in the brain span dataset to leverage previous research focused primarily on protein coding genes to classify ASD risk gene candidates. The validity of this approach is supported by weighted gene coexpression network analysis on the brain span dataset, which has shown convergence of ASD risk genes on developmental pathways (). It is further supported by evidence of the potential role in ASD of ln crnas whose function is closely linked with their expression patterns (). In this study, we first generated a gene list of high confidence developmental ASD risk genes. We were then able to create a support vector machine (SVM) model for ASD risk gene prediction with a 76.7% accuracy capable of prioritizing ASD candidate genes based solely on expression patterns in the developing brain. Utilizing a wrapper methodology and a best first search method during feature selection, we were able to drastically reduce the dimensionality and identify biologically relevant and novel temporo spatial features within the dataset. The performance of the feature subset showed improvement over the full feature set. To further test our model, we used the ASD risk gene list to generate hypothetical loci similar to what would be expected from an association study. The genes within the loci were prioritized to determine the relative rank within the list of the known risk gene. Finally, the model was applied to the prioritization of long non-coding RNA l ncrna genes. Overall, the study demonstrates the effective application of a machine learning approach to ASD risk gene identification using normal tissue expression patterns.

discussion autism spectrum disorder (ASD) has a complex physiologic etiology. Combinations of environmental and genetic factors causing aberrant development of brain regions have been linked to the disorder (). Studies utilizing non-invasive brain imaging procedures such as magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) and positronic emission tomography (PET) have also implicated brain structures and biological processes contributing to ASD (). While the underlying mechanisms remain poorly understood, there is a large body of knowledge in the field to be utilized for further study. Although treatment of ASD has been shown to be effective, it is dependent on early detection. Imaging can offer diagnostic input, but the process is expensive and not always practical. Biomarkers may offer the best means for early detection of the disorder, but the complexity of the disorder and the increase in sequencing capacity have led to a multitude of potential targets too numerous to test. The need for an ASD risk gene prioritization system encompassing all gene types is evident. In this study, we employ a novel approach to bridging this gap. By reframing the task of ASD risk gene identification as a supervised machine learning problem, we were able to construct an accurate classification model. Leveraging the existing extensive research on protein coding genes in ASD and the comprehensive view of the transcriptome for the developing human brain offered by the brain span dataset, we were able to discern a pattern from the expression profile, which distinguishes ASD risk genes. Appling a heuristic search through the possible feature space, we were also three different gene set sizes were tested for the hypothetical loci the selected and full feature set SVM models for the three gene set sizes. For each hypothetical locus, the percentile rank of the known ASD risk gene within the gene list was calculated, and here those ranks are grouped in 5 percentile point increments able to refine the model through feature selection, which improved performance and implicated potentially critical temporo spatial features in the onset of ASD. To test the performance of our model in the absence of an independent test set, we used both standard cross validations and the prioritization of candidate genes within hypothetical loci. The performance measures confirmed that the model achieved high accuracy and had the capability to highly prioritize ASD risk genes within gene lists of varying lengths. In light of the gathering evidence that ln crnas are associated with ASD, we further demonstrated the utility of our model through the prioritization of l ncrna candidates. Biologically significant candidates were highly prioritized, providing further validation to our approach. Collectively, the feature subset has interesting aspects (). It is intriguing that while ASD as early developmental disorders can be diagnosed by the age of two years old with standard methods (American Psychiatric), the developmental time points of the selected features span the entirety of the transcriptome studied (from 8 pcw to 40 years of age). Most notably, the time points are enriched for early development, particularly from 8 pcw to one year of age, and these points were predominantly added to the subset before later developmental time points such as those greater than four years of age. Therefore, the early developmental period appears to have a larger influence on ASD risk gene identification. Co-expression modules enriched with ASD risk genes have been shown to have either dramatic upward or downward trends in expression patterns between 8 pcw to one year of age, which indicates a critical time span in relation to ASD etiology (). Not surprisingly, the structures that were selected are mainly cortical regions, which are associated with sensory input processing and behavior. Generally, cortical regions have been found to be enlarged in children with ASD around three years of age (). Two non cortical regions selected are the hippocampus and the medio dorsal nucleus of thalamus (MD). Both the hippocampus and the thalamus have been found to be proportionately smaller for individuals between the ages of four and eighteen years old with ASD (). However, there is little to no evidence of a role for the MD in ASD. The selected feature set also contained later development cortical structures. These unanticipated features may present new avenues of research for ASD.

conclusion in this study, a novel approach is proposed for knowledge transfer from known ASD risk protein coding genes to all gene types. We have demonstrated that a model built using only expression patterns within normal brain development as features can accurately classify and prioritize ASD risk genes. This provides a distinct advantage over previous models. It does not require a priori knowledge and allows for the prioritization of non protein coding genes. It is our hope that this will lay the groundwork for an accurate prioritization tool utilizing this model autism risk gene prediction
