The surv comp package provides functions to assess and statistically compare the performance of survival risk prediction models. It implements state of the art statistics to (i) measure the performance of risk prediction models; (ii) combine these statistical estimates from multiple datasets using a meta analytical framework; and (iii) statistically compare the performance of competitive models. Availability: The r bioconductor package surv comp is provided open source under the artistic 20 License with a user manual containing installation, operating instructions and use case scenarios on real datasets. surv comp requires R version 2.13.0 or higher.

introduction building risk prediction or survival models is an important area of research, especially in cancer where gene expression signatures are used to predict risk of metastasis, response to therapy and overall survival. However, assessing the relative performance of such models is complex due to the lack of standards regarding the best criterion to use in survival analysis (;). Although a number of model performance estimators have been described (), they are not widely used. This is partly because these are implemented in many different R packages that use heterogeneous interfaces, which makes it difficult for the non specialist to easily use or compare the performance of these models. Another challenge in assessing performance of expression based prediction models is a lack of power due to small sample size. meta analytical methods could leverage power from the numerous microarray datasets that are now publicly available by summarizing model performance estimated in multiple independent studies. Moreover, because they enable efficient joint analysis of multiple datasets, such an analytical framework reduces the risk of artifactual discoveries that are due to bias or confounding factors that may be present in one dataset. This is particularly important when comparing competitive risk prediction models; often authors * To whom correspondence should be addressed claim better performance of a new model without properly assessing whether a model significantly outperforms its competitors. To the best of our knowledge, there is no commercial or open source tool to enable statistical comparison of risk prediction models in a meta analytical framework. To address these issues, we developed a new Bioconductor package, surv comp which implements several performance criteria for risk prediction models (), together with meta analytical methods that enable combination of performance estimations from multiple independent datasets fixed and random effects models (); combine est and statistical comparison of predictions between competitive models c index comp for the concordance index). The concordance index as described by and implemented in surv comp may be sensitive to the study specific censoring distribution, therefore we are working to implement a modified concordance index by that avoids this problem and which should be available in the next release of surv comp. Although the performance criteria that are implemented in surv comp are mostly available in other R packages (except the D index which, to the best of our knowledge, is only in surv comp our package provides a common interface to facilitate easy use of all these estimators. Moreover, with the exception of ipd meta by and surv jam da by, few R packages perform meta analysis of survival data. surv comp provides a uniform interface to simplify the use of performance assessment and statistical comparison of risk prediction models, and provides new R functions to statistically compare these in. The blue square and horizontal line represent the concordance index and its 95% confidence interval which is clipped at 0.4 and 0.9 (represented by an arrow). The black rhombus is the overall meta estimate from the combined five datasets. The greater the concordance index, the more prognostic the risk prediction model. The vertical red bar represents the concordance index of random risk predictions. a meta analytical framework. It is worth noting that the aim of surv comp is to provide efficient computation of several performance estimates () and not to implement a full validation framework. Proper validation using a fully independent test dataset is of utmost importance to avoid over optimistic results () and frameworks for cross validation multiple random splits or a single split into training validation datasets are implemented in several existing R packages including peper r (). We illustrate the functionality of surv comp in a case study that investigates prognosis in breast cancer. In most studies, this is a difficult task due to the (generally) small sample size. Yet despite a large number of published studies, data heterogeneity, both in terms of data sources and microarray technologies, have limited the effectiveness of their joint analysis. Here we apply surv comp functions to statistically compare the prognostic value of a widely used clinical model, a single proliferation gene and two published gene signatures. The results suggest that the multi-gene signatures are not always superior to standard clinical models or to a simple single gene model.

conclusion the r bioconductor package surv comp provides a uniform interface to an extensive set of performance assessment and statistical comparison methods for survival risk prediction.
