Here we present Sequence Variant Analyzer (SVA), a software tool that assigns a predicted biological function to variants identified in next generation sequencing studies and provides a browser to visualize the variants in their genomic contexts. SVA also provides for flexible interaction with software implementing variant association tests allowing users to consider both the bioinformatic annotation of identified variants and the strength of their associations with studied traits. We illustrate the annotation features of SVA using two simple examples of sequenced genomes that harbor Mendelian mutations. Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web at

introduction recent advances in next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have made it possible to search through entire genomes for variants that influence traits of interest (). However, analyzing NGS data still requires addressing a number of considerable computational challenges. A variety of methods have been developed to firstly align the sequence reads (), and secondly to identify the genetic variants (). In this work, we focus on the downstream annotation necessary for the analysis of variants and provide simple means of visualizing variants in their genomic context using a built in genome browser (). One fundamental difference from the previous approach of using genome wide association studies g was (), is that many of the variants identified in NGS will be newly discovered. A second fundamental difference is that unlike g was data, sequence data, at least in principle, provides complete. A screenshot of SVA, highlighting a frameshift in del that is located on exon 14 of the Factor VIII gene and is the cause of type A hemophilia. information about the variation present in a genome. For both of these reasons, it is essential to develop a computational environment that can assess the likely functions of the variants observed, and whether or not they are present in existing variant databases. In most contexts, such functional assignments will need to be considered along with statistical association evidence in order to prioritize variants in terms of their likelihoods of influencing traits of interest. We also emphasize that in the early days of interpreting sequence data for complex traits, the sequence data itself will often not be sufficient to provide statistical confidence of association. Instead, the bioinformatic prioritization helps to point towards variants of interest that can be evaluated in much larger sample sets by direct genotyping. We have designed Sequence Variant Analyzer (SVA) to meet these challenges, and in this report, we use two examples to illustrate some of the annotation features.
