A successful approach for predicting functional associations between non-homologous genes is to compare their phylogenetic distributions. We have devised a phylogenetic profiling algorithm , svd phy which uses truncated singular value decomposition to address the problem of uninformative profiles giving rise to false positive predictions. Benchmarking the algorithm against the KEGG pathway database, we found that it has substantially improved performance over existing phylogenetic profiling methods. Availability and implementation: The software is available under the open source BSD license at

introduction phylogenetic profiling methods are able to predict functional interactions between genes that encode proteins from the same complex or pathway, by comparing their phylogenetic distributions (). The underlying idea is that when two genes are functionally related, they should tend to be co inherited since the loss of either one of these genes would be detrimental to that particular function. Here we present a new phylogenetic profiling method, svd phy which performs considerably better than existing methods for both bacteria and eukaryotes.

discussion we have shown that svd phy has better predictive power than existing phylogenetic profiling algorithms. This improvement was achieved by performing truncated SVD on the profiles before calculating their similarities. An intuitive explanation of this transformation is that it collapses phylogenetic profiles that are shared by many proteins into fewer dimensions (principal components). This reduces noise () and increases the diversity of the resulting profiles, which was recently shown to be beneficial (S  kun ca and). The benefit is that it prevents high similarity scores between uninformative profiles that can be trivially explained by simple vertical inheritance of genes along the taxonomic tree, or by broad similarities in the lifestyles of the organisms. This includes highly similar profiles caused by the inclusion of multiple strains of a species, clade specific proteins and enzymes that have been lost in most parasites (because they instead import metabolites from their hosts). We fully integrated our protein protein interaction predictions with the STRING database () (Supplementary Figs S12S13). The data can be browsed online and is freely available for download in tab delimited format. svd phy executes very fast: its run time is on average about 1020 min per organism on a normal workstation. This allows us to execute the algorithm for all 2031 species in the STRING database, and makes it possible for others to utilize the algorithm within their web resources. In a recent study, ta bach et al. (2013b) successfully used their method to shed light on several disease pathways. Phylogenetic profiling algorithms have also been applied to analyze non-coding elements (NCEs), such as small RNAs (), showing that phylogenetic profiling is indeed an important technique that can be used to shed light even on NCE functions and interactions ().
