Motivation: Structural variation (SV), such as deletion, is an important type of genetic variation and may be associated with diseases. While there are many existing methods for detecting SVs, finding deletions is still challenging with low coverage short sequence reads. Existing deletion finding methods for sequence reads either use the so called split reads mapping for detecting deletions with exact breakpoints, or rely on discordant insert sizes to estimate approximate positions of deletions. Neither is completely satisfactory with low coverage sequence reads. Results: We present sv seq an efficient two stage approach, which combines the split reads mapping and discordant insert size analysis. The first stage is split reads mapping based on the Burrows– Wheeler transform (BWT), which finds candidate deletions. Our split reads mapping method allows mismatches and small indels, thus deletions near other small variations can be discovered and reads with sequencing errors can be utilized. The second stage filters the false positives by analyzing discordant insert sizes. sv seq is more accurate than an alternative approach when applying on simulated data and empirical data, and is also much faster. Availability: The program sv seq can be downloaded at

introduction a deletion is a structural variation (SV) in which a segment of DNA is missing comparing with a reference genome. We focus on developing computational methods for finding deletions in this article. Previously, comparative genomic hybridization with whole genome tiling arrays () was the primary method for characterizing structural variations. Now high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies (such as the Roche 454 FLX, Illumina Genome Analyzer, and ABI SOLiD) become more available. These HTS technologies have been applied in generating huge amount of sequence data and newer methods for finding SVs are mainly developed for sequence data. For example, the pilot study of the 1000 genomes project uses multiple methods to discover SVs from whole genome sequence data collected by different technologies from hundreds of individuals. As more individuals * To whom correspondence should be addressed. are being sequenced at low coverage for the purpose of finding variations at a population level, it is important to develop SV detection algorithms that are efficient for processing large amount of sequence reads and accurate given low coverage short sequence reads. These algorithms should be able to handle sequencing errors that are hard to avoid due to technological limitations. Refer to for discussions on the latest methods for discovering SVs using sequence data. In this article, we develop a new approach called sv seq for finding deletions with exact breakpoints from low coverage next generation sequencing data. Different from methods for estimating approximate positions of beak points, sv seq finds the breakpoints of deletions in resolution of 1 bp, which is similar to the program pin del (). Mapping the breakpoints of deletions to nucleotide resolution facilitates the analysis of the origin and functional impact of the deletions (). Different from pin del sv seq takes a two stage approach for discovering deletions. The first step applies an enhanced split reads mapping approach to identify candidate deletion sites from sequence reads. The second step uses mapped paired end reads spanning candidate deletions as supports to filter false positives. In some sense, sv seq exploits more information (i.e. both the split reads and discordant paired end reads) in the sequence data than existing approaches, which often use only one source of information. Better utilizing the given data is the key to achieve higher accuracy when dealing with low coverage data.
