Motivation: ribo switches are cis regulatory elements in mRNA, mostly found in Bacteria, which exhibit two main secondary structure conformations. Although one of them prevents the gene from being expressed, the other conformation allows its expression, and this switching process is typically driven by the presence of a specific ligand. Although there are a handful of known ribo switches our knowledge in this field has been greatly limited due to our inability to identify their alternate structures from their sequences. Indeed, current methods are not able to predict the presence of the two functionally distinct conformations just from the knowledge of the plain RNA nucleotide sequence. Whether this would be possible, for which cases, and what prediction accuracy can be achieved, are currently open questions. Results: Here we show that the two alternate secondary structures of ribo switches can be accurately predicted once the switching sequence of the ribo switch has been properly identified. The proposed swi spot approach is capable of identifying the switching sequence inside a putative, complete ribo switch sequence, on the basis of pairing behaviors, which are evaluated on proper sets of configurations. Moreover, it is able to model the switching behavior of ribo switches whose generated ensemble covers both alternate configurations. Beyond structural predictions, the approach can also be paired to homology based ribo switch searches. Availability and Implementation: swi spot software, along with the reference dataset files, is available at

introduction gene regulation is essential to achieve organism versatility, giving cells control over structure and functions and being the basis for cellular differentiation, morphogenesis, and adaptability. Since the discovery of ribozymes, it has become more and more evident that RNA molecules are also actively involved in regulatory mechanisms, including the regulation of gene expression (). ribo switches are RNA elements, mainly found in bacteria, that are embedded in 5 0 untranslated regions of mRNA (). They are able to sense cellular metabolites with no involvement of protein factors, and consequently modulate either mRNA transcription or translation by adopting one out of two possible structures (), known as 'ON' and 'OFF' conformations. ribo switches are usually built around an aptamer domain, which binds to the ligand, and an expression platform domain, which undergoes a structural rearrangement upon the ligand aptamer binding (). Furthermore, a central role in regulation has been recognized to an overlapping region between these two domains, referred to as switching sequence (or sw seq for short hereafter). From an evolutionary standpoint, aptamers are typically highly conserved, as a consequence of its recognition specificity towards the ligand. In contrast, expression platforms are usually far less conserved (). Previous works have shown that ribo switches can regulate gene expression via three main mechanisms: (i) transcription termination, through the formation of a terminator hairpin or a competitive anti terminator structure, (ii) translation inhibition, by sequestering or releasing the shine dalgarno (SD) sequence and (iii) alternative splicing regulation, via sequestration release of alternative splicing sites (). Understanding the mechanisms of ribo switch structural switching is of broad interest and applicable to a wide range of scientific fields, such as systems biology or drug design, e.g. to design novel engineered genetic circuits (), or develop ribo switch targeting drugs (). Previous computational efforts targeting ribo switches can be categorized in ribo switch gene finders, and conformational switch predictors (). The former category includes several tools, such as Infernal, the founding component of the rf am database (), and more specific tools such as rib ex (Abreu) or ribo sw (). Such methods are primarily used for genome wide analyses, and are based on machine learning approaches. The second category encompasses various methods based on a structural classification of alternative structures, such as parnas s (), rna shapes () and rna b or (). family specific approaches for on off structure prediction have been employed as well (). Here we present a novel computational method that can predict the two functional conformations of ribo switches using merely as input the plain RNA nucleotide sequence. Importantly, this developed procedure can also be coupled with a classifier to identify putative ribo switch sequences, i.e. to uncover ribo switches based on its potential to generate two alternate configurations.

discussion several methods for ribo switch prediction have been proposed, which are based either on predicting the presence of conformational switches, or on predicting ribo switches using homology based searches (). However, none of the current methods is focused on predicting the two ribo switch conformational structures. Such a capability would be extremely useful in driving ribo switch engineering and for synthetic biology. For this reason, we propose swi spot a novel computational method to directly address conformational prediction of ribo switches. The scarce ness of precise data on ribo switch conformations makes it impossible to build a ribo switch predictor that merely uses a statistical or machine learning approach. Despite the mentioned data shortage, a reference dataset has been defined to properly assess the proposed approach. The proposed modeling effort stems from the first significant result presented in this work: we find a strong computational evidence of the role of the switching sequence in the characterisation of the whole ribo switch system. Moreover we find that the switching sequence incorporates most of the information required to drive the switching mechanisms. The novelty of our approach relies on the ability to locate switching sequences, which are then used to predict the alternative conformations, and to finally classify the target RNA sequence as a ribo switch or not. Notably, previous genome wide methods to search for ribo switches only looked for aptamer motifs (), thus completely ignoring structural predictions. On the other hand, we show that swi spot can be paired to these methods, leading to more reliable rna b or results, run on the same sequence, show only one peak for the OFF structure. A smaller peak with partially free SD is present predictions of putative ribo switches. Importantly, from this experience we observe that the quality of results depends on the capability of selecting the proper subsequence to analyze, around the aptamer, down to the expression platform, and not beyond. Lessons learned in using the proposed algorithms indicate possible future improvements, although apparently difficult to apply. Neglecting the energy contribution of the ligand and kinetic co transcriptional aspects of the folding process can likely lead to biased samplings of the energy landscapes, where conformations similar to both the alternative structures are not adequately represented. This issue could be addressed by introducing additional, diverse forms of sampling. Unfortunately, the lack of real structural data prevents any solid assessment of this kind of improvement. Furthermore, the limitation of excluding pseudo knots could be removed, devising new algorithms for the sw seq Extractor and the Constrained Folder (). Future work will investigate possible improvements within each single module, as well as the provision of new functionalities in additional modules.
