Synthetic Biology is advanced by many users and relies on the assembly of genetic elements to devices, systems and finally genomes. syn bio wave is a software suite that enables multiple distributed users to analyze and construct genetic parts in real time collaboration. It builds on Google Wave and provides an extensible robot robot user communication framework, a menu driven user interface, biological data handling including DAS and an internal database communication. We demonstrate its use by implementing robots for gene data retrieval, manipulation and display. The initial development of syn bio wave demonstrates the power of the underlying Google Wave protocol for Synthetic Biology and lays the foundation for continuous and user friendly extensions. Specialized wave robots with a manageable set of capabilities will divide and conquer the complex task of creating a genome in silico. Availability: The robot is available at syn bio wave app spot com the source code at http://

introduction scientific research is a collaborative effort requiring continuous exchange of ideas and data interlinking researchers at every level of the work flow. Since geographic separation should pose no hindrance, such networking is best achieved using capabilities of the so called Web 2.0. In the life sciences, numerous databases provide information and web services solve specific tasks. Despite these efforts, a technology to share the research working process from the decision and design phase of an experiment to the data collection and the final evaluation remained elusive. This gap is filled by an online platform named 'Wave', which was introduced in 2009 by Google (http://wave.google.com). Google Wave enables real time collaboration between users and also integrates software tools. Various types of content are incorporated in one evolving communication document. Processes are handled * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as joint First authors. by a wave server, which offers sophisticated capabilities for synchronization, annotation and versioning. The underlying Wave protocol as well as the server and client software are available as open source (http://www.waveprotocol.org). There are currently two ways to extend Google Wave: Gadgets and Robots. While Gadgets are client side JavaScript applications that are synchronized by the Wave server, Robots are Java or Python applications running on a server and appearing as artificial communication participants in a Wave client. This technology has been praised (), yet only a few single task robots have been released for scientific applications.

discussions yn bio wave builds upon Google Wave, a real time online collaboration software for molecular and synthetic biology. We added several features that are important for scientific tasks and provide a general purpose extension framework. Wave is still undergoing significant development. A continuous co development of syn bio wave is envisioned and we, for example, upgraded to Google's robot API v2. At present, performance of the Google Wave server varies and the long term availability is unclear. Users can set up their own Wave servers and clients using open source software. (Supplementary). Due to its open architecture, syn bio wave can be adapted to various client server implementations. To ensure wide access and compatibility with the latest updates, the syn bio wave robot is currently hosted on the Google Wave server. The code of syn bio wave is maintained over the sourceforge platform for open source projects enabling subversion control and feature request. Primary contact point is the project web site (http://www.synbiowave.org), which provides documentation, a screencast, and a wordpress forum.
