Motivation: Deciphering the modus operandi of dysregulated cellular mechanisms in cancer is critical to implicate novel cancer genes and develop effective anti-cancer therapies. Fundamental to this is meticulous tracking of the behavior of core modules, including complexes and pathways across specific conditions in cancer. Results: Here, we performed a straightforward yet systematic identification and comparison of modules across pancreatic normal and cancer tissue conditions by integrating PPI, gene expression and mutation data. Our analysis revealed interesting change patterns in gene composition and expression correlation particularly affecting modules responsible for genome stability. Although in most cases these changes indicated impairment of essential functions (e.g. of DNA damage repair), in several other cases we noticed strengthening of modules possibly abetting cancer. Some of these compensatory modules showed switches in transcription regulation and recruitment of tumor inducers (e.g. SOX2 through overexpression). in depth analysis revealed novel genes in pancreatic cancer, which showed susceptibility to copy number alterations (e.g. for USP15 in 17 of 67 cases), supported by literature evidence for their involvement in other tumors (e.g. USP15 in glioblastoma). Two of the identified genes, yw hae and DISC1, further supported the nexus between neural genes and pancreatic carcinogenesis. Extension of this assessment to BRCA1 and BRCA2 breast tumors showed specific differences even across the two sub-types and revealed novel genes involved therein (e.g. TRIM5 and NCOA6).

introduction cancer is the outcome of an intricate interplay of dysregulated mechanisms that are otherwise responsible for maintaining the genomic integrity of the cell. Although our current knowledge of these mechanisms is inadequate to fully understand cancer, immense efforts are underway to identify novel 'cancer genes' (oncogenes) and implicate known ones for novel roles in cancer for example, the recent implication of SOX2 as a frequently amplified gene resulting in fusion and amplification of transcription factor MYCL1 involved in small cell lung cancer (). Methods for computational identification of disease genes look mainly for genes that are differentially expressed, have similar expression profiles with known disease genes, are 'central' or 'reachable' in disease molecular networks or have disease associations in literature (reviewed in). Some examples include ENDEAVOUR () and gene ranker (). A crucial distinguishing factor of cancer genes is that they belong to core mechanisms responsible for genome stability and cell proliferation (e.g. DNA damage repair and cell cycle) and function as highly synergetic or coordinated groups. Therefore, critical to implicating novel genes is the identification of core modules including pathways and complexes dysregulated in cancer. For example identified disease complexes and used them in a Bayesian predictor to rank genes involved in epithelial ovarian cancer traced back paths through the human protein interaction (PPI) network from differentially expressed genes (target) to genes harboring mutations (causal) and successfully applied this approach to identify disrupted pathways in glioblastoma multiform a. On the other hand used an interaction enrichment analysis to identify pairs of genes whose relationships differed between normal and cancer. Through their Gene Interaction Enrichment and Network Analysis (GENIA), the authors categorized interaction profiles as cooperative (expressions correlated), competitive (expressions anti correlated redundant (suppression of both causes dysfunction) and dependent (expression of one is dependent on the other), and then mined these profiles in breast and pancreatic cancers to identify dysregulated pathways incorporated gene expression into annotated pathways to quantify 'pathway activity' patterns in cancer. Subsequently, the authors extracted these patterns using a features election model on a PPI network to construct a 'pathway interaction network'. Sub-networks in this pathway network represented distinct pathways and their cross-talk in cancer. Apart from identifying modules, it is necessary to understand the modus operandi or the underlying 'program' driving these disruptions, and this requires systematic tracking of the behavior of these modules under cancer conditions. For example mined tightly connected gene co-expression sub-networks across 430 cancer networks (cell lines) and tracked aberrant modules as frequent sub-networks appearing across these cancers. However, studying multiple cancers simultaneously makes it challenging to discern clearly the intricate underlying *To whom correspondence should be addressed. mechanisms; different genes are involved in different cancers and even different cancer sub-types, and their roles across these cancers are also different. What is required, therefore, is a systematic method to track gene and module behavior across specific conditions in a controlled manner (e.g. between normal and a cancer type or between specific cancer sub-types). In addition, it is important to effectively integrate multi omics data into such an analysis for example, from The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA): http://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/. multi omics data integration as such has attracted attention during the past few years for example, Chu and Chen (2008) combined PPI and gene expression data to construct a cancer perturbed PPI network in cervical carcinoma to study gain and loss of function genes as potential drug targets correlated somatic mutations and gene expression to identify novel genes in glioblastoma multiform a (e.g. SYNE1, KLF6, FGFR4 and ephb4 integrated DNA methylation, gene expression and microRNA expression data in 385 ovarian cancer samples from TCGA and performed 'multi-dimensional' analysis to identify disrupted pathways combined PPI and gene expression data to construct tissue specific PPI networks for 60 tissues and used them to prioritize disease genes. finally proposed an iterative model to combine mutation and expression data and used it to identify mutated driver pathways in multiple cancer types. Putting all these findings together, we note (i) it is crucial to study the behavior of modules across specific conditions in a controlled manner to understand the modus operandi of cancer mechanisms and to implicate novel genes; and (ii) although most existing methods concentrate on 'mountain' genes that show distinct aberrant behavior in cancers, there are many more 'hills' that often do not display such drastic changes (). These 'hills' are contours, and they may not be identifiable through their own behavior, but their changes are quantifiable when considered in conjunction with other genes (e.g. as modules); these genes may not be differentially expressed, but they are differentially co-expressed with other genes. These points are substantiated further in the following analyses.

conclusion modules including complexes and pathways work in additive, compensatory and alternative ways to counter genome destabilizing agents. Cancer is an outcome of coordinated dysfunction ing of these very modules; therefore, countering it necessitates an even more coordinated and systematic approach. The considerable differences in module behavior between normal and cancer and even between two sub-types of the same cancer depict the complexity and specificity of roles that genes undertake in these conditions. In this context, the point highlighted in Section 1, viz it is critically important to study cancer in a systematic and controlled manner so as to precisely measure and characterize the roles of genes in cancer, makes even more sense.
