The Macrophage Pathway Knowledgebase mac pak is a computational system that allows biomedical researchers to query and study the dynamic behaviors of macrophage molecular pathways. It integrates the knowledge of 230 reviews that were carefully checked by specialists for their accuracy and then converted to 230 dynamic mathematical pathway models. mac pak comprises a total of 24 009 entities and 12 774 processes and is described in the Cell System Markup Language c sml an XML format that runs on the Cell Illustrator platform and can be visualized with a customized Cytoscape for further analysis. Availability: mac pak can be accessed via an interactive web site at http://macpak.csml.org. The c sml pathway models are available under the Creative Commons license.

introduction the immune system has evolved as a defense mechanism against pathogenic microbes. It consists of both (i) innate immunity, which is evolutionary ancient and (ii) adaptive immunity, which provides specific recognition and immunological memory (). Cellular participants in the immune and inflammatory responses include antigen presenting cells and phagocytic cells, such as macrophages. Significant progress has been made recently in understanding the biochemical mechanisms by which lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a bacterial endotoxin which activates immune cells, particularly macrophages (), leads to sepsis, septic shock or systemic inflammatory response syndrome. LPS is a major component of the outer membrane of gram negative bacteria and one of the most potent microbial initiators of inflammation (). Despite much effort, unfortunately there is no effective therapy for this problem. It is estimated that 50 000 people die each year only in the USA of septic shock or systemic inflammatory syndrome (). Thus, a more detailed understanding of the molecular mechanisms (pathways) underlying activation and deactivation of macrophages in response to lps on the ID 15950447, the description of the pathway is displayed. In this page, the user can find the paper information (from where the information about this pathway was retrieved), links to PubMed or details about the processes present in the model. Each process is represented by a unique icon. Detailed descriptions of the used icons can be found at http://macpak.csml.org/statistics/. There are also links to several visualization simulation platforms such as Cytoscape (), Cell Illustrator Online and Cell Illustrator Player (). Users can also download the c sml model from this page; (c) the simula table c sml pathway model on Cell Illustrator Player. Here is possible to run the simulation and observe what happens in the biological system; (d) the pathway can be visualized on Cytoscape and then saved in the numerous file formats available by this platform. For example, after uploading on Cytoscape, the user can export the c sml model in the xg mml viz map s if and GML formats and use this file for further downstream analysis in other platforms; (e) the simulation of the pathway on Cell Illustrator Online. By using CIO, one can change the parameters of the model and visualize the results under different perturbations. available then the provided value is used. Otherwise, the quantity is set to a default value automatically by Cell Illustrator. Currently, the knowledgebase contains 230 pathways, one for each review, summing a total of 24 009 entities (i.e. mRNA, protein, modified protein and complex), 12 774 processes (binding, phosphorylation, activation, ubiquitination, for instance) and 39 823 connectors (reactant process and process product relationship). Each reaction in this repository is annotated with one or more facts derived from the original literature as evidence. Since mac pak is manually curated (by four researchers that built, checked and double checked the c sml models), the quotations from the original publication can be used as a benchmark to test and evaluate the performance of text mining tools that try to reconstruct pathways by using literature information. For example, consider the following process: PMID: 11257452. In the 'Facts' section, there is the sentence 'Adaptor protein called TAB2 that mediates activation of TAK1 by linking TAK1 to TRAF6'. This sentence was copied and pasted from the corresponding paper and used by the annotators to construct the c sml model. Therefore, text mining researchers can evaluate their methods using these 'Facts' (texts) as inputs and evaluate the performance by comparing the output of their methods with the c sml models that can be downloaded for non-commercial use under the Creative Commons license. In order to access each macrophage pathway, the user only needs to input the name of the gene protein of interest or click on the suggested links in the web page (http://macpak.csml.org). Then, a list of pathways that contains the gene protein of interest is shown (). After selecting the pathway to be analyzed, the web page () containing the information about the process is shown, which has links to external databases like Entrez Gene, InterPro and PubMed and an executable file that can be simulated under Cytoscape, Cell Illustrator Online and Cell Illustrator Player platforms shows an example of model that was obtained by analyzing the MyD88 pathway using Cell Illustrator player is the output of Cytoscape and is the simulation result using Cell Illustrator Online.
