Motivation: Tandem Repeats (TRs) are abundant in proteins, having a variety of fundamental functions. In many cases, evolution has blurred their repetitive patterns. This leads to the problem of distinguishing between sequences that contain highly imperfect TRs, and the sequences without TRs. The 3D structure of proteins can be used as a benchmarking criterion for TR detection in sequences , because the vast majority of proteins having TRs in sequences are built of repetitive 3D structural blocks. According to our benchmark, none of the existing scoring methods are able to clearly distinguish, based on the sequence analysis, between structures with and without 3D TRs. Results: We developed a scoring tool called Tally, which is based on a machine learning approach. Tally is able to achieve a better separation between sequences with structural TRs and sequences of a periodic structures, than existing scoring procedures. It performs at a level of 81% sensitivity, while achieving a high specificity of 74% and an Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristic Curve of 86%. Tally can be used to select a set of structurally and functionally meaningful TRs from all TRs detected in proteomes. The generated dataset is available for benchmarking purposes. Availability and implementation: Source code is available upon request. Tool and dataset can be accessed through our website: http://

introduction today the growth of the protein sequence data significantly exceeds the capacity to analyze this data. Many proteins contain periodic sequences representing arrays of repeats that are directly adjacent to each other (), so called tandem repeats (TRs). TRs occur in at least 14% of all proteins (). Moreover, they are found in every third human protein. Highly divergent, they range from a single amino acid repetition to repeated domains of more than 100 residues. Numerous studies demonstrated the fundamental functional importance of such TRs and their involvement in human diseases (). Thus, TR regions are abundant in proteomes and are related to major health threats in modern society. Along this line, understanding of their sequence structure function relationship and evolutionary mechanisms is a promising path in the identification of targets for new medicines and vaccines. Over the course of evolution, perfect TRs tend to degenerate, as a result of mutations, substitutions and deletions. Therefore, the main problem is to distinguish between sequences that contain). A survey of these methods shows that no best approach to score putative TRs in sequences, exists that covers the whole range of repeats (). This evokes the necessity to integrate several algorithms into a pipeline (). Within this pipeline, it is also instrumental to have a universal score, to determine the boundary between repetitive and non repetitive protein sequences, as at present each of these computational programs use their own measure. For example, most algorithms consider multiple sequence alignments (MSA) of repeats as a collection of columns, such scores compute an intermediate score over each column and obtain the global score by averaging the intermediates. p sim () considers the frequency of the most common element in a column, Sdiff () counts the number of mutations observed in a column, Shannon entropy (S) () accounts for the frequencies of each amino acids in a column. Other metrics include evolutionary information such as p value phylo (). Several scores are embedded into their original TR predictors such as TRUST (), pf tools () or hh rep id (). None of these methods, apart from hh rep id use information about 3D protein structure, to set the boundary between repetitive and non repetitive protein sequences. The TR scoring functions can be tested on the structural definition of TRs. For the TR sequences that fold into a stable 3D structure, one can define the criteria for 'true' TRs, as an existence of repetitive blocks in structure. Indeed, the 3D structure of the folded TRs, does not allow mutations that destabilize the structure. It is important to mention that such TRs correspond to repetitive structural blocks (). Sometimes, but less frequently, functional constraints also play a role in the maintenance of repetitive sequence patterns during evolution. Thus, TR scoring functions can be tested against a dataset of the 'true' TRs found both in sequence and in structure t rss and 'false' TRs only found in sequence but not in the structure trs ns. Recently, given this structural definition of TRs, we demonstrated () that none of the existing scoring metrics described above, were able to accurately distinguish between t rss and trs ns. Here, we present a new method called Tally, for scoring TRs, based on a robust Machine Learning (ML) approach trained on an annotated t rss and trs ns datasets. To the best of our knowledge this is the first attempt to benchmark scoring systems that aim to find a proper boundary between t rss and trs ns. ML features includes some of the previously used scoring metrics and several other characteristics, generating an optimal scoring combination. Our approach performs significantly better than existing approaches, over the complete range of TRs.
