Motivation: In systematic biology, one is often faced with the task of comparing different phylogenetic trees, in particular in multi-gene analysis or co speciation studies. One approach is to use a tangle gram in which two rooted phylogenetic trees are drawn opposite each other, using auxiliary lines to connect matching tax a. There is an increasing interest in using rooted phylogenetic networks to represent evolutionary history, so as to explicitly represent reticulate events, such as horizontal gene transfer, hybridization or reassortment. Thus, the question arises how to define and compute a tangle gram for such networks. Results: In this article, we present the first formal definition of a tangle gram for rooted phylogenetic networks and present a heuristic approach for computing one, called the nn tangle gram method. We compare the performance of our method with existing tree tangle gram algorithms and also show a typical application to real biological datasets. For maximum usability, the algorithm does not require that the trees or networks are bifurcating or bi combining or that they are on identical tax on sets.

introduction in systematic biology, one is often faced with the task of comparing different phylogenetic trees, in particular in multi-gene analysis or co speciation studies (). One way to visualize similarities and differences is to draw two phylogenetic trees as rooted trees side by side and to draw lines (which we will call connectors) between tax a that correspond to each other in the two trees, see. Such a depiction is called a tangle gram and different variations of the problem of computing an optimal tangle gram have been studied in the literature. For example, a number of articles () consider the one tree Crossing Minimization otc m and the two tree Crossing Minimization t tcm problems that both aim at minimizing the number of crossings between connectors. In the former problem, the layout of one of the trees is fixed and that of the other is mutable whereas in the latter formulation the layout of both trees are allowed to be changed. For binary trees, otc m is solvable in on log n time (), while t tcm is np complete (). In, the authors describe a 'seesaw' heuristic for the t tcm problem for * To whom correspondence should be addressed.. A tangle gram between a phylogeny of sections of Ficus (a) and that of their associated genera of pollinating wasps (b). Adapted from (). binary (or bifurcating) trees, which operates by repeatedly solving the otc m problem, each time switching the roles of the two trees. A branch and bound approach for binary trees that works in O(n 3 ) time and gives a 2 approximation for complete binary trees is presented in. A generalization of the algorithm to unbalanced binary trees is described in, though in this case the approximation factor does not hold. In addition, this article gives an ILP formulation and an exact branch and bound algorithm for binary trees, where the latter has a worst case running time of O(n 2 +n2 2n ). Other approaches use fixed parameter tractability (FPT) parameterized by the number k of connector crossings (). A generalization to non binary trees is discussed in. The only algorithm that is able to compute tangle grams for binary trees with many to many connections is described in. Their algorithm requires O(k log 2 k log log k time (where k is the number of connectors) in the case that one tree is fixed. Additionally, they present some alternating and local search strategies for the t tcm problem. While evolutionary histories are usually described by rooted phylogenetic trees, in some cases rooted phylogenetic networks may provide a more accurate evolutionary scenario, especially when mechanisms such as horizontal gene transfer, hybridization, recombination, reassortment or incomplete lineage sorting have played a role in shaping the history. There is currently much research on the development of computational methods for computing rooted phylogenetic networks, for an overview see Huson and scorn a vacca (2011a);. The goal of this article is to introduce the concept of a tangle gram for rooted phylogenetic networks and to provide a useful heuristic for computing such tangle grams. Unlike trees, rooted phylogenetic networks are not necessarily planar and so the definition of an optimal tangle gram is not immediately obvious for them. Our heuristic does not require that the networks are bifurcating or page i249 i248i256
