Motivation: In proteomes of higher eukaryotes, many alternative splice variants can only be detected by their shared peptides. This makes it highly challenging to use peptide centric mass spectrometry to distinguish and to quantify protein isoforms resulting from alternative splicing events. Results: We have developed two complementary algorithms based on linear mathematical models to efficiently compute a minimal set of shared and unique peptides needed to quantify a set of isoforms and splice variants. Further, we developed a statistical method to estimate the splice variant abundances based on stable isotope labeled peptide quantities. The algorithms and databases are integrated in a web based tool, and we have experimentally tested the limits of our quantification method using spiked proteins and cell extracts. Availability and implementation: The TAPAS server is available at

introduction higher eukaryotic proteomes have greatly expanded during evolution by the variation created by alternatively spliced forms of the same gene, duplication into orthologous genes and differentially processed proteins (). These multiple protein isoforms play significant roles in differentiation, development and disease (). high throughput genomic, transcript omic and mass spectrometry (MS) technologies have facilitated the genome wide identification of alternative splicing (). It was shown that shifts in the relative splice transcript abundance between different cells and tissues are more frequently observed than all or none switch like behaviors (). Thus, knowing the amount of an expressed splice variant is highly desirable to understand cellular functions. peptide centric high throughput shotgun MS approaches have achieved remarkable detection coverage (). However, inferring protein isoform identities and estimating their abundances by peptide centric shotgun MS is not straightforward, as many peptides are shared between isoforms (). Recently, statistical methods have addressed these problems by using both unique and shared peptides (). While these methods have improved protein quantifications from peptide intensities, they were not specifically designed for a targeted MS approach of isoform analysis. In this work, we developed efficient computational optimization techniques to infer a minimal list of unique and shared peptides needed to accurately quantify a set of isoforms. This algorithm is integrated in a web based tool (TAPAS) that assists in the design of stable isotope labeled (SIL) peptides for targeted MS experiments. experiments. It uses a numerical optimization method implemented in the Stan's C++ framework to find the desired solution, i.e. the quantities of splice variants, by minimizing the gaps between the estimated and observed abundances of peptides (Equation 1 where A i is the abundance of peptide i and k is the estimated amount of splice variant k. i,k is indicator function that gives 1 when peptide i belongs to splice variant k, otherwise it gives zero. n xj 2 ) represents probability of x from normal distribution function with mean , and SD. To estimate the protein abundances of selected splicing variants, TAPAS requires the observed abundance of peptides, identification of peptidases and splice variant sequences as inputs. Validation of the quantification method: We tested our method with a simulation dataset modeled by lognormal distributions. TAPAS quickly converged to a solution and gave robust results on different simulations conditions. Moreover, we found that TAPAS accurately estimated amount of splice variants from experimentally measured peptides amounts. The average percentage of error in the estimated amounts of splice variants was 24.0%. We validated our computational approach by purifying and mixing two Grb2 splice variants and performing absolute quantitation of both splice variants using selected reaction monitoring (SRM) based on SIL reference peptides (Supplementary Material). Estimation of quantifiable splice variants: Through a systematic analysis of databases with ms detected peptides (mostly of trypsin origin;), we theoretically estimated that 50% of the human isoforms and splice variants could be quantifiable. This number goes up to 92% if multiple specific proteases are independently used and the results are combined (Supplementary Material).
