Motivation: The identification of microRNA (miRNA) target sites is fundamentally important for studying gene regulation. There are dozens of computational methods available for miRNA target site prediction. Despite their existence, we still can not reliably identify miRNA target sites, partially due to our limited understanding of the characteristics of miRNA target sites. The recently published CLASH (crosslinking ligation and sequencing of hybrids) data provide an unprecedented opportunity to study the characteristics of miRNA target sites and improve miRNA target site prediction methods. Results: Applying four different machine learning approaches to the CLASH data, we identified seven new features of miRNA target sites. Combining these new features with those commonly used by existing miRNA target prediction algorithms, we developed an approach called tarp mir for miRNA target site prediction. Testing on two human and one mouse non clash datasets, we showed that tarp mir predicted more than 74.2% of true miRNA target sites in each dataset. Compared with three existing approaches, we demonstrated that tarp mir is superior to these existing approaches in terms of better recall and better precision.

introduction the prediction of microRNA (miRNA) target sites is critical in understanding miRNA function and their involvement in various biological processes (). MiRNAs are short noncoding RNAs that bind and regulate their target mRNAs in a variety of biological processes, such as cell development, differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis pathways (). The binding of miRNAs to their target mRNAs degrades the target mRNAs and or prevents the target mRNAs from being translated into proteins, and thus modulates gene expression at the post-transcriptional level (). By identifying miRNA target sites, the target mRNAs and the potential functional roles of miRNAs may thus be discovered. Several features are commonly believed to be important for predicting miRNA target sites. Among them, seed match, the exact sequence matching between the positions 27 of an miRNA and a segment of 6 nucleotides (nt) long in target mRNAs, has been reported to be essential for mirna mrna binding (). Accessibility, which measures how likely a region in an mRNA sequence is 'open' or accessible for an miRNA to bind, is well known to be important for functional mirna mrna binding (). In addition, other features such as AU content (), folding energy () and conservation () are also regarded as informative indicators of functional mirna mrna bindings. Dozens of tools for miRNA target site prediction have been developed in the past decade, based on different subsets of the aforementioned features (). For instance, miRanda () utilizes the features of seed match, conservation and free energy for target site prediction. targets can () uses seed match, pairing of mRNAs with 3 0 of miRNAs, local AU content, etc., for target site identification. In addition to these traditional miRNA target site prediction tools, recently, several tools based on next generation sequencing technologies have been developed (). For instance, mir tar clip () identifies miRNA target sites from the data generated by high throughput sequencing of RNA isolated by crosslinking immunoprecipitation hits clip experiments () and photo activatable ribonucleoside enhanced crosslinking and immunoprecipitation par clip experiments (). Despite the existence of dozens of computational methods, computational identification of miRNA target sites remains a challenging problem partially due to our limited understanding of the characteristics of miRNA target sites. For instance, although matching seed is not always sufficient for a functional mirna mrna interaction (), it has been thought to be necessary for most animal mirna mrna binding. However, studies have shown non-canonical pairings that allow G:U wobbles and even mismatches can be functional (). Recent crosslinking ligation and sequencing of hybrids (CLASH) experiments () have further shown that seed match, including canonical and non-canonical seed matching is not required for certain mirna mrna interactions. The CLASH experiments () provide an unprecedented opportunity to advance our understanding of miRNA target sites and to develop better computational methods for miRNA target site prediction. Compared with other high throughput experimental approaches such as hits clip () and par clip () that identify miRNA target sequences only, CLASH experiments provide both miRNAs and their corresponding target sequences. With thousands of target sequences for dozens of miRNAs in one CLASH experiment, new features of miRNA target sites may be inferred and better computational methods for miRNA target site prediction may be developed. In this study, we developed a new approach for miRNA target site prediction called Target Prediction for miRNAs tarp mir. tarp mir applies a random forest based approach to integrate six conventional features and seven new features to predict miRNA target sites. These features were learned from the only CLASH dataset in mammal that is made publically available by. By cross validation we showed that tarp mir had an average recall of 0.543 and an average precision of 0.181. Tested on three independent datasets, including two human par clip datasets and one mouse hits clip dataset, we demonstrated that tarp mir identified more than 74.2% of known miRNA target sites in each dataset. Compared with three existing approaches, we found that tarp mir is superior to existing approaches, in terms of both higher recall and higher precision. The tarp mir method is implemented in a python package, which is freely available at http:// hula b ucf edu research projects mirna tarp mir
discussion in this study, we identified seven new features together with six conventional features of miRNA target sites. Based on these 13 selected features, we developed a new approach called tarp mir to predict miRNA target sites. We tested tarp mir on a human CLASH dataset, two human par clip datasets, a mouse hits clip dataset and a general dataset from tar base 7.0, and showed that tarp mir performed at least the same or better than three existing approaches. tarp mir is freely available at http://hulab.ucf.edu/research/projects/ mirna tarp mir. Not all new features were completely new. We claimed some features as new because they were not used by most of the existing tools, such as miRanda (), targets can (), diana micro tcds (), rna22-gui (), target miner (), PITA () and rna hybrid (Kr ger and). However, several new features were mentioned in previous studies directly or indirectly. For instance stated that 'some validated miRNA target sites do not have a complete seed match but instead exhibit 1112 continuous base pairs in the central region of the miRNA'. We observed similar target sites in the CLASH dataset and proposed the feature 'The length and position of the longest consecutive pairs'. The selected new features significantly improved the prediction accuracy of tarp mir. To show the contribution of the new features to the accuracy of tarp mir we removed the seven new features and retrained random forests in tarp mir. Compared with the original tarp mir with 13 features, the recall and precision of the modified tarp mir dropped 8.6% and 9.7%, respectively. We also compared the predicted true target sites by different approaches (Supplementary File S4). tarp mir had the largest number of predicted true sites shared by other tools. However, the percentage of shared true target sites predicted by tarp mir was lower than that of other tools, suggesting that tarp mir complements existing tools by predicting sites that can not be predicted by other tools. In fact, there are 2090 non seed matching sites in the first CLASH test dataset. tarp mir was able to identify 1585 (75.8%) of those sites. On the other hand, miRanda and targets can were only able to predict 173 (8.28%) and 34 (1.6%) sites, respectively. This also suggested that the traditional tools like targets can and miRanda almost can not predict non seed matching binding sites. It is also worth mentioning that CLASH experiments may pick up direct and indirect miRNA target sites. The Argonaut proteins are guided by miRNAs to bind mRNAs, which is referred to as mirna dependent recruitment and results in direct miRNA target sites. There is also a mirna independent Argonaut protein recruitment mechanism, in which Argonaut proteins are recruited to target mRNAs by protein protein interaction with rna binding proteins and thus miRNAs do not interact with the mRNAs directly (). In the future, one may want to distinguish these two types of target sites from the CLASH experiments before training predictors for target site prediction. In this way, we may also obtain better features and improve the prediction accuracy. Because of the existence of indirect target sites in CLASH data, the recall of tarp mir on the CLASH testing datasets may be underestimated. In fact, tarp mir had a much higher recall on the three independent human and mouse datasets, suggesting that tarp mir may have a recall larger than 74%. On the other hand, tarp mir had a much lower precision on the independent datasets, which may be underestimated as well. This was because we treated all segments other than the CCRs or identified miRNA target sites in these independent datasets as true negative target sites, which may not be the case. By the time of this study, only one CLASH dataset was publicly available (). This human CLASH dataset was used to train tarp mir. We applied tarp mir to human and mouse datasets and demonstrated that it works well on these datasets. In the future, with more CLASH datasets available, more important miRNA target site features including tissue specific features may be discovered and the accuracy of tarp mir especially its precision, may be further improved.
