In plants, many transacting small interfering RNA ta sirna regulatory pathways have been identified as significant components of the gene networks involved in development, metabolism, responses to biotic and abiotic stresses and DNA methylation at the TAS locus. To obtain a more comprehensive understanding on the nature of ta sirna regulatory pathways, we developed a freely accessible resource, ta sirna db to serve as a repository for the sequences of ta sirna regulatory pathway related microRNAs, TASs, ta sirnas and ta sirna targets, and for the cascading relations among them. With 583 pathways from 18 species, ta sirna db is the largest resource for known ta sirna regulatory pathways currently available. ta sirna db also provides a tool named tas exp analysis that was developed to map user submitted small RNA and deg radome libraries to a stored input TAS and to perform sRNA phasing analysis and TAS cleavage analysis. Availability: The database of plant ta sirna regulatory pathways is available at

introduction in plants a classical '' phase initiator tas transcript  ta sirna target gene '' cascade model for the ta sirna regulatory function has been well determined (). Briefly, a phase initiator (usually a miRNA, but sometimes a siRNA) cleaves the transcript of ta sirnas producing locus (TAS) by binding argonaut e (AGO) proteins 1/7. Then, RDR6 rna dependent rna polymerase 6 dependent conversion of the resulting cleaved fragments into dsRNA and subsequent cleavage by dicer like 4 (DCL4) at every $21 nucleotides (nt) relative to the phase initiator cleavage site generates a ta sirna. The ta sirna further cleaves its target RNA to regulate gene expression by binding AGO1 proteins. The ta sirna regulatory pathways have been identified as important elements in the gene networks involved in development, metabolism, response to biotic and abiotic stresses and DNA methylation at the TAS locus (). Recently, the cascade system has also been used as a valuable tool in functional genomics studies (). Until recently, only a few ta sirna regulatory pathways were characterized; but now, with the development and application of integrative genome wide approaches, including the genome wide computational identification of TASs and the cleaved validation of mirna ta sirna targeting site based on deg radome analysis or 5 0 RACE, about 600 ta sirna regulatory pathways have been reported in different plants. However, no comprehensive and integrated ta sirna related database is currently available. Here, we present a database called ta sirna db of known plant ta sirna regulatory pathways, which can serve as a repository for the sequences of ta sirna pathway related miRNAs, TASs, ta sirnas and ta sirna targets, and for the cascading relation among them. ta sirna db also offers a tool named tas exp analysis which has been developed to map user submitted RNA and deg radome libraries to a TAS and to allow users to perform TAS cleavage analysis and sRNA phasing analysis within ta sirna db
