Motivation: The characterization of phylogenetic and functional diversity is a key element in the analysis of microbial communities. amplicon based sequencing of marker genes, such as 16S rRNA, is a powerful tool for assessing and comparing the structure of microbial communities at a high phylogenetic resolution. Because 16S rRNA sequencing is more cost effective than whole meta genome shotgun sequencing, marker gene analysis is frequently used for broad studies that involve a large number of different samples. However, in comparison to shotgun sequencing approaches, insights into the functional capabilities of the community get lost when restricting the analysis to taxonomic assignment of 16S rRNA data. Results: Tax4Fun is a software package that predicts the functional capabilities of microbial communities based on 16S rRNA datasets. We evaluated Tax4Fun on a range of paired meta genome 16S rRNA datasets to assess its performance. Our results indicate that Tax4Fun provides a good approximation to functional profiles obtained from meta genomic shotgun sequencing approaches. Availability and implementation: Tax4Fun is an open source R package and applicable to output as obtained from the silva ngs web server or the application of q ii me with a SILVA database extension. Tax4Fun is freely available for download at http://tax4fun.

introduction amplicon based sequencing of marker genes is widely used for large scale studies that involve many different sampling sites or time series. The common 16S rRNA gene based analysis is a powerful tool for assessing the phylogenetic distribution of a meta genome but does not provide insights into the communities metabolic potential. Therefore, the prediction of the functional capabilities of a microbial community based on marker gene data would be highly beneficial. As a particular difficulty of such a predictive approach for most organisms in marker gene databases the genome and therefore the functional repertoire is not known. For instance, the SILVA SSU rRNA database () (SILVA 115 full release) contains 3 808 884 rRNA sequences whereas KEGG (Release 71.1) () only comprises 2982 complete prokaryotic genomes. In a previous study (), we introduced a statistical method for predicting the metabolic profiles of a meta genome from its taxonomic composition using a linear combination of precomputed genomic reference profiles. A similar method has been proposed for inference of the community structure from remote sensing satellite image models (). In this approach, the average EC number counts of all annotated genomes from a given taxonomic group, e.g. at order level, are used as reference for the linear combination of the community structure at this V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

conclusion tax4fun predicts the functional profile of a microbial community just from 16S rRNA sequence data. Our approach can not replace whole meta genome profiling but is useful to supplement 16S rRNA analyses in meta genome pre studies or in situations where shotgun sequencing is prohibitively expensive, e.g. for broad surveys in microbial ecology applications. We evaluated our method on four paired data collections from different habitats and compared it to the pic rust tool. The results indicate a high correlation of the predicted Tax4Fun profiles with the corresponding functional profiles obtained from whole meta genome sequence data. Moreover, the results show that Tax4Fun outperforms pic rust on all test datasets. Additionally, our results revealed for all datasets a higher correlation between the meta genomic and 16s predicted functional profiles when using up roc in comparison to the p aud a tool (see Supplementary Material section 3S3). Although we provide functional reference profiles from both tools for Tax4Fun, we recommend the usage of Tax4Fun in combination with the up roc based reference profiles for prediction because of the higher sensitivity of up roc. Tax4Fun allows easy processing of the output from silva ngs q ii me or any other analysis pipeline using the SILVA database as reference. The implementation in R facilitates further statistical analyses of the Tax4Fun predictions, which can be processed within the same R environment.
