TE Displayer can be used to retrieve genetic polymorphisms caused by transposable elements (TEs) in large genomic datasets and present the results on virtual gel images. This enables researchers to compare TE profiles in silico and provides reference profiles for experimental analyses. Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web at

introduction transposable elements (TEs) are found in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic organisms. TEs have caused profound structural and functional changes to genomes, where they continue to persist in and shape the evolution of the host. The molecular domestication of TEs in eukaryotic organisms has resulted in viral immunity against murine leukemia virus in Mus species (), the maintenance of telomeres in Drosophila () and has contributed to site specific V(D)J recombination in jawed vertebrates. Although the majority of TEs are not currently active, their historical activity led to te derived polymorphisms. The currently active TEs are a major driving force for genome evolution and revealing TE activity is also essential to understanding genome evolution (). One method to reveal genome wide insertions caused by TEs is Transposon Display (TD). This technique is a modification of a previously described technique referred to as Amplified Fragment Length Polymorphism (AFLP; den). TD starts with the digestion of genomic DNA with a restriction enzyme. Adapter oligonucleotides are then ligated to the digested genomic DNA fragments. The first round of amplification pre amplification is performed using a primer complementary to the adapter sequence and another primer complementary to the target TE. A second, selective PCR reaction is often performed using the pre amplification products as templates with a nested primer set. Selective amplification PCR products are analyzed by gel or capillary electrophoresis. If a TE family has a high copy number in a genome, selective nucleotide(s) can be added to the 3 end of the adapter primer used in the selective amplification, reducing the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. number of bands per lane (den). The approximate copy number of a TE family in a genome can be estimated from the number of bands. Differences in banding patterns reveal TE insertion polymorphisms between individuals (). Current TE transposition activity in an individual organism may be inferred from the appearance of new bands on a TD gel (). Here, we describe a computational algorithm that follows the conceptual principles of TD. The program, called TE Displayer, has a graphical user interface and runs on Windows and Linux operating systems (Supplementary). The output includes a virtual gel image and detailed genomic location information for each band. TE Displayer was tested using TEs in the Aedes aegypti, Drosophila melanogaster, Caenorhabditis elegans, Arabidopsis thaliana and Oryza sativa genomes and all of the output from TE Displayer is consistent with the output from manual inspection the mobility of a DNA fragment on acrylamide gel is inversely proportional to its size. Therefore, the positions of the bands are calculated using the formula D1/D2 = S2/S1, where D is distance and S is size.
