Motivation: Recent technological advances are allowing many laboratories to sequence their research organisms. Available de novo as-semblers leave repetitive portions of the genome poorly assembled. Some genomes contain high proportions of transposable elements, and transposable elements appear to be a major force behind diversity and adaptation. Few de novo assemblers for transposable elements exist, and most have either been designed for small genomes or 454 reads. Results: In this article, we present a new transposable element de novo assembler, t edna which assembles a set of transposable elements directly from the reads. t edna uses Illumina paired end reads, the most widely used sequencing technology for de novo assembly, and forms full length transposable elements. Availability and implementation: t edna is available at http://urgi. versailles inra fr tools t edna under the GPLv3 license. It is written in C++11 and only requires the sparse hash Package, freely available under the New BSD License. t edna can be used on standard computers with limited RAM resources, although it may also use large memory for better results. Most of the code is parallelized and thus ready for large infrastructures.

introduction most laboratories can now afford sequencing a genome, and several de novo whole genome assemblers, such as Velvet (), are available to assemble even larger genomes. However, these assemblers usually do not assemble the transposable elements: current algorithms can not correctly assemble highly repeated sequences. On the other hand, transposable elements can comprise 490% of a genome, and their role in the evolution of the host genome has been often underlined (). Although assembling the copies (i.e. the traces of transposable elements, scattered along the genome, often strongly mutated) is usually impossible, assembling the transposable elements (a model of the first element that invaded the genome, reconstructed from the observable copies;) is a simpler task. Several de novo transposable elements assemblers have been presented so far, but most have been designed for small genomes (), or assume that the 454 technology have been used (). Only repeat explorer () currently exploits Illumina reads. Here, we present a new tool that reads Illumina paired end reads, arguably the most widely used sequencing technology for de novo assembly, and provides a list of repeated elements. A transposable element de novo assembler is somewhat different from a genome assembler: it assembles sequences from multiple copies, which have evolved through time. A transposable elements assembler should thus correctly handle polymorphism, including long insertions and deletions. Basically, every copy gives a hint about what the transposable element should be, but only the comparison with other copies and the construction of a consensus may help building the transposable element. As such, de Bruijn graphs, used by many assemblers, seem well fitted for this purpose: a km er of a copy may be part of the consensus transposable element, whereas other parts of the copy may not. Transposable elements may thus be assembled as a set of highly repeated km ers. t edna is the first tool that uses a de Bruijn graph for transposable element assembly. Implementation details are given in Supplementary Material.
