Elementary flux modes ef ms are important structural tools for the analysis of metabolic networks. It is known that many topologically feasible ef ms are biologically irrelevant. Therefore, tools are needed to find the relevant ones. We present thermodynamic te fm analysis t efma which uses the cellular metabo lome to avoid the enumeration of thermodynamically infeasible ef ms. Specifically, given a metabolic network and a not necessarily complete metabo lome t efma efficiently returns the full set of thermodynamically feasible ef ms consistent with the metabo lome. Compared with standard approaches, t efma strongly reduces the memory consumption and the overall runtime. Thus t efma provides a new way to analyze unbiased ly hitherto inaccessible large scale metabolic networks. Availability and implementation: https://

introduction an elementary flux mode (EFM) is a steady state pathway that consists of an indivisible set of reactions (). ef ms permit a system wide analysis of metabolism and can be used to identify engineering targets (). Different approaches were published to calculate ef ms in large metabolic models. For instance split a metabolic network into subnetworks and calculated the ef ms for each subnetwork in parallel. Others only enumerated the set of the shortest ef ms () or randomly sampled the full set of ef ms (). A complete EFM analysis for large genome scale models is still out of reach as the number of ef ms increases dramatically with the size of the metabolic network () requiring inhibiting ly large computing resources. To tackle this problem the biological relevance of ef ms needs to be taken into account as only a small set of ef ms are biologically relevant (). Therefore, tools are necessary to find those subsets of (biologically) relevant ef ms enumerated only those ef ms that were consistent with a given transcriptional regulatory network. Here, we use a network embedded thermodynamic (NET) analysis () to detect and remove thermodynamically infeasible ef ms already during their enumeration. Thermodynamic EFM analysis t efma applies the NET principle and uses metabolite concentrations and the compounds' Gibbs energy of formation to determine the energy surface of an EFM. At a constant pressure a biochemical reaction only proceeds spontaneously if its Gibbs free energy of reaction is negative (). If the thermodynamic information is available for a reaction, it can be tested for its thermodynamic feasibility. t efma does not only analyze the feasibility of an isolated reaction, but considers the Gibbs free energy of reaction for all reactions contributing to an EFM. t efma is computationally much more efficient than a sequential approach, where an ordinary EFM analysis is followed by a NET analysis (). The reason for this is that t efma checks the feasibility of (intermediate) ef ms continuously and eliminates infeasible ones during the enumeration process. This reduces the computational costs significantly.

conclusion by integrating the metabolite concentrations into the EFM enumeration we killed two birds with one stone. First, we strongly reduced the memory usage and the runtime of the EFM enumeration. Second, we got a step further to only calculate the set of biological relevant ef ms. Both points are essential to reach the final goal of calculating ef ms in large, genome scale models. We stress that t efma greatly reduces the computational costs. Thus an EFM analysis of medium scale models become possible already on current high end personal computers and no longer requires a dedicated high performance computing environment numbers in brackets list the percentage compared to EFMA.
