Motivation: Cryo electron tomography cryo et produces 3D density maps of biological specimen in its near native states. Applied to small cells, cryo et produces 3D snapshots of the cellular distributions of large complexes. However, retrieving this information is non-trivial due to the low resolution and low signal to noise ratio in to mo grams. Current pattern recognition methods identify complexes by matching known structures to the cryo electron tomogr am. However, so far only a small fraction of all protein complexes have been structurally resolved. It is, therefore, of great importance to develop template free methods for the discovery of previously unknown protein complexes in cryo electron to mo grams. Results: Here, we have developed an inference method for the template free discovery of frequently occurring protein complexes in cryo electron to mo grams. We provide a first proof of principle of the approach and assess its applicability using realistically simulated to mo grams allowing for the inclusion of noise and distortions due to missing wedge and electron optical factors. Our method is a step toward the template free discovery of the shapes, abundance and spatial distributions of previously unknown macromolecular complexes in whole cell to mo grams
introduction cryo electron tomography cryo et enables the 3D visualization of a cell's interior under close to live conditions (). Such to mo grams are essentially 3D representations of the entire proteome providing a snapshot of the distributions of protein complexes and their interaction networks (). However, retrieving shape information and distributions of macromolecular assemblies is not trivial due to the low signal to noise ratio (SNR), missing data and non isotropic resolution, and the fact that individual macromolecules are difficult to recognize in a highly crowded environment (). So far, the identification of macromolecular complexes is accomplished mostly by template matching methods (where the signals representing the density map of a known protein complex structure are correlated to the signals in the cryo et map. * To whom correspondence should be addressed the cross correlation between the template and tomogr am is calculated for each position and every possible orientation. Peaks in the resulting cross correlation function across the whole tomogr am may indicate positions occupied by the particular complex. A major drawback, however, is that template matching can not discover yet structurally unknown complexes. So far only a relatively small fraction of large protein complexes have been structurally resolved. Furthermore, recent work has shown that the quaternary structure of large protein complexes varies considerably across different organisms () and available reference structures might therefore not be applicable to the desired organism. Even if a template structure is available, the template based methods may fail if the template structure is in a different conformation or is bound to additional proteins than the target complexes in the tomogr am. As a consequence, template based methods may fail in detecting an unbiased atlas of the spatial arrangement of all complexes in a cell (i.e. a cellular proteome 'atlas'). It is, therefore, of great importance to develop template free methods for the detection of macromolecular complexes in cryo electron to mo grams. Such methods will allow not only the discovery of the shapes of unknown macromolecular complexes but also allow detecting their positions and orientations in the cryo electron to mo grams. The key problem in a template free approach is to identify frequently occurring density patterns in cryo electron to mo grams. A pattern is defined by voxel regions with similar intensity structures, which appear multiple times at different position in the tomogr am. Such frequently occurring patterns represent objects of biological interest. In this article, we focus on patterns that correspond to protein complexes. Once identical complexes are discovered, their sub to mo grams can be locally aligned and their density distribution averaged producing a density map of the complex with improved SNR. Identifying recurrent patterns in cryo electron to mo grams is challenging because neither the composition nor the total number of the patterns is known. Moreover, cryo electron to mo grams are of very low resolution (4 nm), low SNR and are subject to distortions due to electron optical effects. Therefore, traditional methods in computer vision derived for high resolution and high SNR 3D object recognition usually can not be directly applied to cryo electron to mo grams (). Here, we propose a step-wise approach for classifying cryo electron to mo grams into recurrent density patterns (). First, an initial classification is generated based on rotation invariant features of the tomogr am. In the second step, this initial classification is refined using a Gaussian Hidden Markov Random Field gh mrf model. As an inference method, gh mrf models have shown robustness in 2D image segmentations at relatively high noise levels (). Here, we extend the gh mrf framework to the classification of recurrent patterns in 3D cryo et maps, which contain high levels of noise and distortions. In this article, we provide the first proof of principle of the method, and demonstrate its applicability for the detection of frequently occurring protein complexes in noisy density maps with relatively high accuracy. We test our approach on realistically simulated cryo electron to mo grams including low resolution, high levels of noise and distortions due to missing wedge effects and electron optical factors.
