Motivation: time evolving differential protein protein interaction (PPI) networks are essential to understand serial activation of differentially regulated up or downregulated) cellular processes (DRPs) and their interplay s over time. Despite developments in the network inference, current methods are still limited in identifying temporal transition of structures of PPI networks, DRPs associated with the structural transition and the interplay s among the DRPs over time. Results: Here, we present a probabilistic model for estimating time evolving differential PPI networks with MultiPle Information (TEMPI). This model describes probabilistic relationships among network structures, time course gene expression data and Gene Ontology biological processes go bps. By maximizing the likelihood of the prob-abilistic model, TEMPI estimates jointly the time evolving differential PPI networks t dns describing temporal transition of PPI network structures together with serial activation of DRPs associated with tran-siting networks. This joint estimation enables us to interpret the t dns in terms of temporal transition of the DRPs. To demonstrate the utility of TEMPI, we applied it to two time course datasets. TEMPI identified the t dns that correctly delineated temporal transition of DRPs and time dependent associations between the DRPs. These t dns provide hypotheses for mechanisms underlying serial activation of key DRPs and their temporal associations. Availability and implementation: Source code and sample data files are available at

introduction many cellular events involve serial activation of cellular processes during which genes proteins associated with the processes are up or downregulated. Differential protein protein interaction (PPI) networks (DNs) have been used to delineate pp is (edges) among differentially regulated nodes (DRNs), such as up or downregulated genes or proteins. The DNs have been considered more effective for understanding the differences between two conditions, compared with non dns (). However, the DNs delineate no temporal transition of the DRNs and or their edges to represent serial activation of cellular processes over time. Thus, time evolving differential PPI networks t dns have been introduced to delineate (i) temporal changes in abundances or activities of DRNs (node transition), and or (ii) formation of new edges for the DRNs and disappearance of existing edges over time (edge transition). The t dns are essential to understand serial activation of differentially regulated cellular processes (DRPs) during a cellular event and their underlying mechanisms. time course gene expression analysis can provide temporal changes in abundances of the DRNs (). Several interaction assays, such as yeast two hybrid () and mass spectrometry based tandem affinity purification () can be used to measure pp is among the DRNs. However, it is still challenging to experimentally identify temporal transition of the edges among the DRNs because of the limited coverage of the interactome s detected by these assays (von). The limitation of the experimental methods prompted us to develop a computational method to estimate t dns. Many methods for estimation of dynamic gene regulatory networks have been developed (). However, estimation of temporal transitions of differential PPI networks (i.e. t dns has been rarely studied. A couple of methods have been developed to identify differential PPI networks, which can be then used to estimate t dns. First, a simple method to infer DNs using time course gene expression data identifies DRNs over time and constructs a template PPI network with the known pp is among all the DRNs (). t dns can be then constructed by selecting the interacting DRNs with significant expression changes at each t from the template PPI network. Second, principal network analysis (PNA) identifies differential expression patterns over time and then selects DRNs and their edges (known pp is between the DRNs) showing the differential expression patterns (). A principal subnetwork (PS) is then constructed using both DRNs and edges selected for each differential expression pattern. Finally, t dns can be constructed by selecting the edges in PSs for which the linked DRNs show significant expression changes at each t. Functional interpretation of the inferred t dns is important to understand temporal transition of the DRPs. In most of the network inference methods, it is commonly performed independently from network inference using post hoc analyses of Gene Ontology biological processes go bps of the nodes in the inferred networks (). For example, the method proposed by clusters the nodes in time evolving networks based on the similarity of temporal transitions of their edges and then links these clusters to cellular functions *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com using go bps. However, none of the methods estimating DNs or t dns integrates functional information, such as go bps during the network inference such that the inferred t dns can represent directly temporal transition of differentially regulated go bps and time dependent interplay s between the go bps thereby facilitating functional interpretation of the t dns. Here, we introduce a probabilistic model for estimating time evolving differential PPI networks with MultiPle Information (TEMPI). Although many methods have used probabilistic modeling for estimating network structures (), a unique aspect of our model is that it models additionally probabilistic dependencies of go bps with network structures and time course global data. By maximizing the likelihood function of the probabilistic model, TEMPI jointly estimates the t dns showing temporal transitions of network structures with temporal activation of the go bps and their temporal interplay s. During the network inference, TEMPI infers edges not included in the known pp is whereas most of the previous methods (e.g. PNA) select a subset of pp is for estimation of t dns from the known pp is
