Motivation: Target characterization for a biochemical network is a heuristic evaluation process that produces a characterization model that may aid in predicting the suitability of each molecule for drug targeting. These approaches are typically used in drug research to identify novel potential targets using insights from known targets. Traditional approaches that characterize targets based on their molecular characteristics and biological function require extensive experimental study of each protein and are infeasible for evaluating larger networks with poorly understood proteins. Moreover, they fail to exploit network connectivity information which is now available from systems biology methods. Adopting a network based approach by characterizing targets using network features provides greater insights that complement these traditional techniques. To this end, we present TENET (Target charactErization using NEtwork Topology), a network based approach that characterizes known targets in signalling networks using topological features. Results: TENET first computes a set of topological features and then leverages a support vector machine based approach to identify predictive topological features that characterizes known targets. A characterization model is generated and it specifies which topological features are important for discriminating the targets and how these features should be combined to quantify the likelihood of a node being a target. We empirically study the performance of TENET from a wide variety of aspects, using several signalling networks from bio models with real world curated outcomes. Results demonstrate its effectiveness and superiority in comparison to state of the art approaches.

introduction complex intra and inter-cellular signalling drives various biological processes, such as growth, proliferation and apoptosis within systems. In systems biology, these molecular interactions are typically modelled as signalling networks () that provide a holistic view of the various interactions between different molecular players in the system. As signalling networks become an increasingly acceptable way for representing biological systems, various network based computational techniques have been developed to analyze these networks with the goal of answering biological needs, such as target characterization () and target discovery (). In this article, we focus on the target characterization problem for signalling networks. Target characterization identifies characteristics (e.g. topological features) that distinguishes targets (i.e. nodes) from other nodes in the network. These characteristics can be summarized as models which we refer to as characterization models. Traditionally, targets are characterized based on their molecular characteristics [e.g. structure and binding sites of targets (] and biological function [e.g. regulation of apoptosis (. These traditional approaches focus primarily on the target alone and are oblivious to the presence of other interacting molecules in the system. However, understanding how a target interacts with other molecules in a biological system may provide valuable and holistic insights for superior target characterization. For example, the degree centrality of a target may be leveraged to assess potential toxicity of targets as high degree nodes tend to be involved in essential protein protein interactions () and are potentially toxic as a result. In particular, network based target characterization techniques can exploit such topological features for superior characterization of targets. Recently, there have been increasing efforts toward devising network based target characterization techniques (). These methods focus on using topological features to characterize targets of protein protein interaction (PPI) networks. specifically performed characterization of targets in protein co abundance networks [The protein co abundance networks are essentially protein protein interaction (PPI) networks constructed by identifying highly differentially regulated proteins from proteomics data using specific filters.] using several topological features such as degree centrality. Although this study suggests that multiple topological features can be combined for superior target characterization, it did not explore how these topological features should be combined towards this goal. In contrast concluded that bridging centrality is useful in identifying targets in PPI networks. However, the complexity and diversity of biological networks make target characterization using a single feature challenging as in some networks the chosen feature may perform poorly showed that bridging centrality performs well in the MAPK-PI3K network, but not in the glucose metabolism network proposed the use of machine learning techniques such as support vector machines (SVM) and logistic regression for characterizing known targets in a manually curated human PPI network using 15 topological features. In contrast to, their goal was to identify topological characteristics of drug targets in general, instead of for specific diseases. However, characterizing targets in general assumes that targets of different diseases share similar target characteristics, which may not always be true. Indeed, as we shall see in Section 3, known targets in signalling networks tend to be characterized by different sets of topological features. Consequently, target characterization based on individual disease specific networks may yield better characterization that is specific to the disease. A common thread running through the aforementioned target characterization techniques is their focus on PPI networks. Surprisingly, similar systematic study in curated signalling networks has been lacking in the literature. Compared to signalling networks, PPI networks may contain many false positive PPI in the sense that although these proteins can truly physically bind they may never do so inside cells due to different localization or they are not simultaneously expressed. Furthermore, PPI networks are static. That is, the edges in PPI networks are undirected; there is neither flow of information nor mass between nodes. Hence, they lack of knowledge of the underlying mechanism (i.e. actual signal flow) causing the disease. As network quality directly affects the results of network based target characterization, the aforementioned limitations of PPI networks may adversely impact the search for superior characteristics of targets. Signalling networks, however, model the dynamic interaction of the biological systems and present an attractive alternative to PPI networks. In our recent work (), we took the first step to demonstrate how signalling networks can be effectively leveraged to identify topological features that are discriminative of targets using the Wilcoxon test. However, similar to, this work does not shed any insight on a predictive model to combine these features for identifying potential targets. In this article, we address this limitation by presenting TENET (Target charactErization using NEtwork Topology), a network based approach that characterizes known targets in signalling networks using topological features. Specifically, we use an svm based approach to identify the set of topological features (referred to as predictive topological features) that characterizes known targets and to generate a characterization model using these features. The model specifies which topological features are important for discriminating the targets and how these features should be combined to produce a quantitative score that identifies the likelihood of a node being a target. In particular, TENET uses feature selection to select predictive topological features and weighted misclassification cost (WMC) to handle SVM training issues such as noisy labels and imbalanced data. Our empirical study on four real world curated signalling networks demonstrates the effectiveness and superiority of TENET.
