Motivation: b cell epitope is a small area on the surface of an antigen that binds to an antibody. Accurately locating epitopes is of critical importance for vaccine development. Compared with wet lab methods , computational methods have strong potential for efficient and large scale epitope prediction for antigen candidates at much lower cost. However, it is still not clear which features are good determinants for accurate epitope prediction, leading to the unsatisfactory performance of existing prediction methods. Method and results: We propose a much more accurate b cell epi-tope prediction method. Our method uses a new feature B factor (obtained from X-ray crystallography), combined with other basic phy-sicochemical, statistical, evolutionary and structural features of each residue. These basic features are extended by a sequence window and a structure window. All these features are then learned by a two stage random forest model to identify clusters of antigenic residues and to remove isolated outliers. Tested on a dataset of 55 epitopes from 45 tertiary structures, we prove that our method significantly outperforms all three existing structure based epitope predictors. Following comprehensive analysis, it is found that features such as B factor, relative accessible surface area and protrusion index play an important role in characterizing b cell epitopes. Our detailed case studies on an HIV antigen and an influenza antigen confirm that our second stage learning is effective for clustering true antigenic residues and for eliminating self-made prediction errors introduced by the first stage learning. Availability and implementation: Source codes are available on request.

introduction b cell epitope is the binding site of an antibody on an antigen. It can be recognized by a specific B lymphocyte to stimulate an immune response. If both the antigen and its binding antibody are known, the epitope site can be accurately determined by wet lab experiments, such as by X-ray crystallography. However, it takes a great deal of time and labor to identify the epitope(s) of an unknown antigen and its specific antibody. Computational methods have strong potential for efficient and large scale epitope prediction for many antigen candidates at much lower cost. Early computational prediction methods have focused on the identification of linear epitopes, which are simple forms of b cell epitopes. A linear epitope is composed of a single continuous sequence segment. The early prediction methods have assumed that there should be a good and simple correlation between certain propensities and linear epitope residues, and attempted to predict linear epitopes through one or two propensities. For example, hydrophilicity was used by Hopp and Woods (1981) and, flexibility by Karplus and Schulz (1985), protrusion index (PI) by, antigenic propensity by, amino acid pair by) and turns by. To enhance the robustness of the prediction, various ideas of sliding windows have been proposed () and applied in linear epitope prediction (). However, the sliding window approach is oversimplified and the prediction performance was not improved significantly (). In 2005, Blythe and Flower derived 484 amino acid propensity scales from the aa index and found that even the best set of scales and parameters performed only marginally better than random methods. They recommended the use of more sophisticated methods for epitope prediction (). Other research works have tried to use machine learning methods such as Hidden Markov Model (), Recurrent Neural Network () and Support Vector Machine () to improve performance for linear epitope prediction. The other form of b cell epitope is called conformational epitope. A conformational epitope consists of discontinuous stretches of residues that are tightly connected after folding in 3D space. As over 90% of epitopes are conformational () and an increasing number of protein structures have recently become available, close attention has been shifted to the problem of conformational epitope prediction (). disco top e () is one of the first methods to study conformational epitopes based on structural data. It combines the structural proximity sum of sequentially smoothed log odds ratios with contact numbers to derive a prediction score. Another novelty of the method is that it uses the concept of structural window to smooth the physicochemical propensities. A later method called elli pro () takes advantage of the PI () and makes use of a residue clustering algorithm to predict both linear and conformational b cell epitopes for a protein sequence or protein structure. elli pro does not have a training process, but the parameter thresholds must be set before implementation. The SEPPA method () introduces a novel concept of 'unit patch of residue triangle' to describe the local spatial context *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com of the protein surface. It also incorporates clustering coefficients to describe the spatial compactness of surface residues for epitope prediction. A more recent work in this area is the antibody specific b cell epitope prediction (). This method can accurately predict the more useful antibody specific epitopes rather than antigenic residues. But it requires more prior information, e.g. antibody structure or sequence information. It is not applicable to a new virus when its antibody is unknown. In spite of intensive research, the prediction performance by all of these methods still needs much improvement. In this work, we propose a much more accurate epitope prediction method named cee pre (Conformational epitope prediction). Two new ideas are adopted by cee pre. First, cee pre uses a new feature B factor in the learning process, combined with many other physicochemical, statistical, evolutionary and structural features of the residues. These features are also extended by a sequence window and a structure window to derive composite features. B factor is an important parameter of protein X-ray crystallography. It measures the flexibility rigidity of residues atoms in a protein 3D structure. A higher B factor score implies more flexibility of the atom residue. It has been found that low B factors are usually distributed at the core of unbound interfaces (). The second new idea is that cee pre is a two stage model under the random forest learning process (). In the first stage, the original 304 features are used to predict the potential antigenic residues. In the second stage, the predicted class labels from the first stage are added to the feature space to cluster nearby antigenic residues to form epitopes and remove isolated antigenic or non antigenic residue predictions. This idea is based on the hypothesis that the aggregated antigenic residues are more likely to constitute epitopes, while the isolated antigenic residues are probably wrongly predicted. This idea is effective to eliminate self-made prediction errors to obtain really meaningful final results. cee pre is tested on a set of 55 epitopes from 45 tertiary antigen structures. The result shows that cee pre significantly outperforms all existing structure based epitope predictors disco top e elli pro and SEPPA). With a comprehensive analysis of the important features suggested by random forests in the epitope prediction, it is found that B factor, relative accessible surface area (RSA) and PI play an important role in improving prediction performance. Our analysis also confirms that whether a residue is involved in an epitope is affected by nearby residues both in sequence and in space, and thus it is a good idea to use both the sequence and structure window to construct the feature vector.

conclusion in this article, we have proposed cee pre for conformational b cell epitope prediction. cee pre has a two stage learning strategy for the random forest algorithm to identify clusters of antigenic residues. It incorporates various basic features as well as extended composite features through a sequence window and a structure window. Of these features, B factor is used for the first time for b cell epitope prediction It has been found to be effective in epitope prediction. To be practically useful, a tertiary structure dataset has been constructed for the training of our prediction method and has also been used in the evaluation of cee pre. Compared with three widely used structure based epitope prediction models, our cee pre shows a significant improvement in prediction performance for deep case studies, cee pre has been applied to the epitope prediction for two antigens that are distantly related to our training data. One antigen is an HIV antigen, the other is an influenza antigen. It has been found that cee pre not only obtains more accurate predictions of epitope residues but also forms more meaningful epitope predictions by clustering adjacent residues.
