Motivation: Most rnase q data analysis software packages are not designed to handle the complexities involved in properly apportioning short sequencing reads to highly repetitive regions of the genome. These regions are often occupied by transposable elements (TEs), which make up between 20 and 80% of eukaryotic genomes. They can contribute a substantial portion of transcript omic and genomic sequence reads, but are typically ignored in most analyses. Results: Here, we present a method and software package for including both gene and te associated ambiguously mapped reads in differential expression analysis. Our method shows improved recovery of TE transcripts over other published expression analysis methods, in both synthetic data and qPCR/ nano string validated published datasets. Availability and implementation: The source code, associated GTF files for TE annotation, and testing data are freely available at

introduction transposable elements are mobile DNA elements that constitute a large fraction of most eukaryotic genomes. These parasitic genetic elements propagate by multiplying within the genomes of host cells and can be passed from generation to generation through the germline lineage. Although the majority of TE copies are non-functional, a subset has retained the ability to transcribe and mobilize (). Although retrotransposons require an RNA intermediate to transpose, both DNA and RNA transposons are transcribed from the genome, and they can accumulate in conditions such as cancer (), neurodegenerative diseases (), as well as during embryogenesis (), neural development () and aging (). However, te associated reads are often discarded in sequencing data analyses because of the uncertainty in attributing ambiguously mapped reads to these regions, despite some previous attempts to integrate them in downstream analyses (). Here, we present a program called te transcripts that allows users to analyze both gene and te associated reads concurrently in one simplified workflow.

discussion transcripts derived from TEs form a small but important subset of all transcript omic datasets. Often thought of as junk transcripts with little importance for biological phenotypes, TEs can play a large and unexpected role in important processes such as stem cell identity and reprogramming (), and in human diseases (). Although te derived transcripts should be included as part of standard expression analyses, there have previously been few tools that allow the easy inclusion of te associated reads. te transcripts allows users to simultaneously analyze gene and te derived transcripts in a simple expression analysis framework that works with aligned (BAM) files and annotation files (GTF). Using simulated reads as well as published datasets that include independent validations, we have shown that te transcripts outperforms all other published methods in abundance estimation, and concordance between statistical significance estimation and validated alterations in expression. In simulated datasets, we show that te transcripts performs particularly well at estimating the abundance of young TEs, which are more likely to be mobile and active in cells. In published datasets for both fly and mouse genomes, we show that alterations in TE expression estimated from rnase q data by te transcripts show better overall concordance with external validation data. te transcripts particularly outperforms other methods for complex mammalian genomes, such as the mouse, which has many more insertions per TE than flies, and a larger diversity in TE families. As with all approaches that quantify RNA expression from alignment data, te transcripts is highly dependent on the quality of the genomic alignment and annotation data (for genes and transposable elements). This is especially problematic when working with strains or cultivars whose DNA sequences and transposable element content have diverged significantly from the 'reference' genome and annotations. te transcripts mitigates this limitation by providing flexibility in the input files provided by the user. Our software is agnostic to the genomic aligner and mapping parameters used to generate the input alignment files, as long as it complies with the samba m format. This enables users to optimize genome alignment parameters according to the characteristics of their experimental system before analysis with te transcripts. te transcripts can also utilize user defined annotations for both gene and transposable elements during quantification. Although we have provided transposable element annotation files for a few common genomes, our software will process any TE annotations in the GTF format described earlier. These could include TE annotations that have been manually curated for a specific strain, or those identified by bioinformatics tools searching for de novo transposable elements. This will allow users to provide the best annotation data suitable for their experiment, and maximizes the quality of analysis produced by te transcripts
