Motivation: Uncovering mechanisms underlying gene expression control is crucial to understand complex cellular responses. Studies in gene regulation often aim to identify regulatory players involved in a biological process of interest, either transcription factors co regulating a set of target genes or genes eventually controlled by a set of regulators. These are frequently prioritized with respect to a context specific relevance score. Current approaches rely on relevance measures accounting exclusively for direct transcription factor target interactions, namely overrepresentation of binding sites or target ratios. Gene regulation has, however, intricate behavior with overlapping, indirect effect that should not be neglected. In addition, the rapid accumulation of regulatory data already enables the prediction of large scale networks suitable for higher level exploration by methods based on graph theory. A paradigm shift is thus emerging, where isolated and constrained analyses will likely be replaced by whole network systemic aware strategies. Results: We present t frank a graph based framework to prioritize regulatory players involved in transcriptional responses within the regulatory network of an organism, whereby every regulatory path containing genes of interest is explored and incorporated into the analysis. t frank selected important regulators of yeast adaptation to stress induced by quinine and acetic acid, which were missed by a direct effect approach. Notably, they reportedly confer resistance toward the chemicals. In a preliminary study in human, t frank unveiled regulators involved in breast tumor growth and metastasis when applied to genes whose expression signatures correlated with short interval to metastasis. Availability: Prototype at http://kdbio.inesc-id.pt/software/tfrank/.

introduction transcription is the first step in the flow of biological information from genome to proteome and its tight regulation serves as a crucial * To whom correspondence should be addressed. checkpoint in most biological processes. Transcriptional control often results from the concerted action of diverse transcription factors (TFs), acting alone or as interacting partners, regulating or being targeted, and participating in complex feedback loops (). genome wide studies have been unveiling intricate regulatory networks with increasing layers of complexity as the hierarchy is amplified, empowered by the rapid accumulation of regulatory data in public repositories. Namely, yeas tract () contains tf target links for Saccharomyces cerevisiae, while JASPAR () and TRANSFAC () collect binding sites and position specific scoring matrices for diverse eukaryotes including human. These data provide information on the topology of the regulatory network, which is static and thus not sufficient per se to determine whether a given association is relevant or not in a specific biological context. In fact, binding of a given TF to the promoter region of its target(s) is rather an intermittent event triggered by biochemical stimuli and ultimately leading to changes in expression. Insight on the mechanisms underlying the stimulus response effect can only be achieved through an integrated study of control and behavior, where three challenges often arise: (i) identification of regulators of genes involved in a similar, related biological process; (ii) identification of genes co regulated by a group of TFs of interest; and (iii) prioritization of regulators, target genes or regulatory interactions with respect to a measure of relevance expressing their contribution within the regulatory network under study. Diverse strategies have been proposed to address the first challenge. A popular one is to rank TFs based on the ratio of genes targeted in the dataset under analysis. This score can be normalized by the relative number of targets in the genome to avoid excessive bias toward TFs controlling very large regulon s (). Alternatively, methods may rely on a statistical framework to discover enriched target binding sites by calculating their overrepresentation in the test sequences against a background model estimated from a collection of (randomly) selected sequences (), eventually considering cross species conservation (). A drawback of such procedure is that results are highly susceptible to the choice of the background model and variations on the statistical parameters. Other strategies have overcome this limitation by computing the genome wide overrepresentation of binding sites (Page: 3150 31493157), improved through comparative analysis with orthologous sequences based on phylogenetic footprinting. Regulatory associations have also been uncovered from expression data alone () by searching for correlation of expression profiles under the assumption that TFs tend to express coherently with their targets. However, this is often not the case. In addition, these techniques tend to ignore physical binding and thus generate a larger number of false positives (). The issue was recently mitigated by incorporating binding, expression data and three types of control: regulation, activation and inhibition (). Most methods for the second challenge are experimental, relying on chip chip and DNA microarray assays to find putative targets. Computationally, the problem has been addressed by computing the genome wide enrichment of binding sites (), or the correlation between the expression of each gene with the composite expression of sets of genes pertaining identical binding sites (). All revised approaches include some form of prioritization based on a relevance score and most are able to test large scale data. Nonetheless, they restrict to direct neighbors in the network, disregarding overlapping control and systemic effects of utter importance in gene regulation, where cascade responses proliferate. This systemic perspective was supported in recent work by, suggesting that evolution might lead to the introduction of new layers of control between TFs and their targets. Embedding this knowledge into the relevance score would likely increase informativeness and accuracy in determining key regulatory players, particularly when coupled with the ability to direct the search toward wider purposed or more specific regulators (). Another characteristic of the methods reviewed herein is that they are mostly sequence driven and thus not tailored for the study of higher level hypothesis on gene regulation. Notably, their ability to predict tf target affinities can be exploited in a first step to derive regulations and build large scale regulatory networks for methods based on graph theory, known to deliver effective and efficient network analysis. Notably, network motif mining has been successfully applied to the identification of regulatory modules (). This technique aims to partition the network in coherent groups and is thus more appropriate for finding subgroups of activity rather than studying the composite effect generating a particular response. In this article, we present t frank a method to prioritize regulatory players, involved in a process of interest, considering all known regulatory paths of a given organism. The most common use case is to rank the TFs controlling a set of genes responsive under specific conditions, according to a score calculated as follows. Each gene in the network is given an initial weight indicative of its presence (or absence) in (from) the gene set. Expression values or any alternative measure of importance may be used. A personalized ranking strategy is then applied to propagate the weights through the network graph in the target tf direction. For the prioritization of targets of a set of regulators, the diffusion is performed in the tf target direction instead. t frank is independent from network construction and may be applied to any organism with available tf target interactions. t frank provides: (i) full topology analysis including alternative regulatory paths with intermediate layers of control; (ii) ability to regulate preference for more global or local players; (iii) integrated stimulus response analysis of (static) binding and (dynamic) response; (iv) potential incorporation of interaction confidence scores; and (v) normalization to mitigate bias toward TFs with a large number of targets or genes acted upon by a large number of regulators. We evaluate the contribution of each t frank parameter to the ranking on real data. We test the effectiveness of t frank to unravel regulators potentially involved in the transcriptional control of biological processes in yeast and human. For yeast, we examine the TFs output by t frank for two sets of genes upregulated in response to stress induced by the antimalarial drug quinine and the food preservative acetic acid. For human, we present a preliminary study of the t frank suggested regulators of genes whose expression signature has been previously associated with short interval to metastasis in breast cancer.

conclusion we presented t frank a graph based framework to identify relevant regulators mediating specific transcriptional responses through whole network analysis of gene activity. t frank successfully highlighted regulators potentially involved in the yeast response to quinine and acetic acid induced stresses. In a preliminary study in human, t frank revealed TFs presumably controlling genes related to metastasis in breast cancer. We observed that by assuming a systemic rather than isolated TF action perspective, t frank captured valuable information about the regulatory mechanisms that would not have been unveiled otherwise. We showed that this strategy provides adequate parameters to effectively control the level of regulatory specificity for the problem under study, fine tune tf target association scores and incorporate expression levels or alternative measures of relevance into the input gene list. t frank relies on an additive model to compute the relevance score, which requires additional care when mixing positive and negative input values. A potential workaround is to analyze genes in two distinct groups or to use absolute values. The presented case studies supported t frank as a promising tool to unveil important TFs, despite the real set of regulations active in the process under study remained undisclosed (all known tf target interactions were used).
