In recent years, the improvement of mass spectrometry based gly comics techniques (i.e. highly sensitive, quantitative and high throughput analytical tools) has enabled us to obtain a large dataset of glycans. Here we present a database named xeno gly comics database (XDB) that contains cell or tissue specific pig gly comes analyzed with mass spectrometry based techniques, including a comprehensive pig glycan information on chemical structures , mass values, types and relative quantities. It was designed as a user friendly web based interface that allows users to query the database according to pig tissue cell types or glycan masses. This database will contribute in providing qualitative and quantitative information on gly comes characterized from various pig cells organs in xenotransplantation and might eventually provide new targets in the 13 galactosyltransferase gene knock out pigs era. Availability: The database can be accessed on the web at

introduction cell surface carbohydrates can act as ligand molecules for diverse biological processes such as cell cell interaction, signal transduction, metastasis and so forth (). Especially in pig to human xenotransplantation, the interaction between terminal gal (Gal1-3Gal-R) antigens on zz pig tissues or cells' surfaces and circulating natural human antibodies lead to hyper acute immune rejection (). Despite the development of 13 galactosyltransferase gene knock out pigs, unidentified non gal antigens remain as possible factors triggering delayed xenograft rejection (). Thus, the comprehensive identification of gal and non gal carbohydrate antigens from pig tissues and cells is essential for successful xenotransplantation. During the past decades, several databases have been developed to assist the assignment, annotation and interpretation of glycan and glycoconjugates datasets (). However, none of them systematically classify and update the pig glycans according to the specific pig tissues and cells. Qualitative and quantitative information on the glycan antigens, which play an important role in immune rejection, is also lacking. Here, we have built up a relational database xeno gly comics database (XDB)] from specific pathogen free Chicago Medical School miniature pig () glycan profiles, which have been qualitatively and quantitatively characterized by various mass spectrometry based techniques (Supplementary Data). It includes n gly comes from pig kidney (), endothelial cells, islets (), corneal endothelial cells, kera to cytes (), heart and glyco sphingolipid derived glycans from pig endothelial cells and islets (). The o gly comes from pig kidney, endothelial cells () and heart (accepted) are also included. This specialized pig gly come database will offer a new insight into pig to human xenotransplantation as well as into many different areas of biological and biomedical research.
