Motivation: The gene concept has recently changed from the classical one protein notion into a much more diverse picture, where overlapping or fused transcripts, alternative transcription initiation, and genes within genes, add to the complexity generated by alternative splicing. Increased understanding of the mechanisms controlling pre mrna splicing is thus important for a wide range of aspects relating to gene expression. Results: We have discovered a convex gene delineating pattern in the strength of 5 intron splice sites. When comparing the strengths of 18 000 intron containing Human genes, we found that when analysing them separately according to the number of introns they contain, initial splice sites were always stronger on average than subsequent ones, and that a similar reversed trend exist towards the terminal gene part. The convex pattern is strongest for genes with up to 10 introns. Interestingly, when analysing the intron containing gene pool from mouse consisting of 15 000 genes, we found the convex pattern to be conserved despite 75 million years of evolutionary divergence between the two organisms. We also analysed an interesting, novel class of chimeric genes which during spliceosome assembly are fused and in tandem are transcribed and spliced into a single mature mRNA sequence. In their splice site patterns, these genes individually seem to deviate from the convex pattern, offering a possible rationale behind their fusion into a single transcript.

introduction for protein coding genes, the most significant variety spawning factor is the process responsible for intron removal (). Here the binding reaction between the highly conserved U1 snRNA 5 terminus and the pre mrna intron donor splice site motif is the first and most crucial step (). The consensus sequence of human donor splice sites, the sequence motif which U1 snRNA recognizes, reflects an 'average' complementarity to U1 snRNA (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). The calculation of the free energy of the base pairing between the U1 snRNA 5 terminus and donor site motif has previously been performed as an effective strategy to study binding stability and the strength of donor splice sites ().

discussion in this analysis, we have used the U1-donor splice sites motif complementarity to assess the strength of a particular splice site. However, many other factors affect tissue specific splicing in vivo including splicing enhancers, silencers, trans-acting factors, accept or site motifs, branch point sequences, RNA secondary structure, nucleosome, chromatin and iso chore features (). Given this additional complexity, it is not surprising that we could not find the bell shaped pattern present in every single Human and mouse gene just by investigating one of the contributing factors, the U1-donor site association. Different splicing regulatory elements compensate for weaker splice sites in a coevolutionary network (). Additionally, as already mentioned above the size of exons and introns correlates with the strength of splice sites and there is no obvious way to quantitatively assess or make compensation for all these factors in the analysis presented here (see supplementary for statistics involving splicing enhancers). The conclusion from this analysis is that spliced Human genes seem to contain on average a 'delineation trend' in the donor splice sites, which may play a key role in spliceosome recognition. This role may be most significant in the set of genes where the trend is present at the level of single genes (10% of the gene pool), or it may go far beyond that depending on the contributions of the many other splicing site strength influencing factors mentioned above. Despite 75 millions of years of divergence, mouse genes display the exact same trend. The discovery can not answer the puzzle of spliceosomal intron evolution or why genes are intervened by introns, but it highlights an interesting pattern which in very different types of introns (both within coding regions and UTRs) seem to be subject to similar evolutionary pressures conserving the trend in strength. It also suggests a potential future direction for comparative analysis of spliced genes and gene structure prediction (including splice site prediction) by defining gene categories according to the number of introns they contain.
