Motivation: Phosphorylation by protein kinases is a central theme in biological systems. Aberrant protein kinase activity has been implicated in a variety of human diseases (e.g. cancer). Therefore, modulation of kinase activity represents an attractive therapeutic approach for the treatment of human illnesses. Thus, identification of signature peptides is crucial for protein kinase targeting and can be achieved by using pam chip microarray technology. We propose a flexible semiparametric mixed model for analyzing pam chip data. This approach enables the estimation of the phosphorylation rate (Velocity) as a function of time together with pointwise confidence intervals. Results: Using a publicly available dataset, we show that our model is capable of adequately fitting the kinase activity profiles and provides velocity estimates over time. Moreover, it allows to test for differences in the velocity of kinase inhibition between responding and non responding cell lines. This can be done at individual time point as well as for the entire velocity profile.

introduction scientific advances in biotechnology bring us in a new era of targeted therapies and personalized medicine. Biomarkers are essential for selecting patients that benefit from certain treatments, and biomarker discovery is nowadays driven by novel platforms that measure more biological properties more precisely. Evidently, these technological advances often require the development of optimal analysis approaches for its generated data in order to increase its detection power. Here, we propose a statistical model to efficiently analyze output from pam chip microarrays. These high content peptide arrays are capable of measuring phosphorylation changes over time for more than hundred peptides simultaneously (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed compared to conventional microarrays, pam chips have two main advantages. First, proteins are closer to phenotypic expression than DNA or mRNA profiles. Second, pam chips are not measuring concentrations but biological activity, i.e. phosphorylation over time. An important application area of pam chip microarrays is the study of protein kinase activity (). Protein kinase inhibitors can specifically block key signaling pathways in cancer, making kinases very popular targets in anticancer targeted therapy discovery programs (). pam chip microarrays have a very distinct technical design (see Section 1 of the Supplementary Material for more details) and the data properties of the pam chip read-out are a typical compared with more traditional microarrays. Hence, specific data analysis pipeline has to be developed for pam chip microarrays. In this article, we demonstrate the statistical methodology to model the kinase activity profiles and thereby estimate the phosphorylation rate, referred to as velocity. With the proposed approach, phosphorylation rates can be investigated and tested for each peptide. The article is organized as follows. Section 2 describes a real life pam chip microarray experiment that is used to demonstrate our method. In Section 3, we describe existing methods for analyzing pam chip array data and motivate our approach. In Section 4, we give a brief review of penalized smoothing splines formulated as mixed models, specify the proposed model, specifically adapt it to the pam chip array data at hand and focus on the inference problem of this study. The results are given in Section 5. The discussion and conclusions are presented in Sections 6 and 7, respectively.

discussion protein kinases are key regulators of important cellular processes, including growth, stress response, differentiation and apoptosis. For drug development, signal transduction research and clinical research, in depth insight in the effects of stimuli on multiple protein kinases is often required in order to fully understand the effects of kinase inhibitors. The novel pam chip technology enables us to monitor kinase activity in a highly multiplex setting with wide range of peptides. We have proposed a semiparametric mixed model to analyze pam chip array data. Our aim was to model the kinase activity profiles and estimate the rate of phosphorylation (velocity) over time. The proposed approach is capable of modeling these Page: 2864 28592865

CONCLUSION
