BioPAX is a community developed standard language for biological pathway data. A key functionality required for efficient BioPAX data exchange is validation detecting errors and inconsistencies in BioPAX documents. The BioPAX Validator is a command line tool, Java library and online web service for BioPAX that performs 4100 classes of consistency checks. Availability and implementation: The validator recognizes common syntactic errors and semantic inconsistencies and reports them in a customizable human readable format. It can also automatically fix some errors and normalize BioPAX data. Since its release, the valida-tor has become a critical tool for the pathway informatics community, detecting thousands of errors and helping substantially increase the conformity and uniformity of biopax formatted data. The BioPAX Validator is open source and released under LGPL v3 license. All sources, binaries and documentation can be found at sf.

introduction biopax () is a community developed standard language for biological pathway data. BioPAX is defined in Web Ontology Language (OWL) and can represent a broad spectrum of biological processes including metabolic and signaling pathways, molecular interactions and gene networks. path guide org () lists the pathway databases and tools that support BioPAX. Owing to the complexity of biological pathway knowledge and the rapid growth of the BioPAX corpus, manual validation and review of data exports is impractical. Unless this process is automated, a substantial number of errors would be left undetected and propagate to other resources and tools, making it more difficult for researchers to use pathway data, for each user must debug the errors, trace its origin and contact the data providers to fix them. Other xml encoded systems biology standards have developed custom validator services (). Although generic OWL validators can be used to perform basic BioPAX validation, they are not sufficient. The BioPAX specification contains a number of best practices and constraints that can not be formally defined in OWL (e.g. regarding external ontology terms, standard identifiers or the constraint that each side of a transport interaction must contain participants from different cellular compartments). Checking some of these rules requires accessing external databases and non owl ontologies. Other constraints can only be checked algorithmically, such as circular nesting of protein complexes. Moreover, a tiered reporting format is required to differentiate between violations of invariants and best practices. We developed a comprehensive BioPAX Validator that recognizes syntactic errors, semantic inconsistencies and violations of best practices in BioPAX models. These are defined as an expandable rule set written in Java and are reported in a human readable (HTML) format or XML. The validator can also normalize BioPAX models based on community defined best practices and automatically fix some common errors. The validator substantially facilitates pathway data integration and analysis by increasing the conformity and uniformity of the available biopax formatted data.
