The great variety of human cell types in morphology and function is due to the diverse gene expression profiles that are governed by the distinctive regulatory networks in different cell types. It is still a challenging task to explain how the regulatory networks achieve the diversity of different cell types. Here, we report on our studies of the design principles of the tissue regulatory system by constructing the regulatory networks of eight human tissues, which subsume the regulatory interactions between transcription factors (TFs), microRNAs (miRNAs) and non tf target genes. The results show that there are in out hubs of high in out degrees in tissue networks. Some hubs (strong hubs) maintain the hub status in all the tissues where they are expressed, whereas others (weak hubs), in spite of their ubiquitous expression, are hubs only in some tissues. The network motifs are mostly feed-forward loops. Some of them having no miRNAs are the common motifs shared by all tissues, whereas the others containing miRNAs are the tissue specific ones owned by one or several tissues, indicating that the transcriptional regulation is more conserved across tissues than the post-transcriptional regulation. In particular, a common bow-tie framework was found that underlies the motif instances and shows diverse patterns in different tissues. Such bow-tie framework reflects the utilization efficiency of the regulatory system as well as its high variability in different tissues, and could serve as the model to further understand the structural adaptation of the regulatory system to the specific requirements of different cell functions.

introduction there are some hundred of cell types in the human body harboring the same genome, but showing quite diverse behaviors in morphology and biological functions. This suggests that the cells of different types are developed by eliciting different gene regulatory networks, all encoded in the human genome bent abou de). This raises a number of questions: what is the mechanism that governs the activation of different gene regulatory networks? Are the gene regulatory networks accounting for the different types of cells designed under a same principle or architectural framework? What kinds of differences in regulatory * To whom correspondence should be addressed the authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. networks contribute to the diversity of cell types? These are key questions in understanding the mechanisms underlying the specific functions of different cell types and are essential for cell regeneration that closely relates to the treatment of tissue damage and injury involved in various diseases. The gene regulatory network of a cell is supposed to contain the comprehensive regulatory information governing the gene expression in this cell. In previous works, the gene regulatory network mainly referred to the transcriptional network which depicts the regulations at transcriptional level (). Nevertheless, the microRNA (miRNA), a small RNA that negatively regulates the gene expression at post-transcriptional level by binding to the mRNA sequences of its target gene, was found at the end of the 20th century (). So far, 20 000 microRNAs of different species have been identified (), and many useful databases and effective tools that are used to predict the targets of miRNAs have been developed (). This gives the possibility to construct a more comprehensive map of gene regulatory networks for certain cell types by integrating transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations of gene expression. Nowadays, there are several studies on the gene regulatory networks covering both the transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation of genes. For example, pil pel and co-workers constructed a global mirna tf regulatory network for mammalian and studied the combinatory regulations between TFs and miRNAs according to the local and global architecture of the network ().investigated the biological functions of miRNAs by pursuing the miRNA motif profiles in the mirna tf regulatory network (developed an integrated strategy to construct and analyze the gene regulatory network from high throughput sequencing data (). However, all of these works are focused on the genome wide level. Studies about the regulatory networks of specific tissues and their design principles are largely missing. Here, we constructed the large scale gene regulatory networks of eight human tissues and investigated their design principles from the perspective of three levels, i.e. the local structure of vertices (i.e. degrees), the small circuits (i.e. network motifs) and the assembly of small circuits. Our results show that the tissue specific regulatory networks (TRNs) constructed and analyzed here contain hub nodes, the specific features of which may vary considerably among the tissues investigated. The different TRNs also vary significantly with regard to the composition of topological motifs, the instances of which are organized in a bow-tie structure. The bow-tie structures

discussion the networks constructed here comprise edges that, to the best of our knowledge, are predicted by the most reliable approaches available. As for the mirna target relations, we took the union of the results of a number of predictors (see Section 2). Concerning the tf target connections, we are confident that we successfully minimized the false positive rate, since a high percentage of the predicted edges could be recovered from available high throughput datasets as well (). The trade-off of this attempt, however, certainly was a considerable false negative rate. It should thus be noted that the networks presented here are only based on the subset of TFBS with highest affinity and conserva tivity to which we attribute the property of being 'seed' sites (in preparation). These seed sites are assumed to play a particular role in flagging promoter regions, and thus would nicely coincide with the recently published concept of 'pioneer factors' (). As a first attempt to globally characterize a network, the degree distribution is usually analyzed. The TRNs constructed here show a kind of mixed power law exponential (or broad scale distribution, or 'truncated scale free with their power law exponents in the range of 0.82.4) degree distribution, which may be more on the power law side in case of all in degree distributions, or more on the exponential side for the miRNA out degree distribution. In any case, however, we observed that most nodes of our TRNs exhibit a low connectivity, while very few nodes show a very high degree. We therefore felt that the concept of hub nodes is applicable to the networks constructed and studied here. Different functional types of hubs can be distinguished in the TRNs, depending on the nature of the genes and whether they are in or out hubs. The tf mirna in hubs (e.g. E2F3 and SOX2 in brain, test is and prostate, RUNX2 in heart and liver and hsa-miR124 in brain and prostate) act as the central processors, receiving and integrating a great many of regulatory input from upstream regulators and re-distribute it to the downstream genes, whereas the tf mirna out hubs (e.g. ATF6, MYC, hsa-miR-29A and hsalet-7B in all the eight tissues) act as central coordinators because they regulate large numbers of targets. Interestingly, some TFs and miRNAs are both in and out hubs (e.g. RUNX3 in test is ovary, spleen and prostate, BCL6 and hsa-miR-22 in all the eight tissues), acting as the central processors as well as central coordinators. In contrast, the non tf in hubs (e.g. MAPK4 in brain, prostate and liver, AK2 in all of the eight tissues) may be central executors in the downstream biological processes since they are the terminal genes in regulation whose expression level is finely controlled by complex regulation. In contrast to the majority of genes in the TRNs (Supplementary), the in out hubs show a clear tendency to be shared by multiple tissues. This may relate to an efficient utilization of the gene regulatory system. There shows two kinds of hubs according to hub behaviors in different tissues. One type preserves its hub status in all the tissues they are expressed in (strong hubs), whereas hubs of the other type switch into a non hub in some of the tissues where they are expressed (weak hubs). More miRNA than TF hubs, in particular almost all miRNA out hubs are strong hubs (Supplementary). Thus, the local structures around miRNA hubs are more conserved across
