Motivation: Alignments of protein protein interaction networks pp in can be used to predict protein function, study conserved aspects of the interactome, and to establish evolutionary correspondences. Within this problem context, determining multiple network alignments mn a is a significant challenge that involves high computational complexity. A limited number of public mn a implementations are available currently and the majority of the pairwise network alignment (PNA) algorithms do not have mn a counterparts. Furthermore, current mn a algorithms do not allow choosing a specific pp in relative to which an mn a could be constructed. Also, once an mn a is obtained , it can not easily be modified, such as through addition of a new network, without expensive re-computation of the entire mn a. Results: SMAL scaffold based Multiple Network Aligner) is a public, open source web based application for determining mn as from existing PNAs that addresses all the aforementioned challenges. With SMAL, PNAs can be combined rapidly to obtain an mn a. The software also supports visualiza-tion and user data interactions to facilitate exploratory analysis and sensemaking. SMAL is especially useful when multiple alignments relative to a particular pp in are required; furthermore, SMAL alignments are persistent in that existing correspondences between networks (obtained during PNA or mn a are not lost as new networks are added. In comparative studies alongside existent mn a techniques , SMAL mn as were found to be superior per a number of measures, such as the total number of identified homologs and intero logs as well as the fraction of all identified correspondences that are functionally similar or homologous to the scaffold. While directed primarily at pp in alignment SMAL is a generic network aligner and may be applied to arbitrary networks. Availability information: The SMAL web server and source code

introduction network alignment, in both the pairwise alignment and multiple network alignment mn a formulations, is an np hard problem. Of these formulations, in practice, mn a requires significantly greater time to compute. Understandably therefore, at the state of the art the number of pairwise network alignment (PNA) algorithms and software significantly surpasses those for mn a. However, with increasing availability of interactome s the ability to compare p pins across species through mn a becomes increasingly critical for a spectrum of problems including identification of conserved functional components, function prediction and phylogenetics. SMAL scaffold based Multiple Network Aligner) incorporates a number of operational and theoretical novelties: (i) unlike current mn a methods, it allows mn a construction with respect to
