Motivation: Understanding the association between genetic diseases and their causal genes is an important problem concerning human health. With the recent influx of high throughput data describing interactions between gene products, scientists have been provided a new avenue through which these associations can be inferred. Despite the recent interest in this problem, however, there is little understanding of the relative benefits and drawbacks underlying the proposed techniques. Results: We assessed the utility of physical protein interactions for determining gene disease associations by examining the performance of seven recently developed computational methods (plus several of their variants). We found that random walk approaches individually outperform clustering and neighborhood approaches, although most methods make predictions not made by any other method. We show how combining these methods into a consensus method yields Pareto optimal performance. We also quantified how a diffuse topological distribution of disease related proteins negatively affects prediction quality and are thus able to identify diseases especially amenable to network based predictions and others for which additional information sources are absolutely required. Availability: The predictions made by each algorithm considered are available online at

introduction to understand the molecular basis of genetic diseases, it is important to discover their causal genes. Typically, a disease is associated with a linkage interval on the chromosome if single nucleotide polymorphism (SNPs) in the interval are correlated with an increased susceptibility to the disease (). These linkage intervals define a set of candidate disease causing genes. Genes related to the same disease are also known to have protein products that physically interact (). A class of computational approaches have recently been proposed * To whom correspondence should be addressed. that exploit these two sources of information physical interaction networks and linkage intervals to predict associations between genes and diseases (). Previous studies () typically begin with an artificial disease subinterval and test how well they can identify a known causal gene from among a fixed number of nearby genes in the query subinterval. In this article, instead of ranking only genes in the subinterval, we rank all genes in all intervals related to a query disease. This more stringent approach is advantageous because it allows us to find disease causing genes that lie in existing disease intervals but that were previously not associated with the disease. Consequently, we can gauge a gene's relatedness to any query disease. Several techniques for uncovering gene disease associations take an integrative approach, leveraging Gene Ontology annotations (), gene expression (), protein sequence (), biological pathways (), text mining (), transcription factor binding sites () and various phenotypic traits of diseases (). Recent studies () have suggested that network based predictions can be of comparable quality with current integrative approaches. We focus here on isolating protein protein interaction (PPI) networks and linkage intervals to determine how much information is readily extractable from them for predicting gene disease associations. Any improved network based analysis can subsequently be incorporated into a more comprehensive, integrative system (). We compare approaches based on direct network neighbors (, and neighborhood), unsupervised graph partitioning [graph summarization (GS;) and Markov clustering (MCL;, semi supervised graph partitioning vi cut random walks () and network flow (), plus several of their variants see and Section 2). Trends in the precision and recall achieved by these computational methods yield several insights about the utility of PPI networks for uncovering gene disease associations. We find that random walk approaches outperform all other tested classes of methodologies, with performance ranging from high precision and low recall (92% and 1%, respectively) to low precision and mediocre recall (17% and 38%, respectively) based on the parameters used. The graph clustering methods, which have not previously been tested in this domain, mostly perform better than the neighborhood approaches. When only using linkage intervals (without the network), we find substantially lower performance, as is the case when using only the network (without linkage intervals). However, in this latter scenario, graph clustering methods can be more precise than the other methodologies. This suggests that the proper choice of method and parameters depends on the setting. We also quantify the relationship between the quality of predictions for a disease and the topological distribution of its related proteins in the network. As one would expect, we obtain better results for diseases whose proteins are situated near one another in the network. The measured relationship between closeness homo phil y and performance can be used to estimate precision and recall per disease a priori. The lower precision observed on diseases whose genes are spread apart in the network also suggests that making high quality predictions for these diseases warrants the integration of more information sources and is where future computational efforts should be directed. We compare the actual predictions made by each method and find that most methods make some correct predictions not made by any other method, and that there are very few incorrect predictions made by multiple methods. Consequently, we show that combining these methods using a consensus Random Forest classifier results in Pareto optimal performance. Given the wide range of approaches considered, the consensus method may be considered the current performance of the network itself for determining gene disease associations.

DISCUSSION

conclusion the classes of network based methods considered here each approached the task of predicting gene disease associations using very different philosophies. Although random walk approaches are superior to clustering and neighborhood approaches, we showed that all methods make unique predictions and can be used together to increase performance. We also quantified the relationship between disease homo phil y and prediction quality, and found certain diseases for which high throughput PPI networks were an especially useful source from which to make high quality predictions. Diseases that have little correlation with the interaction network call for higher quality networks or an integrative approach that considers sequence, functional annotations, expression data or other additional information. Funding: National Science Foundation (0812111 and 0849899 to C.K.).
