The semantic measures library and toolkit are robust open source and easy to use software solutions dedicated to semantic measures. They can be used for large scale computations and analyses of semantic similarities between terms concepts defined in terminologies and ontologies. The comparison of entities (e.g. genes) annotated by concepts is also supported. A large collection of measures is available. Not limited to a specific application context, the library and the toolkit can be used with various controlled vocabularies and ontology specifications (e.g. Open Biomedical Ontology, Resource Description Framework). The project targets both designers and practitioners of semantic measures providing a JAVA library, as well as a command line tool that can be used on personal computers or computer clusters.

introduction biomedical ontologies provide well structured and controlled vocabularies of specific domains, e.g. biological processes and clinical healthcare terminology. They are increasingly used to drive data integration, information retrieval, data annotations and decision support, to cite a few ().Open repositories such as the Open Biomedical Ontology (OBO) Foundry or bio portal () provide access to hundreds of biomedical ontologies expressed in various formats, e.g. Resource Description Framework (RDF), OBO, Web Ontology Language (OWL). These structured vocabularies are used to characterize entities through conceptual annotations. For instance, genes (products) can be annotated by Gene Ontology (GO) terms to define their molecular functions, their cellular locations or the biological processes in which they are involved (). Those unambiguous annotations can, therefore, be used to query large collections of data taking into account the knowledge defined in the ontology, i.e. practitioners searching for genes annotated to 'nucleoside binding' will also retrieve genes annotated to 'ATP binding', as the ontology specifies that 'ATP binding' is a specific type of 'nucleoside binding'. However, in some cases, exact searches are too constraining, and we search for entities that are similar or related to the query. Such an imprecise search is based on information retrieval techniques that require a function to estimate whether or not two entities are similar or related with regards to their conceptual annotations. Therefore, to exploit ontologies and corresponding annotations, semantic measures are required. They aim to compare concepts by taking into account the semantic space in which they are defined. They can, therefore, be used to assess the degree of likeness of concepts defined in ontologies or between entities annotated by those concepts (). An increasing number of algorithms rely on semantic measures, for instance to analyze genes based on their molecular functions () or related diseases (). Semantic measures can also assist in comparisons of patient records, chemical compounds, diseases or any entity that can be characterized by unambiguous terms or concepts defined in ontologies or thesauri. Numerous communities are involved in the study of semantic measures (e.g. bioinformatics, Natural Language Processing, artificial intelligence and Semantic Web). Owing to their popularity, many measures have been designed for different ontologies and treatments (e.g. gene analysis, information retrieval): a recent survey distinguished tens of measures dedicated to the GO alone (). However, communities focusing on other types of annotated entities (e.g. patient records) also benefit theoretical findings made by studying measures in other specific domains such as molecular biology and vice versa. Nevertheless, most software solutions related to semantic measures are developed for a specific terminology ontology and only focus on a limited set of measures (). To federate efforts related to the design and analysis of semantic measures and to respond to the need for a generic software tool dedicated to them, we developed the semantic measures library (SML). This article presents its benefits for the computation of semantic measures using bio ontologies
