Motivation: Resource description framework (RDF) is an emerging technology for describing, publishing and linking life science data. As a major provider of bioinformatics data and services, the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) is committed to making data readily accessible to the community in ways that meet existing demand. The EBI RDF platform has been developed to meet an increasing demand to coordinate RDF activities across the institute and provides a new entry point to querying and exploring integrated resources available at the EBI.

introduction the European Bioinformatics Institute (EBI) is the largest bioinformatics resource provider in Europe. Our databases are accessible via dedicated interfaces, web services, data download and (in a few cases) direct database access. Modern research in the life sciences necessitates an understanding of data at many different levels: multi omics from cells to biological systems, across many different species and studying many different experimental conditions. The biology underpinning these research questions is intrinsically connected, yet data are often collected and stored in technology or domain specific repositories. Efforts in the Semantic Web community are already beginning to invest in technology that enables data to be readily integrated (). One method used among the Semantic Web community is using the W3C's resource description framework (RDF) model to represent data. RDF provides a common mechanism for describing data and querying data using SPARQL. To better serve complex research questions across resources, and to meet an increased demand on the EBI to produce RDF, we have developed an RDF platform. The aim of such a platform is to offer users the ability to ask questions using multiple connected resources that share common identifiers and have a common format (RDF) and query interface (SPARQL). This platform complements other existing data access modes such as our Web site and RESTful web services, but additionally contains explicit links between the different data resources. This enables a single query to be asked across multiple distributed datasets and across a range of biological domains. This approach has been applied for the following EBI resources: Gene Expression Atlas (), ch embl (), bio models (), Reactome (), bio samples () and also includes a collaboration with the UniProt Consortium to deliver UniProt RDF (). domain (details can be found at http://www.ebi.ac.uk/rdf/documentation/ uri sebi data. Canonical URIs are used when existing databases, such as UniProt, already provide stable URIs. In cases where no canonical URIs are provided by external resources, the identifiers org registry of scientific identifiers () was used to provide a referencing URI. As part of the URI strategy, every effort has been made to ensure all EBI RDF datasets only use URIs that can be dereferenced using http, supporting content negotiation for human orientated HTML views, alongside machine processable versions in various RDF syntaxes. Using common URI schemes assists data integration with RDF. In addition, ontologies provide a mechanism to semantically describe the data, and the OWL ontology language can be serialized in RDF. The EBI makes extensive use of ontologies to annotate data, however, the richness of these annotations is rarely available in native RDF for exploitation by external applications. The EBI RDF platform adopts a range of common vocabularies and ontologies to annotate data. The ontologies used span common biomedical terminologies such as the Gene Ontology, Chemical Entities of Biological Interest, uber on Cell Type Ontology, Biological Pathways Exchange, EFO and more. Additionally, we adopted metadata standards for describing datasets and provenance such as Dublin Core, Data Catalog Vocabulary and Vocabulary of Interlinked Datasets.

conclusion the EBI RDF platform allows explicit links to be made between datasets using shared semantics from standard ontologies and vocabularies, facilitating a greater degree of data integration. SPARQL provides a standard query language for querying RDF data. Data that have been annotated using ontologies, such as EFO and the Gene Ontology, enable data integration with other community datasets and provides the semantics to perform rich queries. Publishing these datasets as RDF along with their ontologies provides both the syntactic and semantic integration of data long promised by semantic web technologies. As the trend toward publishing life science data in RDF increases, we anticipate a rise in the number of applications consuming such data. This is evident in efforts such as the Open ph acts platform (http://www.openphacts.org) and the atlas rdf r package (https://github.com/jamesmalone/ atlas rdf r. Our aim is that the EBI RDF platform enables such applications to be built by releasing production quality services with semantically described RDF to enable pertinent biomedical use cases to be addressed.
