Motivation: Lipids are a large and diverse group of biological molecules with roles in membrane formation, energy storage and signaling. Cellular lipid omes may contain tens of thousands of structures, a staggering degree of complexity whose significance is not yet fully understood. high throughput mass spectrometry based platforms provide a means to study this complexity, but the interpretation of lipid omic data and its integration with prior knowledge of lipid biology suffers from a lack of appropriate tools to manage the data and extract knowledge from it. Results: To facilitate the description and exploration of lipid omic data and its integration with prior biological knowledge, we have developed a knowledge resource for lipids and their biology— swiss lipids. swiss lipids provides curated knowledge of lipid structures and metabolism which is used to generate an in silico library of feasible lipid structures. These are arranged in a hierarchical classification that links mass spectrometry analytical outputs to all possible lipid structures, metabolic reactions and enzymes. swiss lipids provides a reference namespace for lipid omic data publication , data exploration and hypothesis generation. The current version of swiss lipids includes over 244 000 known and theoretically possible lipid structures, over 800 proteins, and curated links to published knowledge from over 620 peer reviewed publications. We are continually updating the swiss lipids hierarchy with new lipid categories and new expert curated knowledge. Availability: swiss lipids is freely available at http://www.swisslipids.org/.

introduction lipids are a large and diverse group of biological molecules that perform a wide variety of biological functions (). They comprise the bulk of membrane bilayers () and energy stores (), provide markers for the recognition and sorting of distinct organelles (), and regulate processes such as cell proliferation and death (), immunity (), angiogenesis, cardio genesis and neurogenesis () and inflammation (). The lipid complement or lipid ome of individual cells may include hundreds of thousands of lipid structures whose occurrence is tightly regulated in response to changes in the cellular environment and lipid availability (;). Dysregulation of the lipid ome is a feature of many pathological conditions including cardiovascular disease (), hypertension (), diabetes () and Alzheimer (), for which lipids may comprise an important source of biomarkers. Pathogens also manipulate the host lipid ome in order to facilitate their own persistence and replication (). Elucidating the roles of lipids in biological systems requires the integration of quantitative measurements of lipid ome composition with knowledge of lipid metabolic pathways, enzymes and interacting proteins. lipid ome composition may be analyzed using mass spectrometry (MS) and tandem mass spectrometry msms based approaches which are able to quantify hundreds of lipid species over a broad dynamic range (da Silveira Dos). These approaches provide information on the atomic composition of intact lipids and their component parts (such as acyl chains) which can be mapped to prior knowledge of lipid structures using a standardized hierarchical notation (). One of the foremost sources of such knowledge is the LIPID MAPS Structure Database lms d which provides a comprehensive classification of over 37 000 lipid structures grouped in 8 major lipid categories fatty acyl s glycero lipids glycero phospholipids sphingolipids, sterol lipids, pre nol lipids, polyketide s and sac charo lipids (). Other resources and tools for the analysis of lipid omic data include lipid blast which provides a library of 120 000 lipid structures (some derived from LIPID MAPS) and associated theoretical tandem mass spectra (), lipid home a database of over 36 million hypothetical glycero lipid and glycero phospholipid structures specifically designed for MS data integration () and Visualization and phospholipid identification (VaLID) which provides a search engine for a library of hypothetical glycero phospholipid structures somewhat similar to those of lipid home (). Specialized software for annotating MS data include lipid xplorer (), mz mine () and Lipid Data Analyzer (). A common feature of all these resources and tools is that they focus mainly on the classification and identification of lipids. Knowledge of lipid biology, including links to metabolic pathways and enzymes, may be found in public knowledge resources such as BRENDA (), hm db (), KEGG (), MetaCyc () and Reactome (). Although KEGG has been used as basis for computational approaches for matching hypothetical structures to pathways (), these knowledge resources do not aim to provide comprehensive coverage of the hundreds of thousands of lipids that may exist in nature here we describe the development of a new knowledge resource that is designed to help connect lipid omics and lipid biology swiss lipids. Our aim in creating swiss lipids was to provide a comprehensive reference database that can be used to describe mass spectrometry based lipid identifications and link them to curated knowledge of lipid structures, metabolic reactions, enzymes and interacting proteins. swiss lipids was created through an iterative process in which prior knowledge of lipid structures and metabolism curated from published literature is used to generate an in silico library of all feasible structures for common lipid categories. These structures form the basis for a hierarchical lipid classification that is consistent with currently accepted lipid omic data notation and the classification of LIPID MAPS. The result is a reference namespace for lipid omic data publication, data exploration and hypothesis generation, allowing users to ask questions such as 'where has this lipid species been seen before?', 'what structures might this lipid species have?', 'what are the relevant metabolic reactions?' and 'what proteins are known to interact with these putative structures?'
