The studies of chromatin 3D structure help us to understand its formation and function. Techniques combining chromosome conformation capture and next generation sequencing can capture chromatin structure information and has been applied to several different species and cell lines. We built 3DGD (3D Genome Database), a database that currently collected Hi-C data on four species, for easy accessing and visualization of chromatin 3D structure data. With the integration of other omics data such as genome wide protein dna binding data, this data source would be useful for researchers interested in chromatin structure and its biological functions. Availability and implementation: The 3DGD v1.1, data browser, downloadable files and documentation are available at: http://3dgd.

introduction the 3D conformation of chromosome in nucleus is relevant with several important biological processes such as gene expression, regulation and replication (). Understanding these relationships would provide a new perspective to the studies of chromatin (). In recent years, the development of chromatin conformation capture techniques, such as Hi-C, allows us to identify the chromatin interactions across the whole genome unbiased ly (). The technique has been applied to several species such as human, mouse, Drosophila and yeast (). These datasets have been shown useful in studying the property and function of chromosome organization (). However, there is still a lack of an integrative data source of these kind of data for easy accessing and visualization. Besides, integrating additional information such as genome annotation and protein binding information could be useful for studying chromatin structure's function (). Recent studies have shown that some important dna binding proteins are extremely relevant to the chromosome organization and its function. For example, cc ctc binding factor (CTCF) is of importance in the formation of chromatin structure (). Combining dna binding affinities of these proteins together with Hi-C data may help us to understand the formation and the functions of the chromatin structure. Here, we present 3D Genome Database (3DGD), a novel database that collected published 3D structure of genome (currently mainly based on Hi-C experiment) of four different species. We organized and displayed the interaction data in an easy way for accessing, while integrating genome annotation data and some important dna binding protein information. To our knowledge, 3DGD is the first database collecting and displaying chromatin 3D structure data.
