Motivation: In general, diseases are more likely to be comorbid if they share associated genes or molecular interactions in a cellular process. However, there are still a number of pairs of diseases which show relatively high comorbidity but do not share any associated genes or interactions. This observation raises the need for a novel factor which can explain the underlying mechanism of comorbidity. We here consider a feedback loop (FBL) structure ubiquitously found in the human cell signaling network as a key motif to explain the comorbidity phenomenon, since it is well known to have effects on network dynamics. Results: For every pair of diseases, we examined its comorbidity and length of all f bls involved by the disease associated genes in the human cell signaling network. We found that there is a negative relationship between comorbidity and length of involved f bls. This indicates that a disease pair is more likely to comorbid if they are connected with f bls of shorter length. We additionally showed that such a negative relationship is more obvious when the number of positive involved f bls is larger than that of negative involved f bls. Moreover, we observed that the negative relationship between comorbidity and length of involved f bls holds especially for disease pairs that do not share any disease associated genes. Finally, we proved all these results through intensive simulations, based on a Boolean network model.

introduction when two disorders or illnesses occur in the same person, simultaneously or one after the other, they are called comorbid. It is reported that 80% of the elderly population has three or more chronic conditions (), which explains the importance of understanding disease comorbidity. There have been many studies observing the comorbidity phenomenon. Some studies have found high comorbidity rates of certain pairs of diseases () and addressed statistical results of prevalence and mortality of specified regions (). Other studies attempted to quantify the effect of a disease on other * To whom correspondence should be addressed. diseases by introducing comorbidity measures (). In a recent study of illness progression, a database was also constructed to summarize statistical correlations between phenotypic diseases from histories of more than 30 million patients in a phenotypic disease network (). Another class of previous studies investigated factors to explain the cause of comorbidity. For example constructed a human disease network in which a pair of diseases are linked when they share common disease causing genes, and showed a common genetic origin of many diseases from this constructed network. In another study found statistically significant correlations between an underlying structure of cellular networks and comorbidity patterns in the human population by combining information on protein interactions, disease gene associations and population level disease patterns extracted from Medicare data. In that paper, the authors showed positive correlations between the degree of comorbidity, the number of shared genes and the number of shared protein interactions. A bipartite graph was also constructed in which nodes represent diseases and two diseases are linked if mutated enzymes associated with them catalyze adjacent metabolic reactions (). Based on this graph, it was shown that two connected metabolic diseases sharing some pathways tend to show significant comorbidity. This result is consistent with a general proteomic notion that diseases may be related if they share protein interactions () or proteins acting on the same pathway (). Taken together, it can be generally accepted that diseases that share associated genes or molecular interactions in a cellular process are more likely to be comorbid. However, it is interesting that many pairs of diseases show high comorbidity even though they do not share any associated genes or interactions (). Therefore, there is still a pressing need to find other factors which is related to comorbidity. In this study, we consider a FBL (FBL) structure as a novel factor to explain the comorbidity phenomenon. f bls are a well known critical motif to affect dynamics in biological networks (). In particular, f bls were shown to play an important role in robustly sustaining steady state of networks against perturbations (). In this regard, we investigated the relationship between comorbidity and f bls involved with disease associated genes in a human signaling network. Using integrated data from a disease gene association database and a human cell signaling network, we show that there is a negative relationship between comorbidity and the length of page 1114 11131120

discussion high comorbidity between disease pairs, such as diabetes mellitus and obesity, or hypertension and spasms, have been observed. Previous studies explained that such a phenomenon was mostly due to mutational defects of a common disease gene shared by those diseases. However, many pairs of other diseases that do not share any associated gene have also been found, and this may be because complex molecular interaction networks spread the disorder of a gene to the other genes. Therefore, careful analysis of signaling pathways at the system level is needed to understand the comorbidity mechanism. In particular, we considered f bls as an important structural feature for comorbidity, since many previous studies have revealed that they can make the network dynamics complicated and nonlinear. In this regard, we investigated the effect of f bls in the human cell signaling network on comorbidity, and showed that disease pairs connected with a FBL of shorter length make the comorbidity higher than those connected with an FBL of longer length. In other words, a pair of diseases is more likely to be comorbid when their associated genes are involved in f bls of relatively short lengths. Moreover, we showed that such a relationship is apparent when the number of positive involved f bls is larger than that of negative involved f bls in addition, it was also shown that a pair of diseases connected with f bls of relatively short length can be highly comorbid especially when they do not share any gene. Through intensive simulations based on Boolean networks, we proved the relationship between f bls and comorbidity is a fundamental property with respect to network dynamics. In synthetic biology, the findings of this article can be useful in order to control mutual effectiveness between components of an artificial cell. Also, the findings of this study can be considered evidence showing the usefulness of a Boolean network model in studying the dynamics of biological networks. In addition, it will be a significant future study to find out a more realistic measure than mutual effectiveness to simulate comorbidity phenomenon in a Boolean network model.
