Motivation: Circadian oscillations have been observed in animals, plants, fungi and cyanobacteria and play a fundamental role in coordinating the homeostasis and behavior of biological systems. Genetically encoded molecular clocks found in nearly every cell, based on negative transcription/ translation feedback loops and involving only a dozen genes, play a central role in maintaining these oscillations. However, high throughput gene expression experiments reveal that in a typical tissue, a much larger fraction (10%) of all transcripts oscillate with the day night cycle and the oscillating species vary with tissue type suggesting that perhaps a much larger fraction of all transcripts , and perhaps also other molecular species, may bear the potential for circadian oscillations. Results: To better quantify the pervasiveness and plasticity of circadian oscillations, we conduct the first large scale analysis aggregating the results of 18 circadian transcript omic studies and 10 circadian meta bolo mic studies conducted in mice using different tissues and under different conditions. We find that over half of protein coding genes in the cell can produce transcripts that are circadian in at least one set of conditions and similarly for measured metabolites. Genetic or environmental perturbations can disrupt existing oscillations by changing their amplitudes and phases, suppressing them or giving rise to novel circadian oscillations. The oscillating species and their oscillations provide a characteristic signature of the physiological state of the corresponding cell/ tissue. Molecular networks comprise many oscillator loops that have been sculpted by evolution over two trillion day night cycles to have intrinsic circadian frequency. These oscillating loops are coupled by shared nodes in a large network of coupled circadian oscillators where the clock genes form a major hub. Cells can program and reprogram their circadian repertoire through epigenetic and other mechanisms. Availability and implementation: high resolution and tissue condition specific circadian data and networks available at http://circadiomics.

introduction circadian rhythms are pervasive and play a key role in ensuring homeostatic balance with the environment and coordinating many aspects of physiology including the sleep wake cycle, eating, hormone and neurotransmitter secretion and even memory and cognitive function (Eckel). Disruption of circadian rhythms has been directly linked to health problems ranging from cancer, to insulin resistance, to diabetes, to obesity and to premature ageing (). Research has shown that these circadian rhythms are genetically encoded by a molecular clock found in nearly every cell, with a master clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) () of the hypothalamus, coordinating and interacting with peripheral clocks throughout the body (). Central to the cellular clock and the rhythmicity of SCN neurons as well as other cells are transcription factors that drive the expression of their own negative regulators (). This results in a negative transcriptional and translational feedback loop, highly conserved across species, that perpetuates oscillations in gene expression that occur every 24 h. In mammals, two bHLH transcription factors, CLOCK and BMAL1 heterodimer ize and bind to conserved E-box sequences in target gene promoters, thus driving the rhythmic expression of mammalian Period (Per1, Per2 and Per3) and crypto chrome (Cry1 and Cry2) genes (). PER and CRY proteins form a complex that inhibits subsequent clock bmal1 mediated gene expression (). In short, the core of the clock is driven by only a dozen genes (). In contrast, gene expression experiments () reveal that a much larger fraction, on the order of 10%, of all transcripts in the cell are oscillating in a circadian manner and that the oscillating transcripts differ by cell or tissue type (). Thus, the number of oscillating transcripts typically extends beyond the core clock. However, the precise extent of this phenomenon, or its applicability to other molecular species such as metabolites, has not been investigated systematically. While researchers have looked at the common denominator (the master clock genes and its interactors), little has been done to systematically understand the unique and possibly novel oscillations observed in a specific tissue or under a specific set of perturbations. In a recent study (where we contrasted the circadian profiles of both transcripts and metabolites in the liver of mice fed normal chow and high fat diets, we noticed considerable differences associated with a massive reprogramming occurring within the cell. By analyzing not only the transcripts and metabolites that lost their circadian oscillations as a result of the high fat diet but also the transcripts and metabolites that gained novel circadian oscillations as a result of the perturbation, we were able to discover compensatory oscillations in important molecular species like SREBP1, a transcription factor responsible for lipid synthesis. In combination, these results raise several fundamental questions (). Exactly how pervasive are circadian oscillations at the molecular level, i.e. how far do they extend beyond the core clock? What is the overlap in circadian oscillations across different tissues and conditions? How flexible and programmable are these oscillations and what are the underlying mechanisms controlling rhythmicity? To begin to address these questions, we conduct a large scale aggregated analysis of multiple circadian transcriptome and metabo lome datasets.

discussion previous gene expression studies conducted with single conditions have already revealed that a significant fraction of the transcriptome can oscillated in a circadian fashion in simple organisms: a third of the transcriptome in the plant Arabidopsis thaliana (), 64% of the transcriptome in the cyanobacterium Synechococcus elongatus () and almost the entire transcriptome in the marine unicellular alga os treo coccus tauri (). In a recent independent study conducted in 12 mouse organs, 43% of all protein coding genes showed circadian rhythms in transcription somewhere in the body (). Here, we have extended these studies by aggregating and analyzing both high throughput transcript omic and meta bolo mic data in a mammalian system over multiple tissues and conditions, revealing that a large fraction of the molecular species in a mouse cell tissue is capable of circadian oscillations under at least some set of conditions. Furthermore, while the experiments used here were conducted using tissue preparations, it is reasonable to infer that even more diversity in oscillations would be observed if one were to aggregate experiments done at the level of single cells both within tissues and across tissues, as well as many other conditions. Thus, our results provide only lower bounds on the total number of transcripts or metabolites that could be found to oscillate in a circadian manner under at least one set of conditions by the same methods. Additional non transcriptional circadian oscillations, for instance, in the levels of post translationally modified proteins, are in the clock can drive the oscillations of enzymes and corresponding metabolites. In circa dio mics users can select an experiment and a specific gene or metabolite and visualize the molecular network in the vicinity of the corresponding node, as well as the time series of the corresponding concentrations. Each box represents a molecular species with, when available, a plot of the time series of its concentration throughout the day night cycle in the control (blue) and perturbed condition red the pervasiveness and plasticity of circadian oscillations also known to exist (O') leading us to conjecture that almost any molecular species in the cell is potentially capable of circadian oscillations. To better interpret these puzzling results, we briefly develop a coupled circadian oscillators framework logically articulated around four questions: (i) what are the oscillators? (ii) what are their periods? (iii) how are they coupled? and (iv) what is the role of the clock?

conclusion at the behavioral level, circadian rhythms are paradoxically both relentless and flexible. Relentless because they turn us into robots executing the same routine every 24 hours. Flexible because this routine is elastic and let us accommodate, for instance, an occasional early meal or a late bedtime without suffering major consequences. Remarkably, these paradoxical features of pervasiveness and plasticity are found at multiple levels of biological organization, including tissues, cells and molecular networks as shown in this work. Two trillion night and day cycles during the course of evolution have deeply sculpted the molecular networks of the cell and made 24-h oscillations pervasive. Aggregation of high throughput transcript omic and meta bolo mic experiments across tissue types and conditions indeed reveal that a large fraction of the molecular network of a cell is primed for and potentially capable of oscillating in a circadian manner. In a given environment taken in its broadest sense (to include for instance genetic modifications or inter cell inter organ communications), through epigenetic and other modifications, a cell or tissue selects which fraction of molecular species out of its entire repertoire exhibit circadian oscillations, including entirely novel oscillations with respect to the corresponding control case. Ongoing and future work should provide the data to better model and understand networks of coupled circadian oscillators, predict how they respond to perturbations and use these responses to explain biology and direct therapeutic intervention.
