Motivation: Ebola virus causes high mortality hemorrhagic fevers, with more than 25 000 cases and 10 000 deaths in the current outbreak. Only experimental therapies are available, thus, novel diagnosis tools and drug gable targets are needed. Results: Analysis of Ebola virus genomes from the current outbreak reveals the presence of short DNA sequences that appear nowhere in the human genome. We identify the shortest such sequences with lengths between 12 and 14. Only three absent sequences of length 12 exist and they consistently appear at the same location on two of the Ebola virus proteins, in all Ebola virus genomes, but nowhere in the human genome. The alignment free method used is able to identify pathogen specific signatures for quick and precise action against infectious agents, of which the current Ebola virus outbreak provides a compelling example.

introduction ebola virus e bov is a negative strand rna virus from the filo viri dae family that causes high mortality hemorrhagic fevers, for which no vaccine or treatment currently exist (). There are five ebola virus species, namely, Zaire ebola virus Sudan ebola virus bundi bug yo ebola virus Tai Forest ebola virus and Reston ebola virus with the first (1976) and major (2014) outbreaks caused by the type species Zaire ebola virus (). The numbers of the largest ever e bov outbreak are worrying and continue escalating, with over 25 000 cases and 10 000 deaths from the virus mainly in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone, according to the World Health Organization. The current outbreak is also the first where transmission has occurred outside Africa, with reported cases in Europe (Spain) and America (USA;). Promising vaccine candidate tests are being rushed to face the epidemics and could be available within a few months (). These yet experimental therapies include, for example, recombinant viral vectors () or antibodies that target the viral glycoprotein (GP;), but innovative approaches are still needed for the development of diagnosis tools and identification of drug gable targets. Minimal absent words are the shortest sequence fragments that are not present in the genomic data of a given organism. They have been studied before to describe properties of prokaryotic and eukaryotic genomes and to develop methods for phylogeny construction or PCR primer design (). Here, we introduce minimal relative absent words (RAW), a concept which has not been used so far in the context of personalized medicine, but which is deemed useful for differential identification of sequences that are derived from a pathogen genome but absent from its host.

discussion the personalized medicine field is now closer to clinical practice with the advances of next generation sequencing technologies. Personalized therapeutics are a possibility and their development is essential with the emergence of resistance to current available drugs. Additionally, quick diagnosis is required for emerging pathogens and in epidemics such as the current Ebola outbreak. Here, we have detected minimal RAWs in the human genome that are present in e bov genomes, and identified nucleotide differences in some of these sequences that can distinguish between ebola virus species and outbreaks. Also, we show that the corresponding amino acid sequences are conserved within e bov. These results can now be further explored for diagnosis and therapeutics, sometimes mentioned as the rano stics (). Namely, RAW nucleotide sequences can be used in diagnosis to design primers that identify ebola virus infections or distinguish between ebola virus species. For pcr based methods, longer sequences and multiplex reactions can be developed to avoid primer binding bias. Additional nucleotide or protein based strategies for therapeutics can be envisaged, as discussed below. One problem in developing efficient e bov treatments is the virus ability to evade the immune system. The viral GP is a major target because it mediates attachment and entry into the host cells. However, in addition to the surface envelope protein, the GP gene also produces fragment, soluble GPs that are secreted and direct the three minimal sequences found in Ebola virus genomes immune system to produce antibodies for variable and non-essential regions of the virus (). As current efforts based on the viral GP might prove ineffective, additional targets should be sought. Our results show that the viral NP and polymerase (LP) can be attractive targets. As the amino acid sequences of all three 12-mer RAWs are conserved within e bov these regions can be used to screen for small molecule inhibitors. In particular, RAW1 is conserved in all ebola virus NP proteins, which can indicate a functional or structural role. And, considering that the protein model predicts that RAW2 and RAW3 are relatively close in the 3D structure and in exposed domains, these regions can be used to develop novel antibodies. Also, a recently described mechanism shows that the polymerase (LP) from Ebola and Marburg viruses is capable of editing transcripts, resulting in increased variability in the produced proteins, and that the most edited mRNAs are the Ebola GP and Marburg NP and LP itself (). Thus, the use of combined therapies towards multiple proteins can be more effective, as suggested by studies to develop vaccines for Lassa virus that target both NP and GP (). rna based strategies such as RNA interference (RNAi) or antis sense therapies are also promising approaches to silence target specific gene expression. The RAW sequences that we have identified can be used to develop RNAi or antisense probes that bind viral transcripts and prevent their translation, thus, inhibiting viral replication without blocking the host mRNAs. Translation of these technologies into clinical applications have been slowed by challenges in the delivery of small RNAs into cells, but recent developments in delivery systems are bridging the bench to bedside gap (). Among these, gold or lipid nanoparticles () were shown to be effective against cancer and viral infections, including e bov (). gold nano beacons can be applied as a combined diagnosis and therapy tool for effective testing, including in low cost settings () and, with this purpose, advances in peptide nucleic acid probes for viral detection are also taking place (). Whichever the technology, the identification of genome signatures for rapid evolving species such as Ebola viruses will be useful for the development of both diagnosis and therapeutics.
