tigre is an r bioconductor package for inference of transcription factor activity and ranking candidate target genes from gene expression time series. The underlying methodology is based on Gaussian process inference on a differential equation model that allows the use of short, unevenly sampled, time series. The method has been designed with efficient parallel implementation in mind, and the package supports parallel operation even without additional software. Availability: The tigre package is included in Bioconductor since release 2.6 for R 2.11. The package and a users guide are available at

introduction understanding genome function through reverse engineering of gene regulatory relationships from experimental data is one of the key challenges in current biology (). One popular technique is to use gene expression time series to infer these relationships. Unfortunately, most real world expression time series are short () and contain insufficient information for any realistic reconstruction of the gene regulatory network (). Recognizing this, the tigre package aims to answer a much simpler question: given time series expression data where a transcription factor (TF) is changing its activity, which genes are plausibly regulated by that TF? As a result, it provides a ranking of tested target genes according to their likelihood of being targets of the TF. The underlying methodology was presented by(2010a), who showed that it can yield remarkably accurate predictions from very limited data, often attaining more accurate results based on the simple wild type time series expression data than what could be obtained using TF knockout data. The method is based on a linear ordinary differential equation model of TF protein translation and transcriptional regulation. Placing * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a non-parametric Gaussian process prior on unobserved mRNA concentration or protein activity time courses leads to a joint Gaussian process model over the protein activity level and all gene expression levels (). The Gaussian processes can be marginalized out analytically while the model parameters are optimized using maximum likelihood. Candidate targets are then ranked by model likelihood, which effectively measures how well the target fits a model of regulation by the inferred TF. The method was originally implemented in MATLAB, making handling of genomic datasets much more cumbersome than in the new Bioconductor implementation, which benefits from all the preprocessing, annotation and other tools in Bioconductor ().

discussion tigre can fit the models already on very short time series. We have successfully applied it to datasets with as few as 6 and 7 time points (, b). The output of tigre is a ranked set of models for each candidate target gene together with their associated log likelihoods used to form the ranking. Direct interpretation of the log likelihood scores can be difficult. We have found it very useful to use visualizations of the models to assess the fit and to select thresholds for filtering weakly expressed genes (for details, see). We have also developed a web interface called tigre browser (http://pypi.python.org/pypi/tigreBrowser) to aid in browsing the visualizations. The linearity of the differential equation transcription model greatly simplifies the algorithm, but it may be too crude an assumption for some situations. We are working on a method based on a more realistic non-linear model. Such models require, however, more advanced computational techniques that often tend to be more fragile. tigre avoids this pitfall by using a simple enough model allowing very robust inference while effectively capturing the essential degrees of freedom in the transcription regulatory process.
