Motivation: Tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α), a major inflammatory cytokine, is closely related to several cardiovascular pathological processes. However, its effects on the cell cycle of vascular endothelial cells (VECs) have been the subject of some controversy. To investigate the molecular mechanism underlying this process, we constructed time course protein protein interaction (PPI) networks of TNF-α induced regulation of cell cycle in VECs using microarray datasets and genome wide PPI datasets. Then, we analyzed the topological properties of the responsive PPI networks and calculated the node degree and node betweenness centralization of each gene in the networks. We found that p21, p27 and cyclinD1, key genes of the G1/S checkpoint, are in the center of responsive PPI networks and their roles in PPI networks are significantly altered with induction of TNF-α. According to the following biological experiments, we proved that TNF-α can promote G 1 /S transition of cell cycle in VECs and facilitate the cell cycle activation induced by vascular endothelial growth factor. Contact:

introduction tumor necrosis factor- (TNF-), a major inflammatory cytokine, plays a pivotal role in cardiovascular disease and induces multiple changes in vascular endothelial cells (VECs), which affect several pathological processes including tumor angiogenesis (). In addition to its well characterized properties such as altered cell adhesion and increased apoptosis, TNF- also modulates the cell cycle in VECs (). However, its effects on the cell cycle processes of VECs have been the subject of some controversy. Previous studies indicate that TNF- induces cell cycle arrest and blocks proliferation of VECs (). Inhibition of TNF- accelerates endothelial recovery after angioplasty (found that TNF- can enhance VECs proliferation and enhance angiogenesis in rabbit cornea assays revealed that low doses of TNF- can increase DNA synthesis and decrease the proportion of G 1 phase cells. Moreover, our recent studies showed that tnf induced cell cycle may be regulated by dynamic pathway interactions in VECs () and that there is a complex gene network behind tnf induced cell cycle processes in VECs (). We also demonstrate the advantages of protein protein interaction (PPI) networks in studies of disease mechanisms and drug actions (). In this study, we constructed time course PPI networks of tnf induced regulation of cell cycle in VECs and analyzed their topological properties to reveal the molecular mechanisms underlying tnf induced cell cycle processes.

discussion quiescent VECs can rapidly reverse in response to signaling from the microenvironment; however, tight regulation of the cell cycle is necessary for VECs, for one of the most important properties of VECs is to separate blood from underlying tissues (). In the present study, VEGF treatment alone doubled the number of cells in S phase after 24 h (, ecm vegf. An 8 h pulse of TNF- followed by removal of TNF- tnf ecm nearly tripled the amount of cells in S phase and, strikingly, an 8 h pulse of TNF- followed by treatment with VEGF alone tnf vegf caused the highest amount of S phase induction. Conversely, continuous treatment with TNF- for 24 h tnf tnf or addition of VEGF after 8 h to cells continuously treated with TNF- tnf vegf + TNF) caused fewer cells to enter S phase than the 8 h TNF- pulse. The pulse of TNF- facilitated the cells for entry into S phase, but continuous TNF- treatment also acted to repress entry into S phase in the absence of VEGF induction. These results suggest that TNF- has a double role in regulation of the cell cycle in VECs and that the cell cycle of VECs is controlled by multiple cytokines in a balanced way (). In this study, time course microarray datasets and functional relationships of pp is were used to construct responsive PPI networks. PPI networks are a type of scale free network () in which node degree and node betweenness centrality can be used to determine the network center ().compared a metabolic network with the KEGG (Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes) database and found that enzyme phylogenetic profile correlated best with betweenness centrality and also quite closely with degree. Based on these studies, time course microarray datasets and the functional relationship of pp is were used to construct responsive PPI networks in the present study. By employing node degree and node betweenness centrality, we quantified the role of genes in the time course PPI network which made it easier to identify the key genes in the network. Combined with laboratory experiments, we found that TNF- could affect the G 1 /S cell cycle transition in VECs. These results show that time course PPI network analysis could also be a useful way to study other time course biological processes. In summary, combined with computational and experimental studies, we found that TNF- can promote G 1 /S transition of cell cycle in VECs and facilitate the cell cycle activation induced by VEGF. All these results suggest that TNF- can break the resting cell cycle and wake up quiescent VECs.
