Motivation: Despite recent technological advances in genomic sciences, our understanding of cancer progression and its driving genetic alterations remains incomplete. Results: We introduce TiMEx, a generative probabilistic model for detecting patterns of various degrees of mutual exclusivity across genetic alterations, which can indicate pathways involved in cancer progression. TiMEx explicitly accounts for the temporal interplay between the waiting times to alterations and the observation time. In simulation studies, we show that our model outperforms previous methods for detecting mutual exclusivity. On large scale biological datasets, TiMEx identifies gene groups with strong functional biological relevance, while also proposing new candidates for biological validation. TiMEx possesses several advantages over previous methods, including a novel generative probabilistic model of tumorigenesis, direct estimation of the probability of mutual exclusivity interaction, computational efficiency and high sensitivity in detecting gene groups involving low frequency alterations. Availability and implementation: TiMEx is available as a Bioconductor R package at www. bsseethzchcbg software timex
introduction despite recent technological advances in genomic sciences, our understanding of cancer progression still faces fundamental challenges. To this end, new ways of interpreting the increasing amount of generated data are devised, aiming at finding biologically relevant patterns. An important example is the separation of genes into drivers, which have a selective advantage and significantly contribute to tumor progression and passengers, which are selectively neutral and can hitchhike along with fitter clones. Even if intuitive and routinely used, identifying drivers as re currently altered genes () only explains tumorigenesis in a fraction of patients. Alternatively, the functional role of drivers can be assessed in the context of groups of genes, all possessing the same important function, commonly known as pathways. Once one of the group members is altered, the tumor gains a significant selective advantage the alteration of additional group members does not further increase the selective advantage of the tumor, rendering clones with a single alteration likely the most frequent. In this case, the group of genes displays a mutually exclusive alteration pattern. Current approaches for detecting mutual exclusivity are either de novo () or based on biological interaction networks (). While highly informative, the current biological knowledge is incomplete, such that limiting the search space to known biological interactions significantly reduces the detection power. Straightforward pairwise statistical tests assessing whether the number of observed double mutants is lower than expected by chance have also been employed, followed by identifying groups as maximal cliques (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com 2008). The d end rix tool () performs a Markov chain Monte Carlo sampling for group structure search, followed by a permutation test for finding sets of genes with both high coverage and high exclusivity. Its limitation of finding the single main pathway per dataset was addressed by multi d end rix (), a follow-up tool which simultaneously identifies multiple driver pathways via an integer linear programming approach propose mu ex a statistical model for mutual exclusivity, where, however, the group members are required to have similar alteration frequencies. Finally, jer by employ a data driven approach for identifying genome wide synthetic lethality interactions in cancer, which lead to mutual exclusivity. All existing approaches ignore the fact that the mutually exclusive patterns occur over time, during disease progression. Here, we introduce TiMEx, a generative probabilistic model for the de novo detection of mutual exclusivity patterns of various degrees across carcinogenic alterations. We regard tumorigenesis as a dynamic process and base our model on the temporal interplay between the waiting times to alterations, characteristic for every gene and alteration type and the observation time. Under the assumption of rarity of events over short time intervals, TiMEx models the alteration process for each gene as a Poisson process. The waiting times are therefore modeled as exponentially distributed variables with specific rates, which correspond to the rates of evolution for each alteration. In our modeling framework, the temporal dynamics of each alteration process progresses from the onset of cancer, corresponding to the first alteration related to the growth of a malignant tumor, until the observation time, corresponding to the time of tumor biopsy. The observation time is regarded as a system failure time and is exponentially distributed with an unknown rate. A perfectly mutually exclusive group is defined as a collection of genes in which, for every tumor sample, at most one gene is altered. Conversely, we assume that in a group showing no mutual exclusivity, each gene is altered conditionally independent, given the observation time. In a realistic biological setting, however, additional alterations may still provide a small selective advantage to the tumor, rather than none at all, which may lead to the fixation of a clone with more than one alteration, in a group of genes otherwise perfectly mutually exclusive. Thus, biologically, groups of genes display a continuous range of mutual exclusivity degrees. TiMEx quantifies these degrees exactly and assesses their significance using a likelihood ratio test. Our procedure for efficient search of mutually exclusive patterns in large datasets consists of three steps (). We first estimate mutual exclusivity between all possible gene pairs in the dataset. Second, we select as candidates the gene groups in which the significance and degree of mutual exclusivity between each pair of members are high. Third, the candidate groups are statistically tested for mutual exclusivity. In simulation studies, we show that TiMEx outperforms the permutation based method previously introduced by and the mu ex model (). Furthermore, we apply our procedure to four large TCGA studies, two glioblastoma datasets, ovarian (Cancer Genome Atlas Research) and breast (provisional) cancer datasets. On these datasets, we show that TiMEx identifies gene groups with stronger functional biological relevance than two previous methods, namely mu ex and multi d end rix while also proposing many new candidates for biological validation. TiMEx does not impose any temporal assumptions on the set of biological samples it is applied on, and these samples are considered to be independent. Without requiring any previous biological knowledge, our procedure identifies mutually exclusive gene groups of any size and statistically tests and ranks them by their degree of mutual exclusivity. It possesses several advantages over previous methods, including the probabilistic modeling of tumorigenesis as a dynamic process, the novel and intuitive quantification of the degree of mutual exclusivity as a probability, high computational efficiency on large datasets, as well as high sensitivity in detecting low frequently altered genes.
