Motivation: chips eq and chip chip experiments have been widely used to identify transcription factor (TF) binding sites and target genes. Conventionally, a fairly simple approach is employed for target gene identification e.g. finding genes with binding sites within 2 kb of a transcription start site (TSS). However, this does not take into account the number of sites upstream of the TSS, their exact positioning or the fact that different TFs appear to act at different characteristic distances from the TSS. Results: Here we propose a probabilistic model called target identification from profiles (TIP) that quantitatively measures the regulatory relationships between TFs and target genes. For each TF, our model builds a characteristic, averaged profile of binding around the TSS and then uses this to weight the sites associated with a given gene, providing a continuous valued regulatory score relating each TF and potential target. Moreover, the score can readily be turned into a ranked list of target genes and an estimate of significance, which is useful for case dependent downstream analysis. Conclusion: We show the advantages of TIP by comparing it to the simple approach on several representative datasets, using motif occurrence and relationship to knockout experiments as metrics of validation. Moreover, we show that the probabilistic model is not as sensitive to various experimental parameters (including sequencing depth and peak calling method) as the simple approach; in fact, the lesser dependence on sequencing depth potentially utilizes the result of a chips eq experiment in a more cost effective manner.

introduction chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by microarray hybridization chip chip and more recently by sequencing chips eq have been widely used for genome wide identification of transcription factor (TF) binding events (). To facilitate the processing and analysis of the resulting datasets, many methods and software packages have been developed. Most efforts have focused on * To whom correspondence should be addressed. identifying TF binding peaks that are regions of increased sequence read density or hybridization intensity relative to the background (). In addition, methods have been proposed to combine genomic binding data with other biological information (e.g. histone modification, conservation, etc.) for predicting functional binding sites of TFs (). The genome wide TF binding data provide useful biological insights for understanding transcriptional regulation. One of the important applications is to identify the target genes controlled by TFs and dissect the transcriptional regulatory networks underlying the relevant biological process as demonstrated in many studies (). In these studies, a simple peak based method has been used to associate TF binding peaks with genes for determining the tf target regulatory relationships. Specifically, the genes with promoters overlapping with one or more peaks were identified as the targets. This simple peak based method is easy to implement, but it has several limitations. First, it treats all binding peaks equally without taking into account their relative positions to genes. Second, it does not provide confidence scores of the identified target genes, even though the significance of binding peaks is available. Third, the number of target genes identified is very sensitive to the number of binding peaks and the parameter setting such as the size of the DNA regions considered as promoters. Therefore, a more sophisticated method would be helpful for the utilization of genomic occupation data being produced increasingly. In this work, we propose a probabilistic model (TIP) for identifying TF target genes based on chips eq or chip chip data (). The model calculates the regulatory potential of a TF to genes based on the TF's binding profile, i.e. its binding signals across the genome. The binding profiles for different TFs can be quite different most are promoter associated, whereas a few are more distantly enhancer associated. Even for the promoter associated TFs, their binding peaks can often be differentially distributed in the promoter regions. The probabilistic model we propose here integrates the binding signals within a broad DNA region surrounding a gene's transcription start site (TSS) and takes into account the binding characteristic profile of the TF. We apply the model to several datasets to demonstrate its efficiency, and benchmark it against the simple peak based method. In particular, we show that it gives rise to a more biologically meaningful target gene set than the peak based method. The model provides us with a

discussion in this article, we propose a probabilistic model to identify TF target genes based on chips eq or chip chip data. We have shown that target genes identified by this model are more responsive to the stimulation or perturbation of the regulatory TF, and are more likely to contain its binding motif in their promoters, when compared with those identified by the simple method. Our model provides a gene list ranked by the regulatory potential by the TF and gives a confidence score, which allows the user to select a subset of genes for creation of testable hypothesis and further experimental investigation. With ever increasing genomic occupation data, the model provides a powerful tool for understanding gene regulation. As shown in, the genes identified by the model represent a very conservative set of regulatory targets by a TF due to the following reason. Our normalization of the regulatory scores is based on the mean of regulatory scores for all genes, including both targets and non targets (Section 2.3). In the real data, the distribution of regulatory scores for all genes shows a normal like distribution from non-target genes on the left side and a very thick tail on the right side from target genes (Supplementary). We would expect to obtain more significant target genes, if only the regulatory scores for non targets (which can be regarded as the background binding) are used for normalization. Obviously, the non-target genes are unknown in advance, but this issue can be circumvented by iteratively estimating significance and selecting non targets for normalization. Alternatively, one can also normalize the regulatory scores based on the background binding estimated from a number of randomly selected DNA regions. It is also possible to further improve the method by taking into account the existence of TF binding motif, namely, assign higher weight to genes with motifs in DNA regions around their TSS. By combining with additional data such as expression data from TF perturbation experiments, the framework might also be adapted to predict functional binding sites. Although the chips eq and chip chip experiments have detected a large number of binding sites, many of them can not be clearly connected with target gene regulation (). As such, a quantitative method introduced here or previously () would be useful for understanding functional binding. It is interesting to see that the target genes identified by the probabilistic model are not sensitive to the sequencing depth as we have shown using the TCF4 data. When more reads are sequenced in a chips eq experiment, more binding peaks, mostly weak ones, would be identified. These weak peaks are not quite discriminative from the background noise and their contribution to gene regulation might be limited. In this sense, the target genes identified by the
