Motivation: The computational identification of gene transcription start sites tss s can provide insights into the regulation and function of genes without performing expensive experiments, particularly in organisms with incomplete annotations. high resolution general purpose TSS prediction remains a challenging problem, with little recent progress on the identification and differentiation of tss s which are arranged in different spatial patterns along the chromosome. Results: In this work, we present the Transcription Initiation Pattern Recognizer tip r a sequence based machine learning model that identifies tss s with high accuracy and resolution for multiple spatial distribution patterns along the genome, including broadly distributed TSS patterns that have previously been difficult to characterize. tip r predicts not only the locations of tss s but also the expected spatial initiation pattern each TSS will form along the chromosome a novel capability for TSS prediction algorithms. As spatial initiation patterns are associated with spatiotemporal expression patterns and gene function, this capability has the potential to improve gene annotations and our understanding of the regulation of transcription initiation. The high nucleotide resolution of this model locates tss s within 10 nucleotides or less on average. Availability and implementation: Model source code is made available online at

introduction transcription start sites tss s and their associated promoter regions play a critical role in the transcription of genes by RNA Polymerase II. However, the mechanisms by which transcription is initiated at specific genomic locations is still not fully understood, including how the spatial distribution of tss s is defined, how promoter architecture influences this spatial pattern, and how genes lacking canonical elements within the core promoter are transcribed. The advent of high throughput TSS sequencing tss seq protocols such as Cap Analysis of Gene Expression (CAGE) and Paired End Analysis of Transcription start sites (PEAT) have transformed the field of promoter analysis, providing genome wide nucleotide resolution information on TSS usage (). One important goal in this field is the identification of TSS locations when tss seq data is unavailable. While start codons are easily identified, the length of the 5 0 untranslated region (5 0 UTR) upstream of the first exon varies from gene to gene and even between transcripts of the same gene, yielding different mRNA products. Several studies have taken computational approaches to TSS identification, building machine learning models that predict the location of tss s from the surrounding sequence content with varying degrees of success and resolution, ranging from the prediction at the level of individual nucleotides to regions up to 500 nt wide (V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com. The mRNA products produced during the transcription of genes typically do not all initiate at a single genomic location. Instead, transcription initiates upstream of the gene's start codon in a region that can range from very narrow (23 nt) to wide (upwards of 50 nt or more), forming a collection of individual tss s known as a TSS cluster or transcription start region (TSR) (). TSS clusters can be grouped by the shape of their positional distribution that is, the transcription initiation pattern of individual tss s that defines the cluster (). In this study, we focus on the single peak (or narrow peak) and broad peak (or weak peak) patterns defined in previous tss seq studies (). Previous studies have shown that different initiation patterns are associated with different types of genes, tissues and regulatory mechanisms such as transcription factors (TFs) and CpG islands (). While there has been success in the identification of single peak initiation patterns (), it has remained unclear whether other initiation patterns can be predicted from sequence content alone at the same nucleotide level resolution. Models incorporating additional data types such as histone modifications have had success in the prediction of these less well defined patterns (), though prediction of broadly distributed patterns is still clearly a greater challenge. An analysis of 17 TSS prediction models found that these broad patterns could be predicted with low resolution (500 nt) from sequence content alone but did not explore nucleotide resolution models (). In this work, we present a machine learning model capable of predicting tss s of multiple initiation patterns with high performance and positional resolution, while also suggesting the probable initiation pattern that the TSS cluster would form along the chromosome. The transcription initiation pattern recognition tip r model utilizes features derived from sequence content and TF binding affinity to predict the probability of transcription initiation at an individual nucleotide. Because this model provides both nucleotide resolution and initiation pattern prediction, the model can be used to address a wide variety of topics, including a better understanding of promoter architecture, improved gene finding and annotations, identification of TFs which could be involved in the regulation of genes and positional information guiding wet laboratory experiments. We evaluate the tip r model using a publicly available high throughput tss seq dataset from mouse (), where it performs well, achieving area under the receiver operating characteristic curve a uroc of 0.99 and area under the precision recall curve a up rc of 0.82. tip r uses only sequence information in predicting the location and type of TSS initiation patterns and is therefore applicable in cases where tss seq data are not yet available.

discussion tss prediction has many practical applications, including a potential for use in organisms with poorly annotated genomes. tip r requires only DNA sequence as input in order to make predictions and does not require any a priori knowledge of gene annotation. The training of tip r does require tss seq data and through the training process tip r identifies TF binding profiles that are enriched at position specific locations with respect to the tsst f based features are then generated, and the model learns which of these features are most useful in determining TSS location for each peak type. Thus, it is important that the species in which predictions are made is expected to share many orthologous TFs with the training species. The earlier S-Peaker model showed that a model trained exclusively from mouse tss s could identify the tss s of human miRNAs (). This ability provides a strong potential for informative cross species application in sequenced genomes of agronomic interest these species may not yet have extensive high throughput genomic data or even gene annotations available, but are often anticipated to share substantial TF binding domain orthology with a model species in which tss seq information is available. For example, models trained in the dicot Arabidopsis could be useful guides for further experiments on genes in crop species such as tomato. Predictions can be used to assist in the identification of the regulatory networks controlling genes by identifying which tfbs s are positioned in biologically relevant locations relative to the predicted TSS. These models can also be used to identify potential alternative start sites and the regulators which may control them, leading to the transcription of genes in different conditions, or the transcription of different mRNA products altogether. Many genes have been shown to have tissue specific tss s (), and different regulatory networks of TFs have been implicated in at least some of these genes (). Another recent study showed a change in TSS selection, initiation pattern and TF usage during the transition from maternal to zygotic transcription in zebra fish (). TSS prediction tools can be used to identify potential alternative tss s which can help guide wet lab experiments to validate sites and regulatory networks. The prediction of spatial TSS initiation pattern along the genome can also provide insights into the nature of transcripts produced from the site. For example, it may suggest spatiotemporal expression that is more consistent with housekeeping functions, or more consistent with tissue or time related functions. The tip r model provides a large boost in performance (12% increase in a up rc over previous sequence based models (). This is likely to be due in part to the use of a negative set filtering algorithm that selects locations with appropriately similar sequence backgrounds to tss s while excluding false negatives. Another primary contributor to performance is an increased number of TFBS pwm s (the complete TRANSFAC dataset in vertebrates) and the inclusion of new sequence enrichment features. For example, the model feature measuring the sequence enrichment of the CA di-nucleotide (not included in the S-Peaker model) was highly negatively weighted, implying that promoter regions may be significantly depleted of CA. In humans, CA is known to be the most common simple sequence repeat motif, with 19.4 repeats occurring per Mb (). Several studies have shown that intronic CA repeats play a role in the regulation of alternative splicing in some genes (report that the AC motif is significantly depleted directly downstream transcription initiation pattern recognition of human tss s but the same depletion is not seen in the entire promoter region.
