Motivation: The need for new drugs and new targets is particularly compelling in an era that is witnessing an alarming increase of drug resistance in human pathogens. The identification of new targets of known drugs is a promising approach, which has proven successful in several cases. Here, we describe a database that includes information on 5153 putative drug target pairs for 150 human pathogens derived from available drug target crystallographic complexes.

introduction novel mechanisms to escape therapy are constantly emerging among human pathogen populations, and this clearly urges the development, on one hand, of new drugs for the treatment of the diseases and, on the other hand, of rapid and effective methods to help expand the landscape of available treatment options (). In this context, computational studies are called on to help identify novel therapeutic targets and characterize their interactions, and indeed a number of such efforts are described in the literature (). However, these are mostly devoted to the analysis of single targets or specific tropical disease pathogens. The TiPs database has been developed with the aim of facilitating the identification of new therapeutic targets in4150 organisms responsible for human infections. We performed a large scale analysis to systematically identify candidate targets in the proteomes of such organisms. The rationale of our approach is based on the intrinsic poly pharmacological behaviour of compounds targeting homologous proteins (). We considered all drug target pairs for which the 3D structure of the complex is experimentally known and used the sequence of the target to identify its homologues in human pathogens. The evolutionary conservation of such homologues and their 3D structures (available or predicted) were used to verify whether the original drug was in principle able to bind them as it does the original target. To this aim, stringent filters were applied to ensure that predicted binding sites and their interactions with the drug are as accurate as possible. Pathogen proteins predicted with high confidence to be therapeutic targets and the putative drugs interacting with them were collected and annotated in TiPs.
