Motivation: text mining mutation information from the literature becomes a critical part of the bioinformatics approach for the analysis and interpretation of sequence variations in complex diseases in the post genomic era. It has also been used for assisting the creation of disease related mutation databases. Most of existing approaches are rule based and focus on limited types of sequence variations, such as protein point mutations. Thus, extending their extraction scope requires significant manual efforts in examining new instances and developing corresponding rules. As such, new automatic approaches are greatly needed for extracting different kinds of mutations with high accuracy. Results: Here, we report tm var a text mining approach based on conditional random field (CRF) for extracting a wide range of sequence variants described at protein, DNA and RNA levels according to a standard nomenclature developed by the Human Genome Variation Society. By doing so, we cover several important types of mutations that were not considered in past studies. Using a novel CRF label model and feature set, our method achieves higher performance than a state of the art method on both our corpus (91.4 versus 78.1% in f measure and their own gold standard (93.9 versus 89.4% in f measure. These results suggest that tm var is a high performance method for mutation extraction from biomedical literature. Availability: tm var software and its corpus of 500 manually curated abstracts are available for download at http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/ cbb research lupu btm var
introduction in the past 10 years, the focus of biological research has shifted from individual genes and proteins toward the study of entire biological systems. One of the most important research issues is gene protein and disease relationship analysis. Sequence variation plays the key role between gene and disease. Therefore, identifying sequence variation is one of the major approaches for characterizing gene disease relationships (), with many study results subsequently reported in scientific publications. As such, text mining mutation related information from the literature has become an increasingly important task in many downstream bioinformatics applications, such as the curation of mutation related biological databases (), the systematic study of biological effects of protein mutations () and the interpretation of individual genomes toward personalized medicine in pharmacogenomics research (). Despite some reported success in identifying specific mutation types or identifiers, such as dbSNP RS numbers (), mutation identification from free text in general remains a challenge because most mutations are not described in accordance with standard nomenclature (525% in our corpus) and only few are mentioned with standard database identifiers, such as dbSNP RS numbers (510% in our corpus). To the opposite, it is common to see the same mutation described in many different non-standard ways in the literature, which makes it similar to the named entity recognition task in biomedicine (). In response, recently a number of automatic systems have been developed for extracting mutation mentions from the biomedical literature () and some investigated further with respect to mutations' associations with genes (), diseases () and other related information (). Despite different scopes, with regard to methods for mutation detection, most systems rely on manually derived regular expressions. For instance, for detecting protein point mutations (e.g. A42G) from text developed mutation finder which contains 4700 regular expression patterns and achieves state of the art performance of 90% in f measure. Compared with the overwhelmingly used rule based systems, v tag () stands out with a machine learning approach and reports an f measure of 0.82 on their evaluation data. We refer readers to for a summary of previous implementations for mutation extraction. Following v tag and other previous studies on biomedical named entities (Dog an and Lu, 2012b;), we formulated the problem of named entity recognition as a sequence labeling problem. Therefore, a conditional random field (CRF) model () was naturally chosen as our learning algorithm. However, as detailed in our method description, we developed a new CRF model with 11 labels *To whom correspondence should be addressed. (as opposed to the traditional BIO model), as well as a set of novel features in this work. As shown in Section 4, both designs helped improve extraction performance and made our method compare favorably with the state of the art. In addition, our work is also unique in extracting mutations of many types that are not considered by previous methods. Existing methods, such as mutation finder either exclusively aim for extracting point mutations in proteins or are limited to a few mutation types, such as substitution and deletion in both proteins and genes. To our best knowledge, this work is the first attempt to identify various mutation types according to a standard nomenclature endorsed by the Human Genomic Variation Society (HGVS) for the description of sequence variants (mutations). Finally, similar to mutation finder along with a public tool for mutation extraction, we also contribute to the text mining community a large corpus (500 PubMed abstracts) of manually annotated raw and normalized mutation mentions. A raw mutation extraction is normalized when individual mutation components are identified and standardized when applicable. For instance, 'Arg987Ter' (PMID: 22188495) is normalized as 'pjRj987jX' to denote the replacement of an arginine residue at position 573 by termination codon, where a single letter 'p' is added to indicate the mutation type, and the standard one letter codes are used (with their respective positions in the normalized notation) to represent the wild type and mutant residue. As noted earlier in the text, our corpus covers many kinds of mutations not previously considered, such as 'p.Pro246HisfsX13' (PMID: 21738389) and 'IVS31G/A' (PMID: 15111599).

DISCUSSION

conclusion in summary, we introduced a crf based machine learning method for mutation extraction from text with high three labels (B, I, O) 85.81 80.82 83.24 Four labels (B, I, E, O) 86.18 81.59 83.82 Eleven labels (A, T, P, W, M, F, S, D, R, I, O) 92.01 83.72 87.67 performance. Our method complements and extends existing methods in extracting a wide range of different types of sequence variants in scientific publications. There are several future directions for extending this work. First, tm var is shown to be accurate on PubMed abstracts in this study. Although tm var is also applicable to full text, future study is warranted to determine its actual performance on different text genres. Second, despite the fact this work in itself can be used and integrated by other research, just like any other standalone mutation extraction tools (e.g. mutation finder it is useful to extract and associate contextual information (e.g. gene protein sequence) to the extracted mutations. Third, given our high extraction performance, we are interested in exploring direct applications of this work in the framework of computer assisted bio curation (). Indeed, we have started discussing potential opportunities of contributing our computer generated results to dbSNP l phan personal communication). Finally, together with our ability to recognize proteins and diseases (Dog an and Lu, 2012a; 2012b;), we would like to investigate automatic methods for characterizing de facto relationships between sequence variations in complex diseases buried in the biomedical literature.
