There is an increasing need for rich and dynamic biological data visualizations in bioinformatic web applications. New standards in web technologies, like SVG or Canvas, are now supported by most modern web browsers allowing the blossoming of powerful visualizations in biological data analysis. The exploration of different ways to visualize genomic data is still challenging due to the lack of flexible tools to develop them. Here, I present a set of libraries aimed at creating powerful tree and track based visualizations for the web. Its modularity and rich API facilitate the development of many different visualizations ranging from simple species trees to complex visualizations comprising per node data annotations or even simple genome browsers. Availability and Implementation: The TnT libraries have been written in Javascript, licensed under the APACHE 2.0 license and hosted at https://github.com/tntvis.

introduction the web has become the preferred platform to present biological data to the scientific community. Several improvements in web technologies are enabling the blossoming of new web applications for visualising this data: First, support of well established standards like SVG and Canvas by all modern web browsers enables the creation of rich interactive visual displays. Second, the vast improvement in web browser performance has increased the complexity of visualizations. Third, the proliferation of RESTful services providing data from reference biological resources permits easy access to biological data directly from the browser. The direct availability of this data also facilitates the development of reusable visualizations embeddable directly in web pages. Reusability is another key component in modern web development and a strong trend in current biological visualizations.) aims to compile reusable widgets for biological data visualization. It compiles over 120 components at the time of writing (). However, writing reusable visualizations is a complex task in which the developer has to take into account the scope and the environment of the host application in which the visualization will be embedded. Representation of tree data structures has become very popular in different biological fields like phylogenetics or ontology visualization, while the representation of track based annotations is central to genome browsers (), sequence alignments () or general display of coordinate based features such as protein sequence domain (). Here, a new set of libraries aimed at creating configurable, dynamic and interactive re-usable visualizations of trees and track based annotations is presented. They are collectively called TnT, standing for Trees and Tracks, and are distributed as independent n pm packages for easier integration in web applications. The development of the TnT libraries have been driven by two main design principles: flexibility and reusability. Flexibility is achieved by exposing all its internals in a powerful and carefully designed API. Reusability is maximized by developing the libraries as independent units that can be combined. TnT is being used by Ensembl () to display comparative genomics annotations and the Centre for Therapeutic Target Validation (http://www.targetvalidation.org) to display both genomic features and tree based annotation in their websites.
