Motivation: Proteins underlay the functioning of a cell and the wiring of proteins in protein protein interaction network (PIN) relates to their biological functions. Proteins with similar wiring in the PIN (topology around them) have been shown to have similar functions. This property has been successfully exploited for predicting protein functions. Topological similarity is also used to guide network alignment algorithms that find similarly wired proteins between PINs of different species; these similarities are used to transfer annotation across PINs, e.g. from model organisms to human. To refine these functional predictions and annotation transfers, we need to gain insight into the variability of the topology function relationships. For example, a function may be significantly associated with specific topologies, while another function may be weakly associated with several different topologies. Also, the topology function relationships may differ between different species. Results: To improve our understanding of topology function relationships and of their conservation among species, we develop a statistical framework that is built upon canonical correlation analysis. Using the graph let degrees to represent the wiring around proteins in PINs and gene ontology (GO) annotations to describe their functions, our framework: (i) characterizes statistically significant topology function relationships in a given species, and (ii) uncovers the functions that have conserved topology in PINs of different species, which we term topologically orthologous functions. We apply our framework to PINs of yeast and human, identifying seven biological process and two cellular component GO terms to be topologically orthologous for the two organisms.

introduction proteins carry out specific tasks in a cell by binding to each other. New proteins are getting identified due to recent advances in genome sequencing technologies, and annotating their biological functions is receiving increasing interest (). Similarly wired proteins in the protein protein interaction networks (PINs) are shown to carry out similar functions and that fact has been exploited for transferring functional annotations between proteins (). A protein's function can be described at different levels of detail, from its molecular functions to the phenotypes that it affects. Identifying a unified descriptor for protein function is a challenging task due to the inter-dependencies and unclear separation between these levels. Gene ontology (GO) is a well established way of handling these issues (). A GO term represents either a biological process (BP), a molecular function, or a cellular component (CC) phenomenon and the ontology containing these terms describe their dependencies. A protein can be associated with multiple GO terms, each representing a different functional characteristic of the protein. One of the important properties of a network is density: density is the proportion of the node pairs in a network that are connected with edges and it measures how tightly the network is wired. Apart from density, many different standard network properties, such as degree distribution, clustering coefficient, betweenness centrality and closeness centrality, can be used for trying to understand the information contained in the wiring of a protein in the PIN (). graph lets have been shown to be particularly useful in capturing different aspects of the wiring around a node; graph lets are small, connected, non isomorphic induced subnetworks of a large network (). Nodes within each graph let are said to belong same automorphism orbit, if they can be mapped to each other by an automorphism (). The thirty 2 to 5-node graph lets and their 73 automorphism orbits are illustrated in. The wiring around a node can be described by generalizing the notion of node degree to graph let degree milenko vic nd milenko vic nd the graph let degree vector of node n, denoted by GDV n , is a 73 dimensional vector where its ith coordinate, GDV n, is the number of graph lets that node n touches at orbit i (). The GDV captures the wiring patterns around a node for all possible subnetworks with up to five nodes. Because proteins almost never perform their function alone, but interact with each other to carry out their function, analysing their interaction patterns can give valuable insights into their function inside a cell (). It has been shown that proteins with similar functions and cellular locations tend to cluster together in the PIN of yeast () and 7080% of interacting protein pairs share at least one function (). Several graph theoretic approaches were proposed to predict the functions of proteins based on their shared neighbourhoods () or on their closeness in the PINs (). However, it was shown that the functional similarities between proteins do not necessarily depend on them being in the same local neighbourhoods, but on the similarities of their interaction patterns independent of the network location milenko vic nd milenko vic nd pru lj 2008). Another group of methods aligns PINs of two or more species to identify the evolutionary conserved parts of the PINs and use the resulting node to node mappings to transfer the functional annotations of proteins across species (). These graph theoretic approaches show that the topological characteristics of proteins complement their sequence and structural characteristics and enable transfer of their functional annotation (). Although the link between topology and function has been widely studied, all of these studies assume that, for each function, the wiring patterns of the annotated proteins are similar. However, evolution might have varying effects on different parts of the PINs. For this reason, while some essential functions might carry the topological similarity constraint, other functions that are linked with more species specific processes may not have such topological similarity constraints and therefore, their topological characteristics can vary. Unlike the previous studies that aim to predict the functions of proteins from their wiring patterns in PINs, we aim to identify the most prominent wiring patterns of biological functions and to characterize their conservation across species. Our new method utilizes the canonical correlation analysis (CCA) method () to identify significant topology function relationships, with the topology being represented by the graph let degrees of proteins and their functions by GO annotations. To identify the evolutionarily conserved topology function relationships, we separately apply our cca based methodology on different species and integrate the obtained results. We illustrate our method on yeast and human PINs, as they are the most complete to date, and we uncover consistent topology function relationships for seven BP and two CC terms. These functions reveal the regions of the PINs that are evolutionarily the most conserved, which we term topologically orthologous. Furthermore, we perform three case studies on the identified patterns of dna dependent Transcription Initiation', 'Cellular Localization' and 'Proteasome Complex' GO annotations and show that our results are coherent with the underlying topology.

conclusion we propose a three step method that is able to find topology function relationships that persist across the PINs of different species topology function conservation in PPI networks even if these topological patterns are not formed by the same sets of proteins. With our method, we identify that seven BP and two CC GO terms have non-redundant topology function relationships for yeast and human. Our case studies on the patterns of dna dependent Transcription Initiation', 'Cellular Localization' and 'Proteasome Complex' validate that our results are in agreement with the underlying biological mechanisms. Our analysis uncovers conserved topology function relationships on a relatively small number of high level GO terms. This is due to the fact that GO terms that are annotated with small sets of proteins are less likely to appear as significant. Furthermore, while we mainly focus on conserved topology function relationships, our method also uncovers many species specific ones. For example, a highly specific GO term, 'Maturation of ssu rrna is linked with the orbits of dense graph lets (i.e. orbits 3, 14, 58, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72) in yeast while the same patterns are not observed in human. Analysis of such species specific topology function relationships can shed light on the wiring patterns of a wider range of functions and raise interesting questions about the underlying reasons for different wiring patterns of proteins annotated with the same GO terms in different species. This could further improve our understanding of the evolution of those functions. Although the association matrix can be used for predicting the GO term annotations of the proteins from their wiring patterns in PINs, our results show that not all topology function relationships are conserved across species, which is likely to negatively impact the quality of predictions. However, if prediction is the objective, graph let degree statistics can be further supported with other types of features (e.g. protein sequence, or structure). Our methodology can easily accommodate such additional features to derive more accurate linear transformations for predicting biological function. Our method is applicable to any number of species, although the incompleteness of the PINs limits it to yeast and human for the time being. When more complete protein protein interaction datasets become available, we will be able to apply our method without modification. By replacing the functional annotations with other biological information about proteins, our method would further uncover conserved wiring patterns in different phenomena, including those in disease or KEGG pathway annotations of proteins topology function conservation in PPI networks
