Motivation: A common problem in understanding a biochemical system is to infer its correct structure or topology. This topology consists of all relevant state variables usually molecules and their interactions. Here we present a method called topological augmentation to infer this structure in a statistically rigorous and systematic way from prior knowledge and experimental data. Results: Topological augmentation starts from a simple model that is unable to explain the experimental data and augments its topology by adding new terms that capture the experimental behavior. This process is guided by representing the uncertainty in the model topology through stochastic differential equations whose trajectories contain information about missing model parts. We first apply this semiauto-matic procedure to a pharmacokinetic model. This example illustrates that a global sampling of the parameter space is critical for inferring a correct model structure. We also use our method to improve our understanding of glutamine transport in yeast. This analysis shows that transport dynamics is determined by glutamine permeases with two different kinds of kinetics. Topological augmentation can not only be applied to biochemical systems, but also to any system that can be described by ordinary differential equations. Availability and implementation: Matlab code and examples are available at: http://www.csb.ethz.ch/tools/index.

introduction cellular processes, for instance in metabolism, signaling or transport, can often be modeled by sets of deterministic differential equations that describe concentration changes in the molecular species of interest over time. However, the kind of molecular interactions and the specific biochemical form they take in a cellular process are frequently uncertain. Such topological or structural uncertainty has been previously tackled by defining a set of candidate models (e.g. see) that reflects different mechanistic hypotheses. Each of these candidates could in principle encapsulate the process, and empirical data can be used to discriminate between them using available methods for statistical inference (). A severe limitation of evaluating all candidate models is that their number grows exponentially with the number of uncertainties in the model topology. To preselect a subset of candidate models that is small enough to be analyzed, one can incorporate all hypotheses into a single master model, which is then reduced by elimination of hypotheses (). However, the resulting subset of models may not contain any model that satisfactorily explains the experimental data. Furthermore, the number of model parameters increases with the number of hypothetical mechanisms, and model reduction may become infeasible due to the 'curse of dimensionality' (). If no satisfactory model emerges from model reduction, or if the number of hypothetical mechanisms is too large, it may be best to start the inference process from a smaller model that is successively extended and improved. However, there are few computational methods available to extend a model by systematically identifying missing terms in a differential equation, or by improving the existing terms have suggested using stochastic differential equations () instead of ordinary differential equations (ODEs) for model construction. In addition to deterministic terms as in ODEs, SDEs comprise stochastic terms that account for uncertainty in the realization of trajectories, and the equations' solution takes the form of a probability distribution. The method by exploits that stochastic equation terms may fill the gap between the model predictions and the experimental data, and point to the deterministic part of a model's equations that can be improved. This is because the estimated level of uncertainty in the prediction of *To whom correspondence should be addressed y

discussion topological augmentation is a method designed to infer biochemical models in the face of uncertainties about their structure. It classifies and quantifies topological uncertainties that emerge from experimental observations. The method starts from an (usually too simple) ODE model, which it re formulates with SDEs, and relies on the distribution of viable parameter points obtained from random sampling to reveal the presence and the form of missing or incomplete reactions. Motivated by current gaps in the biological understanding of glutamine transport in yeast, we developed a model for glutamine transport and generated experimental data for topological augmentation. Interestingly, this analysis indicated a subsidiary role of gap1 posterior probabilities for glutamine transport models (number of parameters in parentheses; for convergences see Supplementary)
