Motivation: It has been recognized that the topology of molecular networks provides information about the certainty and nature of individual interactions. Thus, network motifs have been used for predicting missing links in biological networks and for removing false positives. However, various different measures can be inferred from the structure of a given network and their predictive power varies depending on the task at hand. Results: Herein, we present a systematic assessment of seven different network features extracted from the topology of functional genetic networks and we quantify their ability to classify interactions into different types of physical protein associations. Using machine learning, we combine features based on network topology with non network features and compare their importance of the classification of interactions. We demonstrate the utility of network features based on human and budding yeast networks; we show that network features can distinguish different sub-types of physical protein associations and we apply the framework to fission yeast, which has a much sparser known physical interactome than the other two species. Our analysis shows that network features are at least as predictive for the tasks we tested as non network features. However, feature importance varies between species owing to different topological characteristics of the networks. The application to fission yeast shows that small maps of physical interactome s can be extended based on functional networks, which are often more readily available. Availability and implementation: The r code for computing the network features is available from www cellular networks org Contacts

introduction information about physical protein protein interactions pp is is essential for a system level understanding of complex biological mechanisms. Two of the major areas of research in that respect are the discovery and interpretation of pp is. A set of pp is can be represented as a network (or graph) where nodes represent proteins and edges represent physical binding proteins. The topology * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of molecular networks contains an extra layer of information beyond the mere representation of binary interactions, thus, topological properties and graph theoretical algorithms can be used for understanding and interpreting these networks (). Topological information is mainly used for the interpretation of pp is i.e. for extracting biological information. Based on network topology, proteins have been assessed for their association with a given disease () or functionally related modules have been extracted (Hua; milenko vic milenko vic and). In addition to interpretation, PPI network topology is also used for discovering new interactions. Features derived from network topology have been used for improving the quality of pp is obtained by high throughput screens such as yeast two hybrid (Y2H) or co purification methods followed by affinity purification mass spectrometry (AP-MS). PPI networks are improved either by eliminating false positive edges or by complementing the network by adding undetected interactions. For example, Friedel and Zimmer (2009) used minimum spanning trees (MSTs) to infer the topology of direct binding in protein complexes obtained from affinity purification assays took advantage of the fact that high quality pp is are well modeled by geometric graphs for the de-noising of pp is. They embedded the given PPI network into a Euclidian space and predicted interactions between proteins that are mapped closer than a threshold distance in the Euclidian space. Edges in the PPI that link proteins that are distant in the embedded space were classified as false positives. Others have identified protein complexes in networks by searching for densely connected regions (). All of these studies require physical PPI networks to be available as input, which is often not the case for many less studied organisms. Direct measurement of physical protein binding is a resource intensive task even though high throughput technologies such as AP-MS and Y2H exist. However, there is a large amount of data derived from other techniques (such as co-expression or genetic interactions) that hint at functional associations between genes or proteins rather than physical protein protein binding. As a result, predicted functional interaction networks (where 'functional interaction' is defined as pathway co membership are readily available for many organisms (). In this study, we investigate the possibility of using functional interaction networks to predict physical binding. Given a functional network, it is likely that only a subset of the edges will also correspond to physical association of the proteins.), but only XY and y z are directly interacting. We observed in such situations that if we convert strength of the functional interactions to edge weights such that stronger interactions have smaller weights, the weight, |XZ| between X and Z in the functional network is often higher than |XY| and y z. This motivates the shortest path ratio, which is xyy zxz. This ratio is less than 1 if the edges XY and y z are strong (small weight) compared to XZ.
