top down mass spectrometry enables the observation of whole complex proteo forms in biological samples and provides crucial information complementary to bottom up mass spec-trometry. Because of the complexity of top down mass spectra and proteo forms it is a challenging problem to efficiently interpret top down tandem mass spectra in high throughput proteome level proteomics studies. We present top pic a tool that efficiently identifies and characterizes complex proteo forms with unknown primary structure alterations, such as amino acid mutations and post-translational modifications, by searching top down tandem mass spectra against a protein database.

introduction in the past decade, top down mass spectrometry (MS) has rapidly developed because of the advances in protein separation and mass spectrometry techniques. It has unique advantages in identifying and characterizing proteo forms with primary structure alterations, such as amino acid mutations and post-translational modifications (PTMs), because top down tandem mass spectra cover whole proteo form sequences (). Although several software tools, such as pro sight pc () and p top (), have been developed for top down MS data analysis, efficient interpretation of high throughput top down MS data is still a challenging computational problem because intact proteo forms often contain unknown primary structure alterations compared with the unmodified forms in the protein database (). We developed top pic top down mass spectrometry based proteo form Identification and Characterization), a software tool for high throughput proteome wide proteo form identification and characterization by top down MS, which integrates algorithms for protein filtering, spectral alignment, E-value computation and Bayesian models for characterization of unknown amino acid mutations and PTMs. In addition, a user friendly web browser based interface is provided. top pic focuses on the identification and characterization of unknown primary structure alterations and the discovery of novel proteo forms. The performances of top pic with various parameter settings were evaluated on a top down tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) data set of Escherichia coli K-12 MG1655.

discussion top pic focuses on identifying proteo forms with unknown primary structure alterations and characterizing unknown modifications. It includes many useful features, such as proteo form identification by combining spectral pairs or triplets generated by the alternating fragmentation mode of mass spectrometers. It is much faster and more memory efficient compared with ms align. In addition, a web server based graphical user interface is provided. top pic is capable of identifying proteo forms with primary structure alterations, but it still has limitations in the analysis of very complex proteo forms. First, the filtering algorithms in top pic are based on finding protein segments without alterations that match to a part of the query spectrum with a large number of matched fragment masses. When a proteo form has many alterations, top pic may fail to identify it because the filtering algorithms can not find such a segment in the target protein. Second, variable PTMs are not incorporated into database search for proteo form identification. A proteo form with several variable PTMs, such as oxidation, may not be identified by top pic. Third, a simple mass counting score is used as the scoring function in top pic. A scoring function that takes into account peak intensities can further improve the sensitivity of proteo form identification and the accuracy of modification characterization.
