The intergenic regions of the ambi sense RNA segments of viruses from the to spo virus genus form large extended RNA structures that regulate virus replication. Using comparative structure analysis , we show the presence of conserved alternative conformations at the apical parts of these structures. In one conformation, a branched y shape the 5 0 proximal hairpin arms are mostly capped by exceptionally stable tetra loop motifs. The tetra loop hairpins are folded in both virus and virus complementary sense RNAs, and different tetra loops can functionally replace each other. Folding simulations show that the branched y shape structures can undergo a conformational transition to alternative extended rod like conformations. Functional importance of both alternatives is supported by nucleotide co variations. The balanced equilibrium between alternative structures is evi-denced by native gel electrophoresis of mutant RNA transcripts with shifted equilibria. The tetra loops play a role in the stability and dynamics of structures but may also be recognized by proteins involved in translation and or replication.

introduction viruses of the genus to spo virus are plant infecting pathogens that possess ambi sense genomic RNA segments (). These ambi sense segments, M (medium) and S (small), yield viral RNA transcripts of opposite polarities with non-overlapping protein coding regions. The 3 0 ends of v rna sense (the polarity of the negative sense RNA packaged in the virion) and vcr na virus complementary transcripts overlap in the intergenic regions (IGR) (). The to spo virus M and S RNA transcripts are not polyadenylated like the majority of eukaryotic mRNAs. Instead, they contain a rich sequences in the 3 0 UTR of mRNAs, encoded in the i grs that contain long stretches of a rich and U-rich sequences. This results in the folding of extended stem loop structures that have been suggested to regulate the translation and or transcription termination of mRNAs of both polarities (). The determinants of the regulatory functions of to spo virus IGR structured domains are not yet known. The structures (frequently called hairpins in the to spo virus literature) may fold into various shapes with branched or unbranched apical parts at the top of the A-Urich stem loops (e.g.). Here, we investigate the hairpins formed by the to spo virus M and S RNA IGR domains, searching for conserved structural features.

discussion comparison of predicted to spo virus IGR structures shows that their conserved hairpin arms exhibit a striking bias in the loop sequences to form tetra loops in the 5 0 proximal arms of both v rna and vcr na structures, using a considerable part of the known repertoire of extra stable tetra loop motifs. A probability of such a bias to be determined by chance alone is negligible. Given a structure with two tetra nucleotide hairpin loops, what is a constrained motif by itself, two stable tetra loops such as gnr a and yn mg would randomly occur with probability 1/512 in an uniform nucleotide distribution (for gnr a UNCG: 1/1024). Conservation of these motifs in different viruses is not determined just by shared ancestry because various tetra loop types are found in homologous hairpins, showing that the tetra loops were evolved several times. A probability of such independent events in different viruses and segments to be determined by chance, being the product of sequence motif probabilities, is negligible. This shows that the observed bias is determined by strong evolutionary constraints these constraints suggest fast co transcriptional formation of the metastable branched configurations that may delay the folding of more stable extended alternative stem loops. The energy barrier for this transition is determined by simultaneous disruption of two hairpins, with total stacking free energy of 15 20 kcal mol in 810 bp capped by stable tetra loops. Thus, the transition times may be considerable and effectively trap to spo virus i grs in branched configurations. Such kinetic trapping in a metastable conformation is supported by the IGR folding simulations and the experimental study of alternative structures (Supplementary). The coupled covariation pattern involving more than two bases () is an indicator of a fine tuned conformational transition (), and multiple note The loop closing pairs are shown in lowercase. The nucleotides in the loops other than stable tetra loops are shown by dots in the tetra loop type column.. Coupled co variations (boxed) in the S segment v rna structures examples of functionally important co transcriptional RNA folding are known (). Functional interchangeability of tetra loop types is usually explained by their exceptional stabilities (). However, the majority of to spo virus M segment GAAA tetra loops are closed by a U-A base pair (), which neither confers the exceptional stability nor is a frequent GAAA closing pair (). Furthermore, the GAAA tetra loops fold significantly slower than yn mg ones and have folding kinetics comparable with the loops with an arbitrary sequence (). Thus, it seems that certain features other than just thermodynamic stability and folding rate are important in the to spo virus RNA tetra loop replacements. Both gnr a and yn mg tetra loops are able to form tertiary interactions with various receptors in RNA (e.g.) and also can be recognized by proteins (). For instance, the less stable uga aaa motif, present in many to spo virus M segments (), specifically binds the phage N peptide (). Furthermore, by analogy to the behavior of the phage N peptide targets, the GTV vcr na 5 0 proximal loop ga aaa (), containing the extruding adenine from the gaaa like fold, is expected to retain comparable binding properties. The to spo virus IGR structures were suggested to stimulate translation by assisting in circular ization of mRNA (). Their y shape conformation resembles those of some of the plant virus translational enhancers such as the so called by dv like cap independent 3 0 UTR translational enhancers (). Remarkably, the by dv like cap independent 3 0 UTR translational enhancer left arms have gn rna and gnr a loops that have been suggested to determine the binding of the translation factor eIF4G and recruitment of eIF4E or other yet unidentified proteins (). The to spo virus S RNA structures have been shown to act in concert with the viral proteins N and NSs, presumably involving NSs binding to RNA (). One could speculate that the tetra loop motifs in the to spo virus IGR structures determine the binding of translation factors and or other proteins. A transition between two RNA structures may determine switching between different processes such as translation, transcription and replication. Replication enhancers may also adopt various y shape or unbranched conformations with diverse loop motifs (). Structurally diverse IGR domains are also folded in the ambi sense segments of some viruses of the genera ph lebo virus and arena virus (), but these structures are not conserved. This may be explained by differences in transcription termination mechanisms (). Further research is needed to elucidate the roles of the to spo virus ambi sense IGR structures and the function of the diverse tetra loop motifs.
