The identification of orthologs genes pairs descended from a common ancestor through speciation, rather than duplication— has emerged as an essential component of many bioinformatics applications, ranging from the annotation of new genomes to experimental target prioritization. Yet, the development and application of orthology inference methods is hampered by the lack of consensus on source proteomes, file formats and benchmarks. The second Quest for Orthologs meeting brought together stakeholders from various communities to address these challenges. We report on achievements and outcomes of this meeting, focusing on topics of particular relevance to the research community at large. The Quest for Orthologs consortium is an open community that welcomes contributions from all researchers interested in orthology research and applications. Contact:

introduction the concepts of orthology and paralogy are central to comparative genomics. These terms were coined more than four decades ago () to distinguish between two classes of gene homology: those descended from a common ancestor by virtue of a speciation event (orthologs) versus those that diverged by gene duplication (paralogs). This distinction permits accurate description of the complex evolutionary relationships within gene families including members distributed across multiple species. Detection of orthology and paralogy has become an essential component of diverse applications, including the reconstruction of evolutionary relationships across species (reviewed in), inference of functional gene properties (e.g.), and identification and testing of proposed mechanisms of genome evolution (e.g.). In to days context, with the number of fully sequenced genomes growing by the day, accurate and efficient inference of orthology has become an imperative. A plethora of computational methods have been developed for inferring orthologous relationships, many of which provide their predictions in form of web accessible databases (reviewed in). In 2009, the first Quest for Orthologs meeting was organized to bring together scientists working in the fields of orthology inference, genome annotation and genome evolution to exchange ideas, tackle common challenges, aiming at removing barriers and redundancy (). The main objectives identified were concerted effort toward standardized formats, datasets and benchmarks, and establishment of continuous communication channels including a mailing list, a website and a regular meeting. Following the first Quest for Ortholog meeting in 2009, a second meeting was held in June 2011, bringing together 45 participants from 27 different institutions on 3 continents, representing 20 orthology databases (http://questfororthologs. org orthology databases. The meeting was structured to include plenary sessions devoted to topics of general interest (reference datasets, orthology detection methodology, practical applications of orthology), and additional discussions focusing on benchmarking, standardized formats, alternative transcripts, ncRNA orthology, etc. In this letter, we summarize the discussions and specific outcomes of the meeting, as well as some of the most important achievements of the Quest for Orthologs community in the past 2 years.
