Motivation: A major goal of biomedical research in personalized medicine is to find relationships between mutations and their corresponding disease phenotypes. However, most of the disease related mutational data are currently buried in the biomedical literature in textual form and lack the necessary structure to allow easy retrieval and visualization. We introduce a high throughput computational method for the identification of relevant disease mutations in PubMed abstracts applied to prostate pc a and breast cancer (BCa) mutations. Results: We developed the extractor of mutations (EMU) tool to identify mutations and their associated genes. We benchmarked EMU against mutation finder a tool to extract point mutations from text. Our results show that both methods achieve comparable performance on two manually curated datasets. We also benchmarked EMUs performance for extracting the complete mutational information and phenotype. Remarkably, we show that one of the steps in our approach, a filter based on sequence analysis, increases the precision for that task from 0.34 to 0.59 pc a and from 0.39 to 0.61 (BCa). We also show that this high throughput approach can be extended to other diseases. Discussion: Our method improves the current status of disease mutation databases by significantly increasing the number of annotated mutations. We found 51 and 128 mutations manually verified to be related to pc a and Bca, respectively, that are not currently annotated for these cancer types in the OMIM or Swiss-Prot databases. EMUs retrieval performance represents a 2-fold improvement in the number of annotated mutations for pc a and BCa. We further show that our method can benefit from full text analysis once there is an increase in Open Access availability of full text articles.

introduction relating human genomic variation to disease risk is one of the major challenges of personalized medicine. During the past decade, hundreds of mutations in the human genome have been associated to disease phenotypes. When available, this information can be integrated into the analysis of genomic variation of individual genomes, which is crucial to developing personalized medicine approaches. Yet, mutational information is, for the most part, in textual form and not organized for easy identification and association to the corresponding disease phenotype. Moreover, the complexity of natural language processing and the continuous exponential growth of literature repositories (e.g. PubMed) make extracting this information challenging. Publicly available databases like online Mendelian inheritance in man (OMIM) () and Swiss-Prot () contain categorized protein and DNA mutational information with explicit associations to cancer and other diseases. Other resources focus on specific diseases, such as cancer [e.g. Cancer Gene Index (or specific chromosomal locations (). These databases are currently constructed and curated manually, which is a slow process that limits the number of cancer mutations available to the biomedical community. text mining methods to find reported mutations in these databases have yielded up to 0.98 sensitivity () but, to date, no accurate automatic methods to find disease related mutations are available. Several algorithms have been developed to extract mutational data from the biomedical literature. All of these methods implement standard regular expressions to identify either the point mutations alone [e.g. mutation finder (, or both the mutations and their associated gene and protein names [e.g. mem a (); mu text (. Most of the 'mutation + gene' recognition methods implement standard regular expressions and generate text collections of the point mutation information; some, however, provide algorithmic and interface alternatives. For instance, Mutation Grab () uses graph based expressions to identify mutations, while mutation miner () uses structural visualizations to display them. Overall, most methods have focused on the extraction of point mutations and their association with specific genes with reasonable accuracy. However, generating a resource of disease related mutations is still a challenge page 409 408415

discussion in this section, we discuss the results for the comparison of: (i) two methods to extract mutations (EMU versus mutation finder and ii the advantages and disadvantages of using seq filter. We also discuss mapping the mutations found by EMU to disease mutation reference databases. In addition, we discuss the feasibility of applying our approach to other diseases and to full text articles, as well as the main challenges we foresee in the complete automation of the annotation of disease mutations extracted from PubMed abstracts.
