Motivation: Pairwise alignment of protein structures is a fundamental task in structural bioinformatics. There are numerous computer programs in the public domain that produce alignments for a given pair of protein structures, but the results obtained by the various programs generally differ substantially. Hence, in the application of such programs the question arises which of the alignment programs are the most trustworthy in the sense of overall performance, and which programs provide the best result for a given pair of proteins. The major problem in comparing, evaluating and judging alignment results is that there is no clear notion of the optimality of an alignment. As a consequence , the numeric criteria and scores reported by the individual structure alignment programs are largely incomparable. Results: Here we report on the development and application of a new approach for the evaluation of structure alignment results. The method uses the translation vector and rotation matrix to generate the super-position of two structures but discards the alignment reported by the individual programs. The optimal alignment is then generated in standardized form based on a suitably implemented dynamic programming algorithm where the length of the alignment is the single most informative parameter. We demonstrate that some of the most popular programs in protein structure research differ considerably in their overall performance. In particular, each of the programs investigated here produced in at least in one case the best and the worst alignment compared with all others. Hence, at the current state of development of structure comparison techniques, it is advisable to use several programs in parallel and to choose the optimal alignment in the way reported here. Availability and implementation: The computer software that implement the method described here is freely available at http://melolab. orgs to vca
introduction an alignment of two protein sequences is completely defined by a set of pairs of amino acids, one from each protein, that are considered to be equivalent or related. On the other hand, an alignment of two protein structures can be considered as a sequence alignment together with the geometric transformation that simultaneously superimposes the C atoms of the equivalent amino acid pairs. In fact, for any sequence alignment, the associated optimal transformation is found by minimizing the root mean square (RMS) error of the C distances between the equivalent pairs of residues. This unique optimal transformation can be computed efficiently (). The remaining question is how to get the most suitable or optimal alignment. At the current state of affairs the question is unanswered. The reason is that in the construction of structure alignments, two conflicting goals need to be satisfied. One goal is to maximize the number of equivalent residues, i.e. the length of the alignment, the second is to minimize the associated RMS error. Obviously, one can lower the RMS error at the expense of shortening the alignment, or one can maximize the alignment length on the expense of increasing the RMS error. But it remains unclear what combination of alignment length and RMS value provides the most suitable result in any particular case. Lacking a clear definition of what constitutes an optimal alignment, structural bioinformatics has created an ever growing arsenal of computer programs (), all dedicated to solve one and the same problem, the pairwise superposition of two protein structures, where each program provides its own numerical criteria and scores to describe the properties of the alignments obtained. From a user's point of view, the situation is most confusing. Research on protein structure requires structure alignment tools, but it is unclear which programs produce the most valuable results in a given situation and how the results obtained have to be interpreted (;). Obviously some effort of standardization is required. In what follows, we describe an approach that can be used to compare structure alignments obtained from any program that reports the geometric transformation required to superimpose the two structures. In fact, the transformation, consisting of a translation vector and a rotation matrix, is the essential result of any structure alignment technique. Using the transformation, the structures can be superimposed and, from the superimposed structures, alignments can be constructed. Transformation and superposition on the one hand and alignment construction on the other can be executed independently. It is therefore possible to use the transformations reported by the individual programs *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com to compute standardized structure alignments and the associated alignment length. As we demonstrate below, this standardized alignment length, which is optimal when obtained with a dynamic programming algorithm on some defined parameters, is a most convenient measure for the comparison and ranking of structure alignment results ().

discussion as we have demonstrated here, the construction of structural alignments of proteins can be split in two independent parts i the geometric transformation required for the superposition of two structures and (ii) the read-out of the associated sequence alignment from the superimposed coordinates. The transformation captures the performance of a particular protein structure alignment program whereas the read-out of the alignment can be standardized. In this way the geometric transformation is mapped to a single characteristic number, the alignment length, which can then be used to judge the performance of individual methods or to choose the longest alignment from a set of alternatives. Using this approach, we have shown that the various programs investigated here perform quite differently on the benchmark data set on the one hand the programs split in two groups where one group clearly outperforms the other, but at the same time there is no single program consistently producing the optimal alignment. Therefore, depending on the application, it may be advantageous to use several programs in parallel to choose the most appropriate alignment from the ensemble of alternatives reported by the individual programs in each case. It is important to highlight that the software developed here, called sto vca is used only to calculate sequence based alignments of maximum length from an input pair-wise protein structure superposition generated with another software. The alignment produced by sto vca is optimal according to the user provided parameters. Given a fixed set of parameters, the resulting sequence alignments are standardized and thus they can be compared directly. In benchmarking the various programs, we used single domains of comparable size corresponding to the most basic scenario encountered in protein structure research. In many applications the situation is more complex. Proteins often consist of several domains, contain repeats, the alignment may require permutations in the sequences, and the complete description of the extent of structural similarity of two proteins may require several alternative alignments. We have not addressed these issues here, as only a few programs report a full set of alignments, can handle permutations or multi-domain proteins (e.g.). Therefore, besides the criteria of optimality we have discussed here, the power of a structure alignment program and the quality of the results obtained critically depend on these additional criteria. Additionally, we have not incorporated in this benchmark any software that carries out flexible protein structure superposition, but only rigid structure superposition. Given that maximum alignment length was the criteria adopted to assess the performance of the structure superposition methods, it would be unfair to use this measure to assess the performance of flexible aligners, which normally produces many short alignments with a low RMS error. Along the same line of discussion, it is also fair to mention that not all the structure superposition software tested here have been optimized to maximize the alignment length. This may explain why on average some software tools perform better than others. The focus of the work presented here is not to compare and rank different structure superposition software but rather to emphasize that in difficult cases the results obtained from the various programs may differ considerably. A reasonable strategy to compare various alignments and to select the best one according to a given measure (like alignment length) is to generate all the alignments in standardized form. This is exactly what the method reported here does. Similar strategies may eventually be developed in the future for alternative measures, thus allowing the comparison of software performance from distinct point of views. We expect that the use of the method presented here improves the accuracy of structural alignments of distantly related and single domain proteins, which in turn may have a widespread and positive impact in the study of: (i) sequence structure relationships in proteins and RNA molecules, (ii) evolutionary relationships in protein families that exhibit a high divergence at the sequence level, (iii) identification of functionally important residues and (iv) classification of protein and RNA structures structure superposition was generated by the specific software tools mentioned above, and the subsequent calculation of the optimal structure alignment with sto vca software was carried out. Segments of protein chains that do not contain equivalent positions are shown in blue (query protein chain) and green (target protein chain) colours. Structurally aligned regions of blue and green protein chains are shown in red and orange colours, respectively ACKNOWLEDGEMENT We are very grateful to Dr Lisa Holm for sending us the Dali software, as well as for her support to install it in our computer systems in the superposition generated with top match and the corresponding optimal structure alignment obtained with sto vca. Colouring scheme used here is the same as that described in
