Motivation: piwi interacting RNA pirn a is the most recently discovered and the least investigated class of argonaut epi wi protein interacting small non-coding RNAs. The pirn as are mostly known to be involved in protecting the genome from invasive transposable elements. But recent discoveries suggest their involvement in the pathophysiology of diseases, such as cancer. Their identification is therefore an important task, and computational methods are needed. However, the lack of conserved pirn a sequences and structural elements makes this identification challenging and difficult. Results: In the present study, we propose a new modular and exten-sible machine learning method based on multiple kernels and a support vector machine (SVM) classifier for pirn a identification. Very few pirn a features are known to date. The use of a multiple kernels approach allows editing, adding or removing pirn a features that can be heterogeneous in a modular manner according to their relevance in a given species. Our algorithm is based on a combination of the previously identified features [sequence features km er motifs and a uri-dine at the first position) and pirn as cluster feature] and a new telomere centromere vicinity feature. These features are heterogeneous , and the kernels allow to unify their representation. The proposed algorithm, named pir pred gives promising results on Drosophila and Human data and out scores previously published pirn a identification algorithms. Availability and implementation: pir pred is freely available to non-commercial users on our Web server evry rna http://EvryRNA.ibisc.

introduction using computational approaches is a practical manner to identify potential non-coding RNAs nc rnas which can be experimentally studied further. Many methods have been developed for the in silico prediction of several types of nc rnas such as microRNAs (miRNAs). The Piwi protein interacting RNA pirn a is the most recently discovered and the least characterized class of argonaut e ago piwi protein interacting small ncRNA. Unlike the broad expression of miRNA in most cells and tissue types, pirn a expression is highly enriched in the germline. Like miRNA, pirn a molecules are associated with proteins of the ago piwi family to execute sequence specific gene silencing. Additionally, pirn a molecules may fine tune gene expression by mediating epigenetic modifications of heterochromatin. The germline enriched expression pattern and the finding that mutating the pirn a biogenesis pathway resulted in sterility demonstrated the critical impact of the piwi pirn a pathway exert on germline development and function (). In addition to their activity in the germline, accumulating recent data have suggested pirn a expression and biological activity in somatic cells as well, and recent discoveries suggest the involvement of pirn as in diseases such as cancer (). Therefore, an updated vision suggests a wider definition of pirn a expression and biological function in both germline and somatic cells (). The pirn as are the largest and most heterogeneous class of the small ncRNA family, exceeding 2 million distinct pirn a species in the mouse (). Initial identification and characterization of mammalian pirn as were achieved by experimental approaches that combined the isolation of Piwi protein interacting sequences and or deep sequencing of germline enriched short RNA sequences (). Although this methodology appeared productive, it could not exhaustively cover the entire repertoire of pirn a molecules in a specific organism. In particular, tissue specific and low copy number expressed pirn a could not be fully detected using this methodology. Unlike miRNAs, pirn as lack clear secondary structure motifs, and primary sequence conservation, except for enrichment for the presence of a uridine nucleotide at the 5 0 first position of the transcript (Le). One hallmark characteristic of pirn a sequences, that are of 2435 nt of length, is that most of them are encoded in genome clusters ranging from 1 to 4100 kb long. There are both mono directional clusters encoding pirn as on one strand, and bidirectional clusters whose halves encode pirn as on opposite strands and whose transcription starts in the opposite direction from a centrally located promoter (). Brennecke et al. have also reported that in Drosophila, pirn as have the tendency to be expressed near telomere and centromere regions on the chromosome (). The lack of conserved characteristics makes the identification of pirn as by computational methods a difficult challenge. Only a few methods have been developed to predict pirn as. These methods can be classified into two classes. The first one uses a linear classification algorithm to predict individual pirn as (), and the second one is based on clustering approaches to predict pirn a clusters from rnase q sequences (). Zhang et al. group proposed a method based on the use of km er strings for the identification of motifs in pirn a sequences. All the 15 nt strings are considered, including 4 1-mer strings (A, C, G and T), *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/4.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com 16 2-mer strings, 64 3-mer strings, 256 4-mer strings and 1024 5-mer strings. A total of 1364 strings are obtained and used for classifying pirn a and non pirn a sequences. Two algorithms have been proposed for predicting pirn a clusters from rnase q data: proTRAC () and pic lust (). The proTRAC algorithm is based on a statistical probabilistic analysis. It analyzes mapped sequence reads and identifies clusters based on significant deviations from a uniform pirn a distribution, using different types of information, including the density of mapped reads, strand asymmetry, frequency of putative pirn a loci with U at the first position of the sequence, or A at Position 10. On the other hand, the pic lust algorithm uses a density based clustering approach without assuming any parametric distribution and considers the actual inter distance between mapped reads for the determination of clustering, with results that were claimed to outperform the proTRAC algorithm. Taken together, previous pirn a prediction algorithms were based on the following features: (i) transcript length of 2435 nt, (ii) nucleotide bias at Position 1 of G expression, (iii) localization in clusters and (iv) differential frequencies of certain km er sequences. To the best of our knowledge, however, none of the previous publications have attempted to combine all of these features together. Exploiting all these features could improve the results obtained by the existing algorithms. In this article, we propose a computational approach to combine heterogeneous types of pirn a features. We developed a machine learning method based on the fusion of multiple kernels and support vector machines (SVMs) (), a well known machine learning method that has been widely used in diverse areas of bioinformatics. SVM is a kernel based learner, which can find non liner boundaries between data classes by using kernels. Using kernel methods makes it possible to represent the original data by using a matrix representation, called a kernel matrix. Symmetric positive definite kernel matrices encode the similarity between sequences in their respective input space. This implies that the heterogeneous features can all be replaced by appropriately kernel matrices. This allows the elimination of the data heterogeneity. Constructing the same representation for all datasets and integrating these representations is the main intuition behind kernel fusion methods. In recent years, several machine learning methods have been proposed to exploit different information sources using kernels (G  one n and alpay d 2011). Research in multiple kernel learning (MKL) has focused on both developing new formulations as well as optimizing them. Different formulations are required to address the needs of different applications. Most of the methods using these formulations propose to learn the combined kernels by tuning automatically the kernel weights (G  one n and). Early work focused on learning the kernel as a linear combination of given base kernels (). Non-linear kernel combinations (), such as products of kernels and mixtures of polynomials, have also been shown to be appropriate in certain domains. Many of these formulations can be easily cast in the generalized MKL gm kl framework proposed in (). In the pirn a prediction problem, the use of multiple kernels makes it possible to propose a modular and extensible method. Thus, new kernels representing newly discovered pirn a characteristics can easily be added. Because the research on pirn as is at its beginning, it is important to have methods that can integrate new knowledge about this RNA. The multiple kernel method also has the advantage of allowing exploration of characteristics, even when these are not yet validated, which is helpful in this context. Thus, it could be possible to ignore an implemented kernel if it turns out not to be useful and or corresponds to a false knowledge. Our method is therefore adaptive, the user being able to consider the appropriate kernels according to the data type and studied species. To summarize, we have developed an extensible and adaptive classification method for pirn a prediction, which is distinct from the existing methods in several aspects: (i) several kernels that represent heterogeneous feature sets are built and used, (ii) a new type of feature is explored, (iii) the characteristic of pirn as to occur in clusters on the chromosome is coded in a kernel to use it in a supervised way and (iv) a non-linear classifier approach is used, which is more suitable for real world data. Here we describe our multiple kernel based SVM algorithm, called pir pred and we report the results that we have obtained, that are promising.

conclusion the present study aimed at the development of a novel algorithm for the identification of pirn a sequences. We propose a multiple kernel fusion and an svm based approach that allows to use heterogeneous features, each kernel implementing a class of features. Our approach is therefore modular, extensible and adaptive, allowing the implementation of new features or the use of more appropriate ones (depending on the species). In the context of pirn as which have not been studied as extensively as miRNAs, for instance, it is appreciable to be able to take into account new knowledge and discoveries on these RNAs. Because of the lack of known conserved characteristics of pirn a sequences (except the occurrence of a uridine base at the first position) and structure (there is no known structure for pirn as their identification by computational methods is a difficult task. To our knowledge, only one computational method, based on km er motifs, has been reported in the literature for pirn a prediction (). Two other methods have been reported, based on the characteristic of pirn as to occur in clusters in the genome (), which identify pirn a clusters from deep sequencing data. In the present study, we have provided a few new elements. We have suggested and confirmed a new feature for pirn a identification, which is the distance to telomere centromere regions, which was reported on Drosophila (). We then tested this feature in combination with previously published features in the context of a modular algorithm, and surprisingly, we were able to identify its utility not only in Drosophila but also in Human. Last, we provide a computational tool for pirn a identification that gives better results than the previously published Zhang et al. method (). One of our further perspectives is to continue our investigation by finding other characteristics of pirn as that would allow us to define new kernels and thus to improve the prediction results. We plan, for instance, to consider a characteristic of pirn a clusters highlighted by a computational analysis performed in the mouse by, who suggest that 25% of pirn a clusters are bracketed by inverted repeats of varying length. One of our other perspectives for improving our classification results is to perform the training step on all known pirn as i.e. on pirn a sequences of pirn a bank and to build kernels with all these sequences. For this classification problem with large training dataset, accuracy, training and testing speed and note TP, true positive predictions; SE, sensitivity. In bold: The highest value in each column.
