Targeting peptides are n terminal sorting signals in proteins that promote their translocation to mitochondria through the interaction with different protein machineries. We recently developed tpp red a machine learning based method scoring among the best ones available to predict the presence of a targeting peptide into a protein sequence and its cleavage site. Here we introduce TPpred2 that improves tpp red performances in the task of identifying the cleavage site of the targeting peptides. TPpred2 is now available as a web interface and as a stand-alone version for users who can freely download and adopt it for processing large volumes of sequences. Availability and implement a ion TPpred2 is available both as web server and stand-alone version at http://tppred2.

introduction the vast majority of mitochondrial proteins are encoded by the nuclear genome, synthesized on the cytosolic ribosomes and therefrom translocated to the different sub mitochondrial localizations. The best characterized mechanism that controls the import into the mitochondrion involves the detection of an n terminal pre sequence the so called targeting peptide, which directs the protein across different translocating protein complexes embedded in the outer and inner mitochondrial membranes. The sorting peptide is proteolytically cleaved when the protein reaches the final destination (). The detection of targeting peptides starting from protein sequences is then an important step to fully characterize the sequence of the mature protein and to annotate its function and localization. Different computational methods can help the annotation of targeting peptides in proteins. The best performing methods implement machine learning approaches, such as artificial neural network, support vector machines (SVMs), hidden Markov models and grammatical restrained Hidden Conditional Random Fields grh crfs (). Here we describe TPpred2, our new implementation for the prediction of mitochondrial targeting peptides and their cleavage sites. The new predictor combines tpp red our previous grh crf based method for the prediction of mitochondrial and plastid ic targeting peptides (), with an additional refinement steps vm based for cleavage site identification. In particular, the SVM classifier is used to identify the correct cleavage site by exploiting tpp red prediction signals (extracted in terms of grh crf based positional posterior probabilities) and a newly defined feature that captures the occurrence of sequence motifs previously recognized at the cleavage sites (). When tested on the non-redundant dataset of proteins of mitochondrial and 8010 non mitochondrial proteins; see Supplementary Section 1.1), TPpred2 significantly outperforms our previous tpp red predictor on mitochondrial cleavage site detection. TPPred2, being optimized for the prediction of cleavage sites of mitochondrial proteins, is not adequate for the identification of plant targeting peptides.

conclusion in this article, we present TPpred2, a software tool for the prediction of mitochondrial targeting peptides and their cleavage sites. The improved performance of TPpred2 is achieved by jointly exploiting, for the first time to our knowledge, peculiar sequence motifs characterizing the cleavage site and grh crf prediction signals. The new TPpred2 predictor is able to better identify cleavage sites when compared with our previous implementation. The software is available as a web server and, most importantly, as a stand-alone program, making it well suited for large scale genomic analysis note See Supplementary Section 1.2.5 for details about scoring measures.
