Motivation: Transposable elements (TEs) can be found in virtually all eukaryotic genomes and have the potential to produce evolutionary novelty. Despite the broad taxonomic distribution of TEs, the evolutionary history of these sequences is largely unknown for many tax a due to a lack of genomic resources and identification methods. Given that most TE annotation methods are designed to work on genome assemblies, we sought to develop a method to provide a fine grained classification of TEs from DNA sequence reads. Here, we present a toolkit for the efficient annotation of TE families from low coverage whole genome shotgun (WGS) data, enabling the rapid identification of TEs in a large number of tax a. We compared our software, transpo some with other approaches for annotating repeats from WGS data, and we show that it offers significant improvements in run time and produces more precise estimates of genomic repeat abundance.

introduction genomic repeat annotation is a challenging task, in part because there are dozens of tools available and not all have not been analyzed in terms of performance or accuracy (). Current approaches for identifying transposable elements (TEs) involve using structural and similarity based approaches with a genome assembly (), mathematical or km er based methods from genome assemblies or random sequence reads (), signature based methods with annotated TEs (), and cluster based approaches from unassembled sequence reads (). Without question, the most accurate method for identifying TEs would be through a combination of the above methods (). One caveat with the aforementioned approaches is that most require a reference genome (i.e. assembled genome) as input. It is not, however, practical to generate a reference genome for every species of interest given that genome sequencing costs remain prohibitively high for non model species, and genome assembly algorithms are not able to easily resolve large and complex genomes (), such as those of many plant species. Therefore, the ideal solution to improving repeat annotation from understudied V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com species would be to leverage high throughput DNA sequencing technologies, enabling phylogenetic descriptions of TE properties in many species simultaneously. Here we present transpo some a toolkit that is able to accurately estimate the genomic abundance of TE families from very low coverage whole genome shotgun (WGS) data, enabling the rapid detection of changes in genome composition across many species. transpo some borrows much of its design from repeat explorer (), a recently published tool for detecting repeats from WGS data. repeat explorer provides an easy to use web interface for users; however, we found this tool to be computationally inefficient and the design is not modular, which makes analyses of multiple species and designing custom pipelines impractical. transpo some builds on the basic approach of repeat explorer which is finding similarity in the genome through a graph based analysis of similarity between WGS reads. We extend this approach in transpo some to provide a more fine-scale level of annotation of genomic repeats, and we provide direct estimates of genomic repeat abundance in biological terms. We demonstrate the utility of transpo some by analyzing a set of WGS reads from the well studied maize (Zea mays L.) genome, and we compare our results to published estimates of genome composition for this species. Our findings indicate that tran po some is both more accurate at quantifying genomic repeats, and more efficient than other approaches (Supplementary).
