Motivation: rnase q uses the high throughput sequencing technology to identify and quantify transcriptome at an unprecedented high resolution and low cost. However, rnase q reads are usually not uniformly distributed and biases in rnase q data post great challenges in many applications including transcriptome assembly and the expression level estimation of genes or isoforms. Much effort has been made in the literature to calibrate the expression level estimation from biased rnase q data, but the effect of biases on tran-scriptome assembly remains largely unexplored. Results: Here, we propose a statistical framework for both transcrip-tome assembly and isoform expression level estimation from biased rnase q data. Using a quasi multinomial distribution model, our method is able to capture various types of rnase q biases, including positional, sequencing and mapp ability biases. Our experimental results on simulated and real rnase q datasets exhibit interesting effects of rnase q biases on both transcriptome assembly and isoform expression level estimation. The advantage of our method is clearly shown in the experimental analysis by its high sensitivity and precision in transcriptome assembly and the high concordance of its estimated expression levels with quantitative reverse transcription– polymerase chain reaction data. Availability: CEM is freely available at

introduction rnase q or deep sequencing of RNAs, takes the advantage of recent high throughput sequencing methods to detect and quantify transcriptome s (). The rnase q technology is becoming a standard and fundamental protocol in transcript omic research and has successfully been applied to study different organisms, diseases and cancers. Various bioinformatics algorithms and tools have been developed for rnase q data analysis, including read mapping and junction discovery (), the expression level estimation of genes isoforms and differential expression analysis (), transcriptome assembly from mapped reads (e.g.) or de novo assembly (e.g.), etc. Despite the success of these rnase q applications, many challenges remain in the analysis of rnase q data, one of which comes from the understanding and handling of biases in rnase q data. The term 'bias' refers to the non-random, non-uniform distribution of the sequenced fragments (or 'reads') across the involved isoforms [or messenger RNA (mRNA) transcripts] in an rnase q experiment. Both positional () and sequencing biases () are routinely observed in rnase q experiments. Positional bias is the non-uniform distribution of reads over different positions of a transcript, while sequencing bias refers to the distribution of reads related to the sequence content and priming method (). Since many next generation sequencing applications (including rnase q require the mapping of reads to the reference genome, the mapp ability bias is also an important source of biases in rnase q and chips eq (). The mapp ability bias arises when read counts are biased due to read mapping. For example, some reads may not be mapped due to sequencing errors and some applications discard reads mapped to the repeat regions of the reference genome; the numbers of reads are thus under-counted for these regions. Also, incorrect read mapping leads to incorrect read counts for regions where the involved reads are mapped to. Biases in rnase q data may cause inaccurate expression level estimation of genes (or isoforms), where most bias correction methods try to overcome. For example, positional biases are handled by learning non-uniform read distributions from given rnase q reads or modeling the RNA degradation (). In Srivastava and Chen (2010), a generalized Poisson (GP) model is used to calculate the expression levels of genes affected mainly by sequencing biases. Other approaches include checking the repeat regions of the reference genome to handle mapp ability biases (), modeling the dependency between neighboring positions to correct sequencing biases () or a combination of several strategies (). However, some methods can handle only one specific type of biases (e.g.) or correct biases only at the gene level (). Other more general methods use sophisticated probabilistic generative models that require the learning of a large number of parameters and thus have to *To whom correspondence should be addressed. make some simplifying assumptions to make the computation tractable (). Besides expression level estimation, the rnase q biases also have significant effects on transcriptome assembly. For example, rnase q biases may generate 'gap regions' on the reference genome where no mapped reads are observed. Because of these gaps, two broken transcripts may be assembled instead of one complete transcript. Also, incorrectly mapped reads may lead to incorrect transcript assemblies. As far as we know, most work in the literature concerning rnase q biases deal with correcting gene (or isoform) expression level estimation, and the effects of biases on the transcriptome assembly remain largely unexplored. In this article, we propose a statistical framework based on the quasi multinomial distribution model (;) to capture the above mentioned rnase q biases, including positional, sequencing and mapp ability biases. The framework allows us to develop an expectation maximization (EM) algorithm () for both transcriptome assembly and isoform abundance level estimation from biased rnase q data. Compared with other algorithms in the literature that use sophisticated probabilistic generative models to handle biases, our EM algorithm uses a single parameter to capture the property of rnase q biases of different types. Utilizing the isoform enumeration algorithm of iso lasso (), the EM algorithm assembles isoforms and estimates their abundance levels at the same time. Moreover, both principles of prediction accuracy and interpretation (or 'sparsity') considered in are achieved in the assembly. The statistical framework and the EM algorithm are introduced in Sections 2 and 3, we demonstrate the superior performance of our EM algorithm compared with other algorithms in the literature through simulated and real rnase q experiments and analyze the effects of rnase q biases on both transcriptome assembly and isoform abundance level estimation. Due to the page limit, we defer some figures and technical derivations to the Supplementary Materials.
