Motivation: Imaging genetics is an emerging field that studies the influence of genetic variation on brain structure and function. The major task is to examine the association between genetic markers such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and quantitative traits (QTs) extracted from neuroimaging data. The complexity of these datasets has presented critical bioinformatics challenges that require new enabling tools. Sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA) is a bi multivariate technique used in imaging genetics to identify complex multi snp multi qt associations. However, most of the existing SCCA algorithms are designed using the soft thresholding method, which assumes that the input features are independent from one another. This assumption clearly does not hold for the imaging genetic data. In this article, we propose a new knowledge guided SCCA algorithm kg scca to overcome this limitation as well as improve learning results by incorporating valuable prior knowledge. Results: The proposed kg scca method is able to model two types of prior knowledge: one as a group structure (e.g. linkage disequilib-rium blocks among SNPs) and the other as a network structure (e.g. gene co-expression network among brain regions). The new model incorporates these prior structures by introducing new regularization terms to encourage weight similarity between grouped or connected features. A new algorithm is designed to solve the kg scca model without imposing the independence constraint on the input features. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm with both synthetic and real data. For real data, using an Alzheimers disease (AD) cohort, we examine the imaging genetic associations between all SNPs in the APOE gene (i.e. top AD gene) and amyloid deposition measures among cortical regions (i.e. a major AD hallmark). In comparison with a widely used SCCA implementation, our kg scca algorithm produces not only improved cross validation performances but also biologically meaningful results. Availability: Software is freely available on request.

introduction brain imaging genetics is an emerging field that studies the influence of genetic variation on brain structure and function. Its major task is to examine the association between genetic markers such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and quantitative traits (QTs) extracted from multimodal neuroimaging data (e.g. anatomical, functional and molecular imaging scans). Given the well known importance of gene and imaging phenotype in brain function, bridging these two factors and exploring their connections would lead to a better mechanistic understanding of normal or disordered brain functions. The complexity of these data, however, has presented critical bioinformatics challenges requiring new enabling tools. Early studies in imaging genetics typically focused on pairwise univariate analysis (). Many recent studies turned to regression analysis for exploring the joint effect of multiple SNPs on single or few QTs () and bi multivariate analyses for revealing complex multi snps multi qts associations (). Canonical correlation analysis (CCA), a bi multivariate method, has been applied to imaging genetics applications. It aims to find the best linear transformation for imaging and genetics features so that the highest correlation between imaging and genetic components can be achieved. Based on the assumption that a real imaging genetic signal typically involves a small number of SNPs and QTs, sparse canonical correlation analysis (SCCA) has also been applied in several imaging genetic studies by imposing the Lasso regularization term to yield sparse results (). However, most existing SCCA algorithms are designed using the soft thresholding technique, which assumes that the input features are independent from one another (). This assumption clearly does not hold for the imaging genetic data [e.g. the existence of the structural and functional networks in the brain and the linkage disequilibrium (LD) blocks in the genome]. Directly ignoring the covariance structure in the data will inevitably limit the capability of yielding optimal results. In this article, we propose a new knowledge guided SCCA algorithm kg scca to overcome this limitation as well as to aim for improving learning results by incorporating valuable prior knowledge. The proposed kg scca method is able to model two types of prior knowledge: one as a group structure (e.g. LD blocks among SNPs) and the other as a network structure (e.g. gene co-expression network among brain regions). The new model incorporates these prior structures by introducing new regularization terms to encourage similarity between grouped or connected features. A new algorithm is designed to solve the kg scca model without imposing the independence *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals permission soup com constraint on the input features. We demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm with both synthetic and real data. For real data, using an Alzheimer's disease (AD) cohort, we examine the imaging genetic associations between all SNPs in the APOE gene (i.e. top AD gene) and amyloid deposition measures among cortical regions (i.e. a major AD hallmark). In comparison with a widely used SCCA implementation in the pm a software package (http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/PMA/) (), our kg scca algorithm produces improved cross validation performances as well as biologically meaningful results.
