Transcript Structure and Domain Display t sdd is a publicly available, web based program that provides publication quality images of transcript structures and domains. t sdd is capable of producing transcript structures from GFF/GFF3 and BED files. Alternatively, the GFF files of several model organisms have been pre-loaded so that users only needs to enter the locus IDs of the transcripts to be displayed. Visualization of transcripts provides many benefits to researchers, ranging from evolutionary analysis of dna binding domains to predictive function modeling. Availability and implementation: t sdd is freely available for non-commercial users at

introduction due to high demand for publication quality transcript visualization software, there have been several software solutions available for researchers. Each of these solutions has advantages and drawbacks. For instance, gec a (), which can be used online or downloaded to a server for offline usage, has a relatively quick runtime, and has an appealing user interface. However, it is difficult to use and lacks customizable features and custom motifs. gec a also requires the DNA sequence, protein sequence and a GFF3 file which could pose a problem for those who may not have this information available. feature stacks () advantages include relatively high quality images and the capacity to display custom domains. However, feature stack lacks an online version, requiring users to download and install a program onto their server. fancy gene () is highly customizable, allowing selection of feature colors, feature sizes and custom motifs. However, it can only display a single gene at a time. gs draw () produces customizable, high quality images with the capability of custom motifs. In addition, gs draw provides users with a phylogenetic tree. However, gs draw has a long run time, requires both the genomic and CDS sequences, and can not utilize a GFF3 file. g sds 2.0 (), is a fast, easy to use, web based program that requires only a GFF3 file and produces customizable results that include custom motifs and a phylogenetic tree. However, g sds has some limitations. g sds can only process a maximum of 50 genes at a time, which may pose a problem when studying large gene families. For example, the WRKY gene family contains well over 100 genes in many species (). Other limitations of g sds include the inability to select a font or font size. g sds also lacks the capability to vertically space genes so when the size of gene features is enlarged, the genes overlap. Herein, we report an alternative and enhanced transcript display software that is fast, easy to use, web based and resolves issues with other transcript visualization software. t sdd is capable of providing researchers with publication quality images that can be customized and downloaded.
