genome wide association studies gw ass have successfully identified many sequence variants that are significantly associated with common diseases and traits. Tens of thousands of such trait associated SNPs have already been cataloged, which we believe form a great resource for genomic research. Recent studies have demonstrated that the collection of trait associated SNPs can be exploited to indicate whether a given genomic interval or intervals are likely to be functionally connected with certain phenotypes or diseases. Despite this importance, currently, there is no ready to use computational tool able to connect genomic intervals to phenotypes. Here, we present traseR, an easy to use R Bioconductor package that performs enrichment analyses of trait associated SNPs in arbitrary genomic intervals with flexible options, including testing method, type of background and inclusion of SNPs in LD. Availability and implementation: The traseR R package preloaded with up-to-date collection of trait associated SNPs are freely available in Bioconductor

introduction genome wide association studies gw ass have been conducted en masse in the past decade and have been tremendously successful in identifying sequence variants that are significantly associated with common diseases and traits (). To this day, thousands of g was have been conducted and reported, across diverse spectrums of diseases as well as qualitative and quantitative phenotypes. Resources, such as association result browser (http://www. ncbi nlm nih gov projects gap plus prev s gap plus htm and NHGRI g was catalog (), have been established to catalog all the trait associated variants. Currently, the association result browser contains 44 124 association results (checked on October 10, 2015), which corresponds to 30 553 (autosomes plus chromosome X) unique trait associated single nucleotide polymorphisms ta snps linking to 573 diseases or phenotypes. We believe such a catalog of ta snps offers scientists a unique perspective to explore and annotate the functional potential of any given genomic intervals showed that regulatory DNA marked by deoxyribonuclease I (DNase I) hypersensitive sites (DHSs) was enriched with noncoding g was SNPs (). Recent studies from ENCODE and Roadmap epi genome consortia systematically examined enrichment of ta snps in chips eq peaks of transcription factors and histone marks, and unveiled biologically interesting connections (). These results indicate the utilities of conducting tas np enrichment analyses in genomic intervals of interest. We believe that it will be a powerful tool for researchers to be able to query any given set of genomic intervals to see whether ta snps are enriched in these particular, differentially methylated regions and putative enhancers. In this way, we can build hypotheses linking these intervals to phenotypes. This is similar to the gene ontology (GO) () term enrichment analysis or the gene set enrichment analysis g sea () except that GO terms or functional categories are replaced by traits, and a set of genes is replaced by a set of genomic intervals. We believe ta snps can bring important functional insights to genomic regions, especially intergenic regions. Despite the great utilities, currently there is no off the shelf computational tool available to carry out this non-trivial test. To cater for this demand, we developed an R Bioconductor package named traseR, trait associated SNP EnRichment analysis, which offers a turnkey solution for enrichment analysis of ta snps
