Motivation: Elementary flux modes ef ms analysis constitutes a fundamental tool in systems biology. However, the efficient calculation of ef ms in genome scale metabolic networks gsm ns is still a challenge. We present a novel algorithm that uses a linear programming based tree search and efficiently enumerates a subset of ef ms in gsm ns. Results: Our approach is compared with the efm evolver approach, demonstrating a significant improvement in computation time. We also validate the usefulness of our new approach by studying the acetate overflow metabolism in the Escherichia coli bacteria. To do so, we computed 1 million ef ms for each energetic amino acid and then analysed the relevance of each energetic amino acid based on gene protein expression data and the obtained ef ms. We found good agreement between previous experiments and the conclusions reached using ef ms. Finally, we also analysed the performance of our approach when applied to large gsm ns. Availability and implementation: The stand-alone software tree efm is implemented in Cþþ and interacts with the open source linear solver coin or Linear program Solver (CLP).

introduction many advances in medicine and biology would not be possible without a detailed understanding of the functional mechanisms of cellular metabolism (). However, this is a very complex task as there are intricate regulatory events controlling cellular response. Novel technologies, referred to with the suffix omics, are emerging in the last two decades and providing us with a cellular picture of unprecedented coverage and resolution (). Unfortunately, it is often difficult to detect the mechanisms behind an observed alteration using the data provided by omics technologies. The scientific community needs improved tools and methods to identify these mechanisms in different scenarios (). Several mathematical methods modeling metabolism are emerging that are able to incorporate datasets provided by different omics technologies. Many of these methods are encompassed within constraint based models (), in which a set of mathematical constraints are defined using a genome scale metabolic network gsm n reconstruction as a starting point. Several curated gsm ns can be found in the literature (). However, being able to automatically characterize the biochemical reactions present in a particular metabolism through omics data truly constitutes a challenge (). Typically, constraint based models account for two principal constraints, namely the mass balance equation at steady state, and thermodynamic based irreversibility constraints. If, given a set of enzymes, all of them are essential to fulfill these two constraints, the set is referred to as an elementary flux mode (EFM;). In other words, ef ms are solutions with the minimum support necessary to operate in stoichiometric steady state balance with all reactions in the appropriate direction. The advantages of analysing metabolic networks based on ef ms have been shown in different works (e.g.). However, their use has been limited because enumerating them is computationally demanding. Algorithms have been developed to enumerate all the ef ms in medium size metabolic networks (; Von). However, despite the development of novel methods using state of the art computational techniques expediting their application in larger networks (), this family of algorithms fails on gsm ns using standard computers, because of the combinatorial explosion in the number of ef ms (). In this light, several methods have been recently proposed to determine a subset of ef ms in gsm ns (). Continuing with this effort, we present here a novel algorithm that uses a linear programming based tree search for EFM numeration, denoted as tree efm. We benchmark the performance of our new approach with efm evolver (), currently the most efficient framework to find ef ms in gsm ns. The results show that tree efm outperforms efm evolver. After confirming the efficiency of the new approach presented here, we calculate a large set of ef ms to study a relevant biological question, the acetate overflow metabolism. The aerobic production of acetate causes serious economic losses in bacteria based bio factories (). Finding the mechanisms that prevent this scenario constitutes an open question in the field (). Here we analyse the relevance of eight energetic amino acids in the overflow metabolism using our approach to compute a large set of ef ms. We then apply the methodology presented into score each EFM based on expression data, using the gene protein expression data provided by. On the basis of a literature review, we could validate the conclusions reached using ef ms. Finally, we analysed the performance of our approach for handling even larger networks than traditional gsm ns paving the way for forthcoming models involving an ever increasing number of reactions and metabolites.

discussion the methodology presented here based on linear programming and an efficient tree search procedure, is a general one for enumerating extreme points in a polytope. In this work, we focused on the computation of ef ms. Our approach showed a computational advantage with respect to efm evolver which is a key issue in the analysis of gsm ns involving thousands of reactions.
