Assessment of phylogenetic diversity is a key element to the analysis of microbial communities. Tools are needed to handle next generation sequencing data and to cope with the computational complexity of large scale studies. Here, we present tree phyl er a tool for fast taxonomic profiling of meta genomes. tree phyl er was evaluated on real meta genome to assess its performance in comparison to previous approaches for taxonomic profiling. Results indicate that tree phyl er is in terms of speed and accuracy prepared for next generation sequencing techniques and large scale analysis.

introduction beyond the analysis of single species genomes of culturable organisms, meta genomics currently opens a new view on the exploration of microbial communities. Progress in sequencing technology enables broader and deeper genomic sampling of the biosphere which in turn puts new challenges for sequence analysis methods. Problems arise from the sheer mass and the short length of sequencing reads. Usually only a small fraction of reads can be assembled due to the phylogenetic diversity in the samples. In the first instance, large scale analysis of short meta genomic sequencing reads has to provide an estimate of the phylogenetic distribution of the sample. Taxonomic profiling achieves this task by assigning sequencing reads to phylogenetic categories. The most common methods are based on homology to known genes. The classical 'gold standard' approach to taxonomic profiling in meta genomics is focused on the 16S rRNA gene and relies on a sufficient number of sequences of that gene in meta genomic sequence data. Usually the number of reads containing sufficiently long stretches of 16S rRNA is small. Therefore, several researchers perform deep sequencing of that particular gene [see e.g. (. Although this approach efficiently overcomes the sparseness of 16S rRNA in meta genomic samples, the sequence data support taxonomic profiling only page 961 960961. The relative amount of assigned sequences is shown for each method as well as for each bacterial phylum for the glacial ice meta genome. screen matching sequencing reads for significant hits. Reads are classified using a phylogenetic tree. For each PFAM family with a sufficient number of newly assigned sequences, approximate maximum likelihood trees of the PFAM database sequences and the matching reads are computed using fast tree which combines the speed of minimum evolution methods with the accuracy of maximum likelihood methods. Once trees are computed, tree phyl er uses the algorithm of () to classify reads according to the phylogenetic placement in the tree (see also tree phyl er web site). tree phyl er offers an efficient way to balance the computation load on multi-core computers or computer clusters. By this, the runtime only depends on the computation of the largest trees. Similar to CARMA, tree phyl er only computes trees for PFAM families with less than 3000 (assigned + reference) sequences.

conclusion we introduced tree phyl er a new tool for fast taxonomic profiling of meta genomes. We evaluated our method on real meta genomic data by comparison with previous approaches for taxonomic profiling. We could show a close correspondence between the predicted profiles of tree phyl er and CARMA, while computational speed was increased by orders of magnitude. While speed is not necessarily an essential requirement in genome analysis, the increase of meta genomic sequence data urges for particularly efficient techniques, which also work with limited computational resources. Therefore, the approach we propose here is well prepared for next generation sequencing technologies and large scale studies like the exploration of the human microbio me. Funding: DFG (German Research Foundation) Priority Program SPP1174 'Deep Metazoan Phylogeny' (Project Wo896/6-1,2).
