Motivation: Motifs in DNA sequences often appear in degenerate form, so there has been an increased interest in computational algorithms for weak motif discovery. Probabilistic algorithms are unable to detect weak motifs while exact methods have been able to detect only short weak motifs. This article proposes an exact tree based motif detection tree motif algorithm capable of discovering longer and weaker motifs than by the existing methods. Results: tree motif converts the graphical representation of motifs into a tree structured representation in which a tree that branches with nodes from every sequence represents motif instances. The method of tree construction is novel to motif discovery based on graphical representation. tree motif is more efficient and scalable in handling longer and weaker motifs than the existing algorithms in terms of accuracy and execution time. The performances of tree motif were demonstrated on synthetic data as well as on real biological data.

introduction regulatory regions such as promoters, enhancers, locus control regions, etc. contain motifs or regulatory elements that control biological processes such as gene expression (). Generally, activation or inhibition of gene expression is regulated by proteins referred to as transcription factors (TFs) that bind to particular sites in regulatory regions. For example, TATA box with a core sequence of 5-TATAAA-3 located in the promoter region of genes is bound by TFs such as TFIID, TFIIA and TFIIB to initiate transcription. Such TF binding sites (TFBS) are useful DNA motifs and their locations and detection are important to decipher and control sophisticated regulatory mechanism of gene expression. In practice, sequence motifs occur with mutations or degeneration at sites, which are then referred to as motif instances. Motifs are denoted as ld motifs where l denotes the motif length and d denotes the maximum number of mutations allowed in the motif. Many techniques have been proposed for detecting motifs: enumeration algorithms (), probabilistic * To whom correspondence should be addressed. algorithms and () deterministic algorithms (). In addition, ensemble techniques have been attempted (). An algorithmic challenge for motif discovery was posed in Pevzner and Sze (2000): find 20 planted motif instances of ld motifs in 20 DNA sequences of length 600. It was observed that most existing techniques were unable to detect a (15, 4)-motif. This problem, referred to as motif challenge problem, planted motif discovery problem or subtle weak motif discovery problem, has recently received increased attention. Many deterministic graph based algorithms have been proposed for weak motif discovery, which begin by representing l mer substrings sampled from sequences in the dataset as nodes in a multipartite graph. Thereafter, the nodes with  2d Hamming distance are connected by edges as two instances of the same motif must not differ by more than in 2d sites. The cliques of a sufficient size of this graph represent instances of the motifs in the dataset. A graph based algorithm winnow er was proposed to solve the motif challenge problem (). c winnow er imposes an additional filtering constraint to winnow er to decide whether edges should be deleted or retained (). The modification substantially improves the execution time compared with winnow er. We have previously proposed an exact graph based algorithm dp cfg which efficiently detects weak motifs by constructing lists (cliques) of motif instances in graphs (). dp cfg had better accuracy and execution time than those of winnow er for sequences as long as 2000 for the (15, 4)-motif problem. However, for longer and weaker motifs such as (24, 8), dp cfg demands high memory requirements. This work attempts to solve problems with longer and weaker motifs with less memory and time requirements. Probabilistic graph based algorithms, such as motif cut () and m clwmr (), have also been proposed for weak motif discovery. motif cut formulates the problem into finding maximum density subgraphs in a weighted graph constructed using all l mer substrings from the dataset. m clwmr is a heuristic that uses the Markov cluster to search for cliques of motif instances in weighted graphs. m clwmr has shown competitive execution time and accuracy. non graph based algorithms were also proposed. For example, PROJECTION enhanced discovery performances through finding good starting points for expectation maximization (). PROJECTION produced higher performance than winnow er for weaker (l, d motif detection problems. however page 2642 26412647

discussion weak motif discovery is an important yet unresolved problem in computational biology. Several graph based exact methods such as winnow er and dp cfg have shown improved accuracy compared with heuristics or probabilistic methods. However, clique finding to discover the motifs can be time consuming. In this article, we designed tree motif for discovering weak (l, d motifs by building up trees on nodes of graphs. After initialization, tree motif appends new nodes onto existing trees, where the appending operations happen only when cliques indicated by the leaf nodes are extendable by the new nodes. The novel constrained strategy of clique construction introduced in tree motif can avoid trivial operations on intermediate results of final cliques. In addition, by doing motif refinement, the sensitivity of motif discovery (defined in Section 3.1.1) can be increased compared with the list algorithm in which produces exact OOPS motif instances by using a recursive node selection. Performance comparisons with several popular motif discovery methods have shown that tree motif detects weak motifs accurately, especially for relatively longer weak motifs. Moreover, it performs better on a recent benchmark constructed using real motif data. One drawback of tree motif is that its memory requirement grows exponentially as the sequence length n or parameter p is increased. Because of large memory requirements, tree motif failed to find weaker (l, d motifs such as (13, 4), (15, 5), (17, 6), (18, 6) and (19, 7). This is due to the maintenance of increased number of Page: 2647 26412647
