trio vis is a visual analytics tool developed for filtering on coverage and variant frequency for genomic variants from exo me sequencing of parent child trios. In trio vis the variant data are organized by grouping each variant based on the laws of Mendelian inheritance. Taking three Variant Call Format files as input, trio vis allows the user to test different coverage thresholds (i.e. different levels of stringency), to find the optimal threshold values tailored to their hypotheses and to gain insights into the global effects of filtering through interaction. Availability: Executables, source code and sample data are available at https://bitbucket.org/biovizleuven/triovis. Screencast is available at

introduction recent advances in massively parallel sequencing technologies, especially sequencing of the entire protein coding portion of the genome exo me have introduced new strategies for identifying Mendelian disease genes (). Analysis of parent child trios is one of the strategies for identifying single pathogenic mutations among the thousands to millions of genomic variants. By sequencing, the patient as well as his or her parents, variants can be filtered based on consistency or inconsistency according to the laws of Mendelian inheritance. Although filtering based on inheritance pattern seems to be straight-forward, distinguishing true variation from artefacts and false negatives while retaining sensitivity is a challenging task because of the sequencing error rate and the interdependency of sequencing quality for multiple samples. A previous study () reported that 470% of Mendelian inconsistencies were found to be false negatives because of the failure to call the germ line variant in either parent sample in search for de novo mutations. Similarly, we found that the majority (77%) of variants were consistent with the Mendelian laws when we analysed those variants that are in common between the exo me sequencing and an SNP genotyping array for a trio case (data not shown). One of the metrics commonly used to filter variants is the depth of coverage. Researchers we interviewed adjust the coverage threshold based on the overall coverage and their intuition without any visual aids. The optimal coverage thresholds also depend on other factors, such as the suspected type of mutation, whether somatic or inherited, and the stringency of analysis. Although finding the optimal coverage threshold can be automated to some extent, it still requires fine adjustments of the filtering setting for variant discovery. We present a visual analytics tool, trio vis designed to help the analytical reasoning process of setting coverage thresholds to filter variants from parent child trio sequencing experiments. It visualizes variants in a structured table and provides interactive visual interfaces to let the researcher dynamically and interactively test different threshold settings and change levels of stringency.

conclusion trio vis provides an interactive interface and optimization function to calibrate coverage thresholds based on Mendelian inheritance laws for parent child trio cases. By visualizing variants in a novel table layout based on the inheritance laws, it allows the researcher to gain insights into the global effect of filtering in the context of trio analysis. The researcher can export the filtered result as VCF files for subsequent analysis to annotate variants to genes, using annotation tools, such as annotate it () and an novar (). Future work includes improving the optimization algorithm, and integration of this tool into functional annotation tools, such as annotate it and Galaxy ().
