Motivation: Accurate identification of transcription start sites tss s is an essential step in the analysis of transcription regulatory networks. In higher eukaryotes, the capped analysis of gene expression technology enabled comprehensive annotation of tss s in genomes such as those of mice and humans. In bacteria, an equivalent approach, termed differential RNA sequencing d rnase q has recently been proposed, but the application of this approach to a large number of genomes is hindered by the paucity of computational analysis methods. With few exceptions, when the method has been used, annotation of tss s has been largely done manually. Results: In this work, we present a computational method called ts ser that enables the automatic inference of tss s from d rnase q data. The method rests on a probabilistic framework for identifying both genomic positions that are preferentially enriched in the d rnase q data as well as preferentially captured relative to neighboring genomic regions. Evaluating our approach for TSS calling on several publicly available datasets, we find that ts ser achieves high consistency with the curated lists of annotated tss s but identifies many additional tss s. Therefore, ts ser can accelerate genome wide identification of tss s in bacterial genomes and can aid in further characterization of bacterial transcription regulatory networks. Availability: ts ser is freely available under GPL license at

introduction identification of transcription start sites tss s is a key step in the study of transcription regulatory networks. It enables identification of promoter regions, and thereby the focused search for binding sites of transcription factors. Although for species such as mouse and human, methods to capture tss s have been developed 410 years ago (), owing to differences in messenger RNA (mRNA) processing, these methods can not be applied to bacteria. Recently, however, a method for genome wide identification of bacterial tss s has been proposed (). The method, called differential RNA sequencing d rnase q uses the 5 0 monophosphate dependent terminator exonuclease (TEX) that specifically degrades 5 0 mono phosphorylated RNA species such as processed RNA, mature ribosomal RNAs and transfer RNAs, whereas primary mRNA transcripts that carry a 5 0 triphosphate remain intact. This approach results in an enrichment of primary transcripts, allowing tss s to be identified by comparison of the tex treated samples to control untreated ones. As an automated computational method to identify tss s based on d rnase q data has not been available, TSS annotation based on d rnase q data required substantial effort on the part of the curators. The aim of our work was to develop an automated analysis method to support future analyses of d rnase q data. We here introduce a rigorous computational method that enables identification of a large proportion of bona fide tss s with relative ease. The method is based on quantifying 5 0 enrichment of tss s and also the significance of their expression relative to nearby putative tss s. Benchmarking our method on several recently published datasets, we find that the identified tss s are in good agreement with those annotated manually, and that a relatively large number of additional tss s that also have the expected transcription regulatory signals are identified. ts ser is freely available at http://www.clipz.unibas.ch/TSSer/index.php.

discussion deep sequencing has truly revolutionized molecular biology. It enabled not only the assembly of the genomes of thousands of species, but also annotation of transcribed regions in these genomes and the generation of a variety of maps for dna binding factors, non-coding RNAs and rna binding factors. high throughput studies revealed that not only eukaryotic but also. Properties of tss s that were present only in the reference list (left), both in the reference and the ts ser list (middle) or only in the ts ser list (right). (a) Box plot of averaged normalized expression (the boxes are drawn from the first to the third quantile and the median is shown with the red line). (b) Box plot of the displacement distribution relative to the start codon. (c) Scatterplots of 5 0 versus local enrichment (both shown as percentage). (d) Sequence logos indicating the position dependent (5 0 ! 3 0 direction) frequencies of nucleotides upstream of the TSS (datasets are shown from top to bottom rather than from left to right) prokaryotic genomes are more complex than initially thought. In particular, bacterial genomes encode relatively large numbers of non-coding RNAs with regulatory functions () and antisense transcripts (). Such transcripts are of particular interest because they are frequently produced in response to and contribute to the adaptation to specific stimuli (). The availability of a large number of bacterial genomes further enables identification of regulatory elements through comparative genomics based approaches (). However, these methods benefit from accurate annotation of tss s that enables a focused search for transcription factor binding sites. Although the data supporting TSS identification can be obtained with relative ease (), the annotation of tss s has so far been carried out manually, which is tedious and likely leads to an incomplete set of tss s. Only recently, as our manuscript was in the review process, methods for automated annotation of tss s based on d rnase q data started to emerge () (see also http://www.tbi.univie.ac.at/newpapers/pdfs/TBIp-2013-4.pdf). The method that we propose here is meant to provide a starting point into the process of TSS curation. Because it uses d rnase q data, it is clear that only tss s from which there is active transcription during the experiment can be annotated. As we have determined in the benchmark against the h pylori there remain tss s for which the expression evidence is poor, yet have the properties of bona fide tss s. Additional samples, covering conditions in which these tss s are expected to be expressed are necessary to identify them. Alternatively, they can be brought in during the process of manual curation. Nonetheless, the advantage of an unbiased automated method such as the one we propose here is that it allows the discovery of tss s that may not be expected or easily evaluated such as those of antisense transcripts, alternative tss s and tss s corresponding to novel genes. Furthermore, this method can provide an initial set of high confidence tss s that can be used to train more complex models of transcription regulation, which could be used to iteratively identify additional tss s that may be supported by a small number of reads. To illustrate this point, we here used an HMM, which we trained on high confidence tss s from the 'Common' category, to provide an additional list of putative tss s that appear to have appropriate transcription regulatory signals but that were not captured with high abundance or enrichment in the experiment (Supplementary). Thirty-six percent of the tss s that were only present in the reference annotation are part of this list. More sophisticated versions of this approach could be used toward comprehensive annotation of tss s in bacterial genomes. Finally, the method can be applied to other systems in which genomic regions give rise to an increased number of transcripts in specific conditions.

conclusion we have proposed an approach for genome wide identification of tss s in bacteria, which uses d rnase q data to quantify the 5 0 and local enrichment in reads at putative tss s and their corresponding significance. The method is implemented in an automated pipeline, which we applied to several recently published d rnase q datasets. A thorough benchmarking of the tss s proposed by our method relative to manual curation indicates that the method performs well in identifying known tss s and is able to further detect novel tss s that have the expected properties of bona fide TSS. Thus, our method should enable rapid identification of tss s in bacterial genomes starting from d rnase q data.
