Motivation: Advances in sequencing technologies and computational algorithms have enabled the study of genomic variants to dissect their functional consequence. Despite this unprecedented progress, current tools fail to reliably detect and characterize more complex allelic variants, such as short tandem repeats (STRs). We developed tss v as an efficient and sensitive tool to specifically profile all allelic variants present in targeted loci. Based on its design, requiring only two short flanking sequences, tss v can work without the use of a complete reference sequence to reliably profile highly polymorphic, repetitive or uncharacterized regions. Results: We show that tss v can accurately determine allelic STR structures in mixtures with 10% representation of minor alleles or complex mixtures in which a single STR allele is shared. Furthermore, we show the universal utility of tss v in two other independent studies: characterizing de novo mutations introduced by transcription activator like effector nucleases (TALENs) and profiling the noise and systematic errors in an ion torrent sequencing experiment. tss v complements the existing tools by aiding the study of highly polymorphic and complex regions and provides a high resolution map that can be used in a wide range of applications, from personal genomics to forensic analysis and clinical diagnostics. Availability and implementation: We have implemented tss v as a Python package that can be installed through the command line using pip install tss v command. Its source code and documentation are available at https://pypi.python.org/pypi/tssv and http://www.lgtc.nl/ tss v
introduction as a consequence of various mechanisms such as DNA recombination, replication and repair associated processes, the spectrum of human genetic variation ranges from single nucleotide differences to large chromosomal events. Among the different types of genetic changes, repetitive DNA sequences show more polymorphism than single nucleotide variants (), and they are important in human diseases (), complex traits and evolution (). In particular, microsatellite variants, also known as short tandem repeats (STR), and their expansion shortening have been linked to a variety of human genetic disorders (), and have been used in genotyping () and forensic DNA fingerprinting studies (Kayser and). Because of the repetitive nature of STRs and often the low level of complexity of the DNA sequences in which they occur (), characterization of STR variability and understanding of their functional consequences are challenging (). So far, sequencing based strategies have focused on reads mapped to the reference genome and subsequent identification of discordant signatures and classification of associated STRs (). Yet, the mainstream aligners, such as BWA () or Bowtie (), do not tolerate repeats or insertions and deletions (indels) as a trade-off of run time (). This limitation leads to ambiguities in the alignment or assembly of repeats which, in turn, can obscure the interpretation of results (). Moreover, the current human genome reference still remains incomplete and provides only limited information on expected and potentially uncharacterized STRs in different individuals (). Consequently, STRs are not routinely analyzed in whole genome or whole exo me sequencing studies, despite their obvious applications and their role in human diseases, complex traits and evolution. Here, we present a method for targeted profiling of STRs that reports a full spectrum of all observed genomic variants along with their respective abundance. Our tool, tss v can accurately *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com profile and characterize STRs without the use of a complete reference genome, and therefore minimizes biases introduced during the alignment and downstream analysis. tss v scans sequencing data for reads that fully or partially encompass loci of interest based on the detection of unique flanking sequences. Subsequently, tss v characterizes the sequence between a pair of non repetitive flanking regions and reports statistics on known and novel alleles for each locus of interest. We show the performance of tss v on robust characterization of all allelic variants in a given targeted locus by its application in several case studies: forensic DNA fingerprinting of mixed samples by STR profiling, characterization of variants introduced by transcription activator like effector nucleases (TALENs) in embryonic stem (ES) cells and detailed characterization of errors derived from a next generation sequencing (NGS) experiment.

discussion in the past decade, advances in sequencing technologies as well as computational analysis tools have enabled the study of genomic variations to dissect the mechanisms by which they exert their function in the case of human diseases, evolution and other complex traits. Despite this unprecedented progress, structural variations and repetitive DNA sequences (such as STRs) or coupling of de novo mutations present major obstacles for accurate and reliable allelic analysis (). In particular, most computational tools are not ideal to identify STRs because of biases introduced during alignment as well as strong reliance of algorithms on coverage depth or the presence of split reads. Here, we present a method tss v that provides a high resolution map of allele specific genomic variants within targeted loci of interest. Our approach does not rely on the use of a complete reference sequence to reliably profile highly polymorphic sequences (such as STRs) or uncharacterized variants at a single nucleotide resolution. However, it does require two unique flanking sequences that harbor the region of interest to identify supporting reads. We assess the performance of tss v on profiling known allelic STR structures across pure samples from a single individual as well as mixed samples with variable abundance. Of 16 allelic STR structures that were targeted for sequencing, six STR loci were sufficiently covered so that the associated allelic STR structures could be reliably resolved. The strong imbalance between yield of STR markers is because of the assay (designed and optimized for fluorescent dye based fragment analysis of STR loci) used for preparing the sequencing library. We show that sensitivity of tss v in determining allelic STR structures exceeds mixtures with only 10% representation of minor alleles and more complex mixtures in which a single STR allele is shared. The lower boundary of detecting minor allele frequencies is subject to experimental design and the complexity of the targeted locus that may result in variable rate of slippage and background noise. Our detailed analysis of three STR loci provides significant insights into forensic DNA fingerprinting of mixed samples while it confirms the feasibility of tss v to profile causal allelic expansion of triplet, tetra nucleotide or more complex repeat structures in variety of human disorders (). Second, we sought to profile and annotate the full spectrum of de novo mutations introduced by TALENs that specifically target intron 52 of hd md in mouse ES cells. The applicability of designed TALENs to introduce mutations in a targeted locus largely depends on its efficacy because this method lacks a selection procedure. Detected talen specific editing events were almost exclusively insertions and deletions that fit the expected mutation profile of TALENs (). Although it has recently been reported that TALENs induce insertions at a much lower frequency than deletions (), we have observed an extremely balanced rate of insertion and deletion events (37.26% versus 37.20%, respectively). Nevertheless, talens induced deletions tend to affect more bases than insertions. We show that tss v can resolve difficult to call editing events that affect the length of homopolymers based on the variant frequency in talen treated ES cells versus controls. Moreover, the result of tss v analysis of talen treated and control ES cells suggests that observed de novo structural variants are predominantly caused by initiation of a double strand break that is repaired by non-homologous end joining mechanism and are not the result of sequencing errors. Notably, the ion torrent variant caller failed to identify any of the observed variants because of their complexity, and therefore does not provide any information on de novo allelic structures that were introduced. As laboratories begin to generate deep coverage sequencing data to identify low frequent mutations (i.e. cancer genomics), the robustness and accuracy of NGS technology and library preparation methods has become vital (). After running tss v on a third dataset to identify potential causal mutations in samples from five DMD patients and one female carrier, we observed numerous systematic errors introduced by the ion torrent PGM sequencer or the base calling algorithms. The number of sequencing reads that support the presence of a new allele was in excess of 45% while no mutation was found after Sanger sequencing of the same libraries. Moreover, the amount of allelic discordant reads were unexpected and could not be biologically explained as five out of six samples were derived from male patients who are expected to have only one copy of the x chromosome. Across all samples, the majority of detected variations were single nucleotide insertions ($62%), excluding duplications, that were mostly the result of a single 'A' insertion (78%). Surprisingly, insertions were predominantly specific to the plus strand (94%) that can be the result of flow order in specific sequence contexts. Although the second base caller improved the deletions and duplications rates that were derived from over or under calling of homopolymers, the insertion rates remained unchanged. We further observed a preference for erroneous substitution events that were more pronounced in the second base caller. However, we were unable to identify motifs that may be associated with observed biases. We argue that the result of tss v analysis and its ability to provide a high resolution map of variants ever more highlights the importance of robust and vigorous assessment of downstream analysis as we generate volumes of sequencing data to identify rare mutations and in the advent of NGS in clinical diagnosis. To demonstrate the added value of tss v over mainstream STR profiling tools, we ran lob str () and repeat seq () on four samples used for resolving allelic STR structures. Because repeat seq hardly reported any STR markers, the performance of tss v could only be compared with that of lob str. We show that tss v robustly and accurately resolved allelic STR structures with differing complexity. tss v outperformed lob str in reporting the accurate copy number of major STR unit while it provides additional information on allelic STR structures and their strand specific frequencies. Notably, tss v excelled in resolving complex mixtures, whereas lob str failed to differentiate STR structures associated with different samples, and therefore produced unreliable and inaccurate estimations. Although lob str performs well on genotyping diploid samples, there is a clear need for tools to resolve mixtures with differing level of complexity and abundance. Currently, the major limitation of tss v is the sequencing read length because the detectable allelic structures are restricted to those that can entirely be covered by a single read. Thus, we envision that the immediate developmental outlook for tss v can be the inference of allelic locus structure by local assembly of partial reads (reads with only one recognizable flanking region) combined with the comparative analysis of coverage of targeted loci and flanking regions. Furthermore, the promise of novel sequencing technologies (such as Pacific Biosciences RS II), and therefore significant increase in read length will aid the study of larger structural variations. Advances in sequencing technologies and computational analysis algorithms in unraveling genetic variations from SNPs and indels to cn vs () have facilitated the study of experimental data on an unprecedented scale to better understand the functional consequences of genetic variations. tss v complements the existing tools by aiding the study of unknown, uncharacterized or highly polymorphic and repetitive short structural variations that can be used in a wide range of applications, from personal genomics to forensic analysis and clinical diagnostics.
