Motivation: Many RNA molecules function without being translated into proteins, and function depends on structure. pseudo knots are motifs in RNA secondary structures that are difficult to predict but are also often functionally important. Results: turbo knot is a new algorithm for predicting the secondary structure, including pseudo knotted pairs, conserved across multiple sequences. turbo knot finds 81.6% of all known base pairs in the systems tested, and 75.6% of predicted pairs were found in the known structures. pseudo knots are found with half or better of the false positive rate of previous methods. Availability: The program is available for download under an open source license as part of the rna structure package at:

introduction in many cases, RNA functions in cells without being translated into proteins. These non-coding RNAs nc rnas carry out a wide range of functions, including catalysis, intracellular protein trafficking, immunity and gene regulation (). The functions of these nc rnas depend on their structures. RNA structure is hierarchical, beginning with the sequence of nucleotides (the primary structure), then the set of all canonical, i.e. GC, AU and GU base pairs (the secondary structure), and ultimately the full 3D positioning of all the atoms in the molecule (the tertiary structure). The secondary structure tends to form on a faster time scale and with stronger interactions than those interactions that fold the tertiary structure, so the secondary structure can usually be predicted independently of knowing the overall tertiary structure (). The most accurate method of secondary structure determination is comparative sequence analysis. It relies on the hypothesis that sequences that serve the same function share the same structure. But comparative sequence analysis is impractical in many situations * To whom correspondence should be addressed. because it requires significant human insight and a large number of diverse sequences (). Commonly, the secondary structure for a single sequence is predicted using free energy minimization. These methods use a set of thermodynamic parameters that predict the folding free energy change of a given structure and a dynamic programming algorithm to find the structure with lowest free energy change (). The thermodynamic parameters can be used with a different type of dynamic programming algorithm to predict a partition function, which can be used to predict the base pairing probability for all possible canonical pairs (). Base pair probabilities can be used to assemble structures called maximum expected accuracy me a structures (). Briefly, me a prediction seeks to maximize the sum of probabilities of each base pair for all paired bases and the probabilities of being single stranded for all unpaired bases. Empirically, me a structure prediction works because that base pairs predicted to be the most probable are the most likely to be in the known structure (). Although comparative sequence analysis is not yet automated, a number of methods have been developed to improve structure prediction by using the information available in homologous sequences. (). These methods use a supplied input sequence alignment, predict the structure for each sequence and then find the common structure, or align and fold the sequences simultaneously. These programs have been reviewed previously (). The recently published turbo fold algorithm is one such method that improves secondary structure prediction by predicting a conserved structure using two or more homologous sequences (). It refines base pairing probabilities of an arbitrary number of sequences using their probabilistic alignments in an iterative manner. Structures are then assembled using a me a algorithm from the final set of base pairing probabilities. Because of computational complexity, most programs that predict secondary structure do not predict pseudo knots. Formally, a pseudoknot occurs if an RNA has two base pairs, one between bases i and j, and a second between i and j , such that i  i  j  j. pseudo knots make up only a small fraction of base pairs, but they are often found in nc rnas. Predicting the minimum free energy secondary structure that includes pseudo knots of any topology has been proven to be np hard (). In spite of this, a number of single sequence methods have been developed to). These methods limit the set of possible pseudoknot topologies to accelerate the search. A number of available methods has been previously reviewed (). Recently, a new algorithm was published, prob knot that uses a single sequence partition function to predict pairing probabilities and assigns base pairs if the two bases are mutually maximally probable to pair with one another (). This algorithm can find pseudo knots of any topology. While the partition function does not include terms for pseudo knotted structures, the prob knot algorithm was able to find pseudo knotted base pairs with reasonable accuracy compared with other methods, and at minimal computational cost: the algorithm is O(N 2 ) in addition to the O(N 3 ) partition function calculation. Approaches to the pseudoknot prediction problem that employ information from sequence and structural homology are few in number. Like single sequence methods (), a Monte Carlo alignment and folding method has also been published (). Also analogous to single sequence methods (), another approach identifies common pseudoknot free structures and then iteratively matches regions that can form pseudo knots (). A third approach computes a score matrix based on alignment and thermodynamic information and uses a maximum weight matching (MWM) algorithm to assemble an optimal secondary structure (). The latter two approaches are dependent on a high quality sequence alignment as input, either one assembled manually or one computed from sequences with a large degree of sequence identity (70% or more). Such alignments are not always available, particularly for newly discovered classes of RNAs. This contribution reports a new algorithm, turbo knot for predicting RNA secondary structures conserved in multiple sequences, including pseudo knots. turbo knot assembles structures in the same way as prob knot but with the pairing probabilities predicted by a turbo fold calculation using multiple sequences to inform the pairing probabilities. The additional computational cost compared with turbo fold is small compared with the turbo fold calculation itself, just O(MN 2 ), where Mis the number of sequences used and N is the length of the longest sequence. It is benchmarked against two algorithms capable of predicting pseudo knots that also use multiple sequences as input, ILM and hx match (). It is also benchmarked against the single sequence prob knot algorithm (). Finally, two algorithms that can not predict pseudo knots are included in the benchmark, turbo fold () and me a max expect ().

discussion in the same way as the in the process it predicted more than twice as many false positive pairs as there were true pseudo knotted pairs in the accepted structures. Single sequence methods, with or without pseudoknot prediction capabilities, were reported as having poor performance on the prediction of tmRNA structure (). The results with the sequences used here are consistent with that result. turbo knot (and turbo fold however, show significant improvement for this difficult class of RNAs. turbo knot shows its best pseudoknot prediction capabilities on this class of RNAs, with 49% of all predicted pseudo knotted base pairs being true positives. In contrast, Group I introns show slightly worse sensitivity in turbo fold and turbo knot compared with max expect and prob knot although they did still have higher pp vs. This is likely because the long insertions present in some Group I introns makes accurate sequence alignment difficult. Indeed, ILM and hx match which are dependent on a sequence alignment algorithm for input, did not perform well with randomly chosen groups of sequences from this class of RNAs. These algorithms may have more success, however, when sequences with higher sequence similarity are used or when using a manually curated alignment, which would allow for more accurate sequence alignment. Such groups of sequences are not always available. ILM was benchmarked in a previous study using just one sequence rather than an alignment, and, unexpectedly, it appears less accurate when using multiple sequences as input compared with previously reported benchmarks (). This is likely because it was hindered by errors made by the sequence alignment algorithm, which aligns sequences but not secondary structure (). It fared much better when given manually curated alignments based on structural homology (). Because hx match which was given the same input sequence alignments, had similar results on similar classes of RNAs, it is likely tools that consider both secondary structure and alignment at the same time are necessary to accurately align functionally similar RNAs which are not chosen to have a relatively high sequence identity. While turbo knot has significantly improved pseudoknot prediction accuracy, more work is needed to raise the accuracy to the current standard for non pseudo knotted base pairs. Dirks and Pierce (2004) report an algorithm that computes a partition function that includes pseudo knots of some limited topologies in O(N 4 ) time. This partition function could be used by turbo fold and turbo knot to consider a larger structure space, ideally increasing the probability of true pseudo knots at the expense of false ones that are predicted currently at an acceptable increase in computational expense.
