In randomized clinical trials, identifying baseline genetic or genomic markers for predicting subgroup treatment effects is of rising interest. outcome dependent sampling is often employed for measuring markers. The R package two phase ind implements a number of efficient statistical methods we developed for estimating subgroup treatment effects and gene treatment interactions, exploiting the gene treatment independence dictated by randomization, including the case only estimator, the maximum estimated likelihood estimator and the semiparametric maximum likelihood estimator for parameters in a logistic model. For rare failure events subject to cen-soring, we have proposed efficient augmented case only designs, a variation of the case cohort design, to estimate genetic associations and subgroup treatment effects in a Cox regression model. The R package is computationally scalable to genome wide studies, as illustrated by an example from Womens Health Initiative. Availability and Implementation: The R package two phase ind is available from http://cran.r-pro ject org web packages
introduction depending on genetic background and clinical characteristics, individuals respond differently to treatment or prevention. In randomized clinical trials, there is a rising interest in identifying baseline biomarkers that predict subgroup or individual treatment effects, for example pharmaco gene netics or pharmacogenomics studies, that may lead to personalized or precision medicine. A common design of such studies is to measure predictive biomarkers of treatment efficacy from achieved specimens after trial completion (). The genetic or genomic markers are often expensive to measure, particularly for genome wide high throughput assays such as whole genome sequencing. The outcome dependent sampling, such as case control or case cohort sampling are widely used for cost efficiency in this type of retrospective studies. only designs for trials with rare events subject to censoring, in which genetic biomarker main effects are also of interest (). The R package two phase ind assembles a number of functions to compute the estimates and provide standard error and p values for subgroup treatment effects and gene treatment interactions in various aforementioned study settings. The two phase part in the name of the package refers to the retrospective sampling for biomarker measurement after the completion of the prospective trial, and the 'Ind' part refers to the unifying theme in implemented methods that we exploit gene treatment independence to improve the estimation efficiency. Data examples are included in the package and presented in an R package vignette.
