Motivation: Chimeric DNA sequences often form during polymerase chain reaction amplification, especially when sequencing single regions (e.g. 16S rRNA or fungal Internal Transcribed Spacer) to assess diversity or compare populations. Undetected chimeras may be misinterpreted as novel species, causing inflated estimates of diversity and spurious inferences of differences between populations. Detection and removal of chimeras is therefore of critical importance in such experiments. Results: We describe u chime a new program that detects chimeric sequences with two or more segments. u chime either uses a database of chimera free sequences or detects chimeras de novo by exploiting abundance data. u chime has better sensitivity than chimeras layer (previously the most sensitive database method), especially with short, noisy sequences. In testing on artificial bacterial communities with known composition, u chime de novo sensitivity is shown to be comparable to Perseus. u chime is  100× faster than Perseus and  1000× faster than chimeras layer. Contact: robert drive 5com Availability: Source, binaries and data: http://drive5.com/uchime.

INTRODUCTION

discussion chimeric sequence identification poses a challenging problem in algorithm design, especially with short reads, where the available evidence is often limited to very small numbers of observed differences. u chime achieves a significant improvement in detection accuracy over previous methods that use a reference database, and performs comparably to a state of the art de novo method designed specifically for pyrosequencing, despite the fact that u chime was not designed or trained for this particular type of data. u chime achieves much faster execution speeds than previous programs. Our results show that u chime has robust performance when presented with different types of 16S data and is tolerant of simulated noise, suggesting that u chime is likely to perform well Page: 2199 21942200 u chime input sequences are de noised amplicons and abundances predicted by amplicon noise (). These results show that de novo u chime u cdn with default parameters (obtained by training on SIM2) has similar sensitivities and error rates to perseus d. In reference database mode uc ref using the microbio me utils gold reference database, u chime performance is similar, reflecting the fact that many of the 16S sequences in the communities are found in the gold database. N is the number of chimeric sequences and m is the number of segments in the chimera. good seqs and Chimeras are the total numbers of biological sequences and chimeras, respectively, found using a separate reference database of 16S sequences for species in the communities see for details elapsed time required to execute two implementations of the u chime algorithm compared with chimeras layer and Perseus on the uneven 1 subset of the MOCK data, which has 1124 sequences. The chimeras layer reference database (5181 sequences) was used for both u chime and chimeras layer. The stand-alone u chime program is tested and also an implementation of the same algorithm in the u search package (). A single core 1 GHz 32-bit i86 Linux computer with 1 GB RAM was used with other types of data, e.g. the fungal ITS region or reads from novel sequencing technologies. u chime requires either a database with adequate coverage of the phylogenetic diversity in the input sequences (reference mode), or an estimate of unique amplicon sequences and their abundances (de novo mode). Construction of a suitable reference database and robust estimation of amplicon sequences and their abundances (denoising) are both challenging problems that are discussed in more detail in the Supplementary Material. Although we regard the experiments reported here as informative for comparing algorithms, realism is hard to achieve both in simulations and in mock communities, so results may not be predictive of sensitivity and error rates that would be achieved on experimental data from environmental samples. The emerging interest in characterizing the effects of members of the rare biosphere in a range of clinical and environmental contexts, combined with the rapid decrease in sequencing cost, challenges us to improve the efficiency of sequence analysis so that that computational cost does not become a limiting factor. u chime meets this challenge for an essential step in many experiments, offering a unique combination of accuracy and speed that will be of great value to biologists.
