Two new tools on the UCSC Genome Browser web site provide improved ways of combining information from multiple datasets, optionally including the users own custom track data and or data from track hubs. The Data Integrator combines columns from multiple data tracks, showing all items from the first track along with overlapping items from the other tracks. The Variant Annotation Integrator is tailored to adding functional annotations to variant calls; it offers a more restricted set of underlying data tracks but adds predictions of each variants consequences for any overlapping or nearby gene transcript. When available, it optionally adds additional annotations including effect prediction scores from d bnsf p for missense mutations, ENCODE regulatory summary tracks and conservation scores. Availability and implementation: The web tools are freely available at

introduction the UCSC Genome Browser database () contains a wealth of genomic datasets. One of its strengths is the suite of web tools at http://genome.ucsc.edu/ for visualizing and extracting data from the database in combination with the user's own custom track data as well as data provided via track hubs (). For over a decade, the Table Browser () has provided the capability to extract textual data from any data track, with many options such as filtering by values, format conversion and sequence output. However, its abilities to combine data from multiple tracks are limited. It provides an intersection function that retains items in the selected track that overlap with items in a second track; however, the identities and attributes of items in the second track are not retained, so it is not possible to associate items in one track with items in another track. Over the years, many users of the UCSC Genome Browser have requested that capability, so we have developed a new tool, the Data Integrator (DI), to provide a flexible and open ended query interface for combining data columns from multiple tracks. One common request is to add annotations to a user's custom track of variant calls, for example the name of any gene that the variant intersects. Variant functional annotation is a well studied problem V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.

conclusion the DI and VAI offer two new, complementary ways to interactively mine data from the UCSC Genome Browser database, making a useful addition to the existing Table Browser. Future plans for the DI include adding selection from related database tables where applicable, drag reorder of output columns, filters on inputs and outputs and more options for configuring intersection of items. Future plans for the VAI include VCF output, HGVS notation (http://www.hgvs.org/mutnomen) and more annotation choices.
