Motivation: Modelling protein protein interactions pp is is an increasingly important aspect of structural bioinformatics. However, predicting pp is using in silico docking techniques is computationally very expensive. Developing very fast protein docking tools will be useful for studying large scale PPI networks, and could contribute to the rational design of new drugs. Results: The Hex spherical polar Fourier protein docking algorithm has been implemented on Nvidia graphics processor units (GPUs). On a GTX 285 GPU, an exhaustive and densely sampled 6D docking search can be calculated in just 15 s using multiple 1D fast Fourier transforms (FFTs). This represents a 45-fold speed up over the corresponding calculation on a single CPU, being at least two orders of magnitude times faster than a similar CPU calculation using z dock 3.0.1, and estimated to be at least three orders of magnitude faster than the gpu accelerated version of PIPER on comparable hardware. Hence, for the first time, exhaustive fft based protein docking calculations may now be performed in a matter of seconds on a contemporary GPU. three dimensional Hex FFT correlations are also accelerated by the GPU, but the speed up factor of only 2.5 is much less than that obtained with 1D FFTs. Thus, the Hex algorithm appears to be especially well suited to exploit GPUs compared to conventional 3D FFT docking approaches.

introduction protein docking is the task of calculating the 3D structure of a protein complex starting from unbound or model built protein structures (). As well as providing a useful technique to help study fundamental biomolecular mechanisms, using docking tools to predict protein protein interactions pp is is emerging as a promising complementary approach to rational drug design (). Although proteins are intrinsically flexible, many protein docking algorithms begin by assuming the proteins to be docked are rigid, and they employ geometric hashing () or fast Fourier transform (FFT) correlation techniques () to find putative initial docking poses, which are then re scored and refined using more sophisticated but more computationally * To whom correspondence should be addressed. expensive techniques (). This article focuses on using graphics processor units (GPUs) to accelerate fft based approaches to the initial rigid body stage of a docking calculation. The FFT approach was first used to as a rapid way to calculate shape complementarity within a 3D Cartesian grid (). It was later extended to include electrostatic interactions, e.g. ft dock () and DOT (), or both electrostatic and de solvation contributions, e.g. z dock (). However, because most fft based approaches use 3D Cartesian grid representations of proteins, they can only compute translational correlations, and these must be repeated over multiple rotational samples in order to cover the 6D search space. Recently, FFT techniques have been used to calculate correlations of multi term knowledge based potentials (). However, each cross term in the potential requires a corresponding FFT to be calculated, and this adds to the overall computational expense. Furthermore, protein docking algorithms provide a useful way to study the nature of encounter complexes (), and they are beginning to be used as an in silico technique to help predict PPI networks (). Both of these approaches are computationally intensive because they involve performing many cross docking calculations. There is, therefore, a need to develop more efficient techniques to calculate pp is. To address the main limitations of the Cartesian FFT approaches, we developed the spherical polar Fourier (SPF) technique, which uses rotational correlations () to accelerate the calculation. This reduces execution times to a matter of minutes on an ordinary workstation (). The related fro dock (fast rotational docking) approach has also recently demonstrated considerable performance gains compared to Cartesian grid based FFT approaches (). Nonetheless, further computational improvements are always desirable because greater speed may be traded for greater accuracy. In recent years, many scientific calculations have benefited from the very high arithmetic capabilities of modern GPUs (). Initially, it required considerable skill and knowledge of graphics programming techniques to transform a scientific calculation into a form that could be executed by dedicated pixel processing hardware on a GPU. However, with the advent of programmable GPUs and software development tools such as Brook () and the CUDA (Common Unified Device Architecture) toolkit (http://www.nvidia.com/), it is now much easier to deploy scientific software on GPUs. For example, using GPUs to calculate protein and DNA sequence alignments can give speed-ups from at least a factor of 10 () to over a 100 () compared to

conclusion the Hex 1D and 3D FFT docking schemes have been implemented on CUDA GPUs. Although the CPU version of Hex is already much faster than conventional Cartesian grid based FFT docking algorithms, gpu based correlations using the 1D FFT scheme are accelerated by at least a factor of 100 compared to a single CPU core, and a very satisfactory 45-fold overall speed up is achieved for the 1D FFT scheme. This corresponds to an 15-fold speed up compared to the 3D FFT scheme on the CPU. However, only a very modest gpu cpu speed up factor of about 2.5 is obtained for the 3D FFT scheme. This shows that the Hex 1D FFT docking scheme is especially well suited to exploit current GPU architectures. On a contemporary high end GPU, the 1D FFT scheme allows an exhaustive protein docking calculation to be completed in just 15 s, which is at least two orders of magnitude faster than leading conventional cartesian based docking algorithms such as z dock and PIPER. Thus, for the first time, exhaustive fft based protein docking may now be carried out in interactive time-scales using a modern GPU. This algorithmic improvement will facilitate the use of docking techniques to help study pp is and PPI networks.
