Motivation: Pinpointing genes that underlie human inherited diseases among candidate genes in susceptibility genetic regions is the primary step towards the understanding of pathogenesis of diseases. Although several probabilistic models have been proposed to prioritize candidate genes using phenotype similarities and protein protein interactions, no combinatorial approaches have been proposed in the literature. Results: We propose the first combinatorial approach for prioritizing candidate genes. We first construct a phenome interactome network by integrating the given phenotype similarity profile, protein protein interaction network and associations between diseases and genes. Then, we introduce a computational method called max if to maximize the information flow in this network for uncovering genes that underlie diseases. We demonstrate the effectiveness of this method in prioritizing candidate genes through a series of cross validation experiments, and we show the possibility of using this method to identify diseases with which a query gene may be associated. We demonstrate the competitive performance of our method through a comparison with two existing state of the art methods, and we analyze the robustness of our method with respect to the parameters involved. As an example application, we apply our method to predict driver genes in 50 copy number aberration regions of melanoma. Our method is not only able to identify several driver genes that have been reported in the literature, it also shed some new biological insights on the understanding of the modular property and transcriptional regulation scheme of these driver genes.

introduction although the past few decades have evidenced many successful stories of identifying genetic variants that underlie human inherited diseases through statistical methods such as linkage analysis and association studies (), uncovering genes that are truly associated with these diseases from susceptibility genetic regions obtained by these statistical analyses still remain as a great challenge and appeal for the development of effective computational methods (). To tackle this problem, several approaches have been proposed from the viewpoint of one class novelty learning. For example, the guilt by direct association principle suggests ranking candidate * To whom correspondence should be addressed. genes in a susceptibility region according to their relevance to genes that are already known as associated with the disease under investigation. Based on this principle, a wide variety of information, including protein sequences (), gene expression profiles (), functional annotations (), literature descriptions (), protein protein interactions (PPI) () and many others (), has been used to facilitate the prioritization of candidate genes. Recently, a number of studies have also suggested the guilt by indirect association principle, which resorts to the modular nature of human genetic diseases () and utilizes PPI information and similarities between disease phenotypes with a variety of computational models to infer genes that are truly associated with diseases (). For example proposed a Bayesian model to integrate PPI and phenotype similarities ().developed a regression model to explain phenotype similarities using gene proximities (also proposed to align the phenotype network against the PPI network. Li and Patra utilized a random walk model called an rw rh to simulate the stationary distribution of the strength of associations for genes ().proposed a network propagation method called PRINCE to mimic the sharing of disease status among genes. These recent methods not only exhibit the state of the art performance, but also open the possibility of identifying genes that are responsible for diseases, whose genetic bases are completely unknown. The success of the above methods relies largely on the use of PPI networks for estimating functional similarities between genes (). The functional similarities between a pair of genes are typically measured by using the shortest path between genes in a PPI network (). Since the shortest path measure considers only a single optimal path between a pair of genes and overlooks all other paths, the reliability of the optimal path and the robustness of the resulting method may therefore be adversely affected. Moreover, most of the above methods are based on probabilistic models, which are typically very computation
