Modern structural biology still draws the vast majority of information from crystallography, a technique where the objects being investigated are embedded in a crystal lattice. Given the complexity and variety of those objects, it becomes fundamental to computationally assess which of the interfaces in the lattice are biologically relevant and which are simply crystal contacts. Since the mid-1990s, several approaches have been applied to obtain high accuracy classification of crystal contacts and biological protein protein interfaces. This review provides an overview of the concepts and main approaches to protein interface classification: thermodynamic estimation of interface stability, evolutionary approaches based on conservation of interface residues, and co occurrence of the interface across different crystal forms. Among the three categories, evolutionary approaches offer the strongest promise for improvement, thanks to the incessant growth in sequence knowledge. Importantly, protein interface classification algorithms can also be used on multimeric structures obtained using other high resolution techniques or for protein assembly design or validation purposes. A key issue linked to protein interface classification is the identification of the biological assembly of a crystal structure and the analysis of its symmetry. Here, we highlight the most important concepts and problems to be overcome in assembly prediction. Over the next few years, tools and concepts of interface classification will probably become more frequently used and integrated in several areas of structural biology and structural bioinformatics. Among the main challenges for the future are better addressing of weak interfaces and the application of interface classification concepts to prediction problems like protein protein docking.

introduction contemporary structural biology is a mature yet dynamic field, where well established techniques like protein crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance coexist and cross fertilize with emerging or re-emerging ones, such as electron diffraction or single particle electron cryo microscopy. Thanks to advances in detectors and software, this latter technique has broken resolution barriers that were once thought unassailable (). The bulk of bio macromolecular structural information; however, still comes from protein crystallography, which accounts for 89% of the entries in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () as of June 2015. A key feature of the crystal structure of bio macromolecules is that the molecules are embedded in a crystal lattice, containing several non-biological interfaces called crystal packing contacts (or, briefly, crystal contacts), which are often indistinguishable by crystallographic means from any biological interface the protein may possess (). With the increasing complexity of bio macromolecular structures, the interface problem correctly classifying all contacts in a crystal lattice as biologically relevant or crystal contact has become more frequent and important. Starting in the mid-1990s, several computational approaches, based on a variety of concepts, have been developed to tackle this 'interface classification problem'. The number and diversity of the scientific contributions in this area are now large enough to constitute a recognized topic in structural biology and structural bioinformatics. This review aims to provide an overview of the protein interface classification problem, as well as a historical perspective of the research in this area, of its applications and of the main perspectives and challenges for the future.
