Motivation: Recent experimental studies have suggested that proteins fold via stepwise assembly of structural units named fold ons through the process of sequential stabilization. Alongside, latest developments on computational side based on probabilistic modeling have shown promising direction to perform de novo protein conformational sampling from continuous space. However, existing computational approaches for de novo protein structure prediction often randomly sample protein conformational space as opposed to experimentally suggested stepwise sampling. Results: Here, we develop a novel generative, probabilistic model that simultaneously captures local structural preferences of backbone and side chain conformational space of polypeptide chains in a united residue representation and performs experimentally motivated conditional con-formational sampling via stepwise synthesis and assembly of fold on units that minimizes a composite physics and knowledge based energy function for de novo protein structure prediction. The proposed method, UniCon3D, has been found to (i) sample lower energy conformations with higher accuracy than traditional random sampling in a small benchmark of 6 proteins; (ii) perform comparably with the top five automated methods on 30 difficult target domains from the 11th Critical Assessment of Protein Structure Prediction (CASP) experiment and on 15 difficult target domains from the 10th CASP experiment; and (iii) outperform two state of the art approaches and a baseline counterpart of UniCon3D that performs traditional random sampling for protein modeling aided by predicted residue residue contacts on 45 targets from the 10th edition of CASP. Availability and Implementation: Source code, executable versions, manuals and example data of UniCon3D for Linux and OSX are freely available to non-commercial users at http://sysbio.rnet.mis souri.edu/UniCon3D/.

introduction computationally predicting protein structure from its amino acid sequence, the so called 'de novo' structure prediction problem, remains to be largely unsolved owing to the challenges associated with efficiently navigating huge conformational space accessible to proteins as well as due to the difficulties in accurately capturing physical forces behind protein folding in silico (). Recent experimental studies based on equilibrium and kinetic hydrogen exchange () have theorized that protein folding proceeds by stepwise assembly of protein structural units known as fold ons. Previously formed fold on units cooperate to sequentially stabilize subsequent fold ons to gradually build the native structure in a process known as sequential stabilization (). Alongside, encouraging process has been made on computational side with development of probabilistic graphical models () to perform conformational search from a continuous space that is free from discretized database driven search strategies as employed in fragment assembly based structure prediction methods (). These methods adopt different representations to parameterize protein conformational space and employ a diverse set of machine learning methods to model it. For instance, FB5-HMM () adopts a coarse grained (Ca only) representation and trains a generative Hidden Markov Model (HMM) to capture local structural preferences. A discriminative learning method crf sampler (), on the other hand, trains a Conditional Random Field (CRF) by utilizing Ca only representation. torus dbn () and cst or us () uses Dynamic Bayesian Network (DBN) to capture structural bias of proteins' backbone whereas FUSION () relies on input output Hidden Markov Model io hmm for modeling local preferences of backbone conformational space. Furthermore, methods relying on Markov random field (MRF) have been proposed () to generate protein side chain rotamer library (v dihedral angles) conditioned on backbone conformation. DBN based models such as BASILISK () also exist to capture backbone dependent and backbone independent structural preferences of side chain v angles. Despite showing promising direction, these approaches follow several conventions that can be circumvented. First, starting from an extended polypeptide conformation of the whole protein, these approaches attempt to predict the folded structure by replacing random stretches of the chain using probabilistic sampling and optimizing a potential energy function. These probabilistic graphical model methods, like current fragment assembly based methods, therefore, do not apply experimentally suggested stepwise protein folding paradigm during structure prediction. Second, these methods do not consider the influence of side chains during structure modeling and typically add side chain conformation conditioned on backbone after the backbone geometry is predicted. Motivated by experimental hypothesis, we develop UniCon3D, a de novo protein structure prediction method that performs stepwise synthesis and assembly of fold on units via conditional sampling from a novel united residue probabilistic model, which captures local conformational bias of backbone and side chain simultaneously in a united residue representation. The rationale for choosing united residue representation is to integrate both backbone and side chain during structure modeling. It is found that (i) stepwise sampling produces lower energy conformations with higher accuracy than random sampling when everything else remains the same; (ii) UniCon3D attains comparable performance with top five automated methods of CASP11 and CASP10 in a dataset of 30 and 15 difficult target domains, respectively; and (iii) UniCon3D outperforms a baseline counterpart of UniCon3D that performs traditional random sampling as well as GDFuzz3D () and ftc omar (), two state of the art approaches for de novo protein structure prediction aided by residue residue contacts in a dataset containing 45 CASP10 targets.

conclusion here we show that experimentally motivated stepwise, probabilistic sampling can lead to improvements during de novo conformational sampling of united residue polypeptide chains by generating lower energy conformation with higher accuracy than traditional random sampling approaches. Moreover, stepwise sampling strategy naturally avoids domain splitting and reassembly during multi-domain protein modeling and can be directly applied to predict structures of relatively larger proteins. Combined with a basic implementation of united residue physics based force field aided by predicted residue residue contacts, the method attains accuracy comparable with the top automated approaches worldwide in a dataset of difficult protein targets. Furthermore, with sufficiently accurate predicted contacts, the method can consistently predict correct overall folds of proteins with higher average accuracy than two state of the art approaches. Our results, obtained purely based on coarse grained sampling and scoring, could be further enhanced by focusing future work on all atom refinement and improved scoring function.
