Unipro u gene is a multiplatform open source software with the main goal of assisting molecular biologists without much expertise in bioinformatics to manage, analyze and visualize their data. u gene integrates widely used bioinformatics tools within a common user interface. The toolkit supports multiple biological data formats and allows the retrieval of data from remote data sources. It provides visualization modules for biological objects such as annotated genome sequences, Next Generation Sequencing (NGS) assembly data, multiple sequence alignments, phylogenetic trees and 3D structures. Most of the integrated algorithms are tuned for maximum performance by the usage of multithreading and special processor instructions. u gene includes a visual environment for creating reusable workflows that can be launched on local resources or in a High Performance Computing (HPC) environment. u gene is written in C++ using the Qt framework. The built in plugin system and structured u gene API make it possible to extend the toolkit with new functionality. Availability and implementation: u gene binaries are freely available for MS Windows, Linux and Mac OS X at http://ugene. unipro ru download html. u gene code is licensed under the GPLv2; the information about the code licensing and copyright of integrated tools can be found in the license 3rd party file provided with the source bundle.

introduction the number of available bioinformatics tools has grown dramatically over the past two decades. However, as a result of increasing complexity of the tools and a lack of rigorous software engineering practices, using, installing and configuring a bioinformatics application, along with ensuring that it is communicating well with other programs, can be a challenging task. Moreover, a large number of computational methods and tools are available only as source code packages, command line utilities which can run only in a linux unix environment, web services (), or programming libraries (), and can not be easily accessed by biologists who do not have the necessary skills. A number of existing tools also lack user documentation and have limited support. * To whom correspondence should be addressed some solutions have been proposed to improve the situation. There are bioinformatics tools which are multiplatform, easy to install and hide the underlying complexity behind an easy to use GUI interface. Usually, these tools are focused on a particular niche. Good examples of such tools are the Artemis genome browser (), Jalview multiple alignment editor (), Tablet () and IGV () next generation sequencing data visualization packages. Applications such as Galaxy () or Taverna () solve communication issues between tools by providing easily accessible capabilities to manage bioinformatics workflows, but still require significant effort to set up on a local server. There are also closed source commercially available programs, such as vector nti www invitrogen com gene ious www gene ious com or clc bio www clc bio com that could act as a bioinformatics 'Swiss army knife'. In this article, we introduce Unipro u gene a multiplatform open source application, which integrates popular bioinformatics algorithms and tools, providing both graphical and command line interfaces. It has an active user community and support from a team of professional software developers. To perform complex computational experiments, u gene allows the construction of reusable workflow diagrams.
