Motivation: similarity based methods have been widely used in order to infer the properties of genes and gene products containing little or no experimental annotation. New approaches that overcome the limitations of methods that rely solely upon sequence similarity are attracting increased attention. One of these novel approaches is to use the organization of the structural domains in proteins. Results: We propose a method for the automatic annotation of protein sequences in the UniProt Knowledgebase (UniProtKB) by comparing their domain architectures, classifying proteins based on the similarities and propagating functional annotation. The performance of this method was measured through a cross validation analysis using the Gene Ontology (GO) annotation of a subset of uniprotkb swissprot. The results demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in detecting functional similarity with an average f score 0.85. We applied the method on nearly 55.3 million uncharacterized proteins in uniprotkb trembl resulted in 44 818 178 GO term predictions for 12 172 114 proteins. 22% of these predictions were for 2 812 016 previously non annotated protein entries indicating the significance of the value added by this approach.

introduction the reduction in the cost of sequencing has led to the accumulation of a vast amount of data in biological databases. These data are stored in public repositories such as the UniProt Knowledgebase () for protein sequences, and NCBI GenBank () and the EMBL Nucleotide Archive () for gene sequences. In order to make sense of these data, the stored sequences need to be annotated with respect to their functional and evolutionary properties. Defining the functions of genes and gene products is a difficult task due to the biological complexity of organisms. There are various projects aiming to standardize the description of the functional attributes of biological sequences by introducing controlled vocabularies. The Gene Ontology (GO) project provides the most comprehensive functional standardization system for proteins (). GO uses a directed acyclic graph (DAG) structure to define the functions from generic to specific in three main categories namely: molecular function, biological process and cellular component. Discovery of functional properties for proteins is a key step in biomedical research, yet experimental identification of proteins is still a quite laborious and expensive task. This has led to many similarity based computational methods being developed to infer the unknown properties of proteins based on their similarity to experimentally annotated proteins. The most widely used approach is sequence alignment (). A significant proportion of the unknown functional space has been covered thanks to this procedure where similarity is inferred in terms of the shared evolutionary history of the sequences. Nevertheless, different approaches have been tried lately for the prediction of protein properties, to augment the performance of sequence methods. One approach is to exploit information on the physicochemical properties of the amino acids in the protein sequence to infer subcellular localization (). A different approach is the prediction of the structure of the proteins using their sequences (). Yet another one is to identify evolutionary conserved regions in the sequences (such as motifs and domains) and to relate these sequence segments to specific functions (). The idea is that genes with mutations in these regions are selected against because changes in these functionally active segments may cause a decrease in efficiency or even the loss of function, decreasing the fitness of the gene. Combinatorial approaches are gaining popularity, where different methods are combined to increase the coverage and the quality of predictions; either by gathering together different features under one classifier () or by using multiple classifiers at the same time (). Critical Assessment of Protein Function Annotation was initiated in 2011, in order to evaluate various methods in terms of their performance in the prediction of GO terms on a standard dataset (). Many of the methods using evolutionary conserved sub-sequences focus on protein domains. These are the structural building blocks in proteins that are able to function and fold independently from the rest of the protein (). There are many well established biological databases dedicated to the identification and search of functional domains and the grouping of similar protein sequences into families. These databases attempt to assign functional annotations to the domains and families, and approach a protein sequence as a functional combination of its domains. Some of the widely used sequence based domain family databases are Pfam (), PROSITE (), HAMAP (), SUPERFAMILY () and InterPro (). InterPro incorporates all of the above databases and more to provide a comprehensive classification of proteins. One view in the field of protein function inference states that the function of a protein is not simply the sum of the functions of the independent domains it contains, but rather is a unique property emerging from the contribution of all of the structural blocks synergistically (). This has led to the concept of domain architectures arrangements (DA) defined as the organizational properties of a protein regarding the domains it contains. These properties may include the domain content, linear order of the domains in the protein sequence and recurrence of the domains in the protein. In da based methods, statistically significant similarities between test proteins are identified using the above mentioned properties. Examples of DA information being employed in biological data analysis methods include. Although the methodology used varies greatly between the different studies, most of them try to predict the pairwise similarities homologies between proteins (). Earlier studies mostly focused on similarities in the domain content of proteins (), whereas information regarding domain order, position, recurrence and promiscuity is more frequently used in later studies (). The study by was the first to incorporate information about the sequential order of domains into the similarity search (). In most of these studies, the authors set out to quantify the similarities between proteins using domain information, mostly with the aim of identifying pairwise homologies. Here, we present the UniProt Domain Architecture Alignment and Classification (DAAC) procedure for the automatic annotation of uncharacterized proteins in UniProtKB based upon domain architectural similarity to manually reviewed sequences in the UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot. Four attributes are incorporated into the measurement of domain architectural similarity: domain content, order, position and recurrence. The proposed method incorporates domain annotation from InterPro in order to obtain comprehensive domain information coverage for the proteins. This study is the first that we are aware of to use DA comparison and classification in the automatic functional annotation of large protein sets. The proposed method also brings new approaches to the field by (i) employing InterPro as the domain annotation source, (ii) the use of multi label classification technique to annotate proteins with multiple functions in one run and to be able to optimize the parameters for each functional term independently and (iii) application of domain weights during the alignment step to direct the procedure to the optimal solution. multi label classification is a technique used to classify each sample into one or more classes. This method is frequently employed to analyze examples with multiple attributes as opposed to the traditional single label or binary classification (). In the latter, each of the objects under consideration can be assigned to only one class among a set of mutually exclusive classes. However, in the real world, objects can belong to multiple classes that are not necessarily disjoint, e.g. a protein may interact with ATP (attribute 1) in the plasma membrane (attribute 2). There are two ways to address these cases. The first is to perform several separate processes of binary classification, each for one class, and then to aggregate the results. The second option is to perform a multi label classification, which allows assigning an object to more than one class and in one single process. The proposed method has been validated using protein sequences from uniprotkb swissprot together with their experimentally validated GO annotations. By doing so, we hope to demonstrate that the results of the analysis have biological relevance for protein function prediction. Finally, we applied the method to UniProtKB/ TrEMBL to obtain functional predictions for the protein entries in the database. It is important to emphasize that the proposed method is not designed to replace conventional sequence based methods but to complement them. The case for using DA comparison methods to complement sequence based approaches has been reported in previous studies ().displays the representation of DAAC. The method first generates the DAs for both training and test proteins as explained in Section 2.1. Training of the system takes place as the second step where DAs of reference proteins are aligned pairwise in an all against all manner using the InterPro domain hits as the strings instead of amino acids. Then training proteins are grouped under classes representing unique GO terms. class specific similarity thresholds are determined at the end of the training (as discussed in Section 2.3). The third step is the application. DAs of the query proteins are aligned to the training samples and classified into the annotation term classes considering their similarity measure from the alignment. Query proteins receive the GO term of the corresponding classes as predictions.
