Motivation: Lung cancer is often discovered long after its onset, making identifying genes important in its initiation and progression a challenge. By the time the tumors are discovered, we only observe the final sum of changes of the few genes that initiated cancer and thousands of genes that they have influenced. Gene interactions and heterogeneity of samples make it difficult to identify genes consistent between different cohorts. Using gene and gene product interaction networks, we propose a principled approach to identify a small subset of genes whose network neighbors exhibit consistently high expression change (in cancerous tissue versus normal) regardless of their own expression. We hypothesize that these genes can shed light on the larger scale perturbations in the overall landscape of expression levels. Results: We benchmark our method on simulated data, and show that we can recover a true gene list in noisy measurement data. We then apply our method to four non small cell lung cancer and two pancreatic cancer cohorts, finding several genes that are consistent within all cohorts of the same cancer type. Conclusion: Our model is flexible, robust and identifies gene sets that are more consistent across cohorts than several other approaches. Additionally, our method can be applied on a per patient basis not requiring large cohorts of patients to find genes of influence. Our approach is generally applicable to gene expression studies where the goal is to identify a small set of influential genes that may in turn explain the much larger set of genome wide expression changes. Availability: The code is available at

introduction the reality of cancer diagnosis is harsh. Despite continued advances in surgical, pharmacological and radiological treatments, mortality * To whom correspondence should be addressed. remains high, with lung cancer as the leading cause of cancer related deaths in the United States (). One of the primary challenges of lung cancer is the detection of small, early stage tumors. Most cancers are identified and the tumor is excised for molecular analysis at a late stage. By then, we are only able to observe the final sum of changes to cell structure and function reflected in differential expression of a few genes that initiated cancer and thousands of genes affected through gene interactions. Because of the cascading effect, it is difficult to identify genes that are directly responsible for tumorigenesis from gene expression data alone. Recently, a large number of studies have investigated the use of known gene gene relationships, such as physical interaction of their proteins, to characterize cancer genes (;) and to identify more robust signatures of diseases including cancer (). For instance, it has been shown that genes whose expression has changed are more likely to be surrounded by genes whose expression has also changed (;). Initial attempts have relied on pre-defined pathways or gene sets, limiting these analyses to well studied genes or known pathway memberships. A more natural approach is to study the change in expression of a gene directly in the context of the interaction network of gene products, for instance, by identifying active subnetworks that are predictive of the disease (). Development of accurate models for identifying important genes in cancer still face a number of key challenges. First, many methods depend on the knowledge of 'seed genes' known to be involved in a particular disease [e.g.; nav lakh a and Kingsford (2010);. Second, the procedure for estimating parameters in these models sometimes combine ad hoc heuristics with underdetermined systems of equations (), which may not be robust to expression or network noise. Third, most methods require availability of a sufficiently large number of samples in order to reach conclusions about important genes. In this article, we start to address these challenges within a framework for detecting genes of influence given a set of gene expression profiles from tumor and healthy samples, and a network of gene gene interactions. Our method does not require seed genes; does not have to simultaneously infer the network, circumventing the second challenge outlined above; and can be applied on the
