Motivation: Although the integration and analysis of the activity of small molecules across multiple chemical screens is a common approach to determine the specificity and toxicity of hits, the suitability of these approaches to reveal novel biological information is less explored. Here, we test the hypothesis that assays sharing selective hits are biologically related. Results: We annotated the biological activities (i.e. biological processes or molecular activities) measured in assays and constructed chemical hit profiles with sets of compounds differing on their selectivity level for 1640 assays of ChemBank repository. We compared the similarity of chemical hit profiles of pairs of assays with their biological relationships and observed that assay pairs sharing non promiscuous chemical hits tend to be biologically related. A detailed analysis of a network containing assay pairs with the highest hit similarity confirmed biological meaningful relationships. Furthermore, the biological roles of predicted molecular targets of the shared hits reinforced the biological associations between assay pairs.

introduction the screening of a library of compounds in a biological assay is a common first step in drug discovery to find chemical hits for the drug leads. A single chemical screening experiment provides information about the activity of compounds on a target or biological process. However, to determine the suitability of the chemical hit as chemical probe or drug lead, it is important to know additional properties of the compound such as its specificity and toxicity. An inexpensive and efficient manner to obtain information about these properties is to learn about the activity of this compound across multiple chemical screens. This approach is followed routinely in chemical screening programs such as the NCI60 project run by 'US National Cancer Institute (NCI)' where the activity of a compound across 60 different cancer cell lines is measured to detect selective chemical hits for a particular cancer and avoid general toxicity (). In the past decade several initiatives including the NIH Molecular Libraries Program () and ChemBank () have compiled chemical biology experiments performed by different laboratories using diverse experimental set-ups ranging from cell free to cell based and even whole organism based assays. The analysis of these heterogeneous datasets is challenging yet offers the possibility to obtain a global view of the chemical and biological activities of chemicals. In this regard, the integration and analysis of the collection of assays stored in the PubChem BioAssay () repository has proven to be useful to predict adverse drug reactions () and to determine chemical properties of promiscuous compounds, that is, those that appear as frequent hitters in many high throughput assays (). The results of these studies suggest that a plethora of hidden molecular and biological information in these repositories can be uncovered using integrative computational methods. This is particularly relevant for the hits of phenotypic assays, for which the underlying molecular targets responsible for their activity is unknown. To determine the protein targets of the chemical hits of these assays, in silico target prediction methods () are arising as an efficient approach to obtain insights into the compound mode of action. For instance, Young et al. have shown recently that the predicted molecular targets of hits are able to explain complex readouts of high content screening assays (). Here, we exploited the vast amount of publicly available chemical screening assays present in the ChemBank database to evaluate in a systematic manner if a pair of biological processes or molecular activities (hereafter named 'biological activities') modulated by common chemicals in phenotype or target based assays, respectively, is related. We tested and confirmed this hypothesis by the systematic analysis of the biological activities measured in pairs of assays sharing non promiscuous compounds in this repository. Subsequently, to understand the molecular mechanism linking pairs of phenotypic assays sharing chemical hits, we annotated the molecular targets of the shared hits. To that aim, we used hit pick (), a recently developed in silico target prediction method to predict the molecular targets of compounds. We found that the known biological role of the predicted targets of common chemical hits confirms the biological processes relationships between the phenotypic assay pairs and provides mechanistic understanding of the relationships. This approach allows us to find relationships between biological activities and to understand better the molecular basis of the shared biological activities.

discussion in this work, we have integrated and analysed the information stored in ChemBank and demonstrated that the biological activities of assay pairs sharing selective chemical hits are often related. The relationships between the biological processes of phenotypic assays are furthermore supported by the role of protein targets predicted for the shared hits. fingerprint based approaches, where profiles of a collection of predefined features of an object such as a compound or protein is compared, have often been exploited in Chemistry and Biology fields to infer properties of compounds () () and genes (). These approaches are based on the observation that similar fingerprint profiles correlate with similar properties (). For example, compounds with similar chemical fingerprint profiles tend to have similar biological activities (). Likewise, compounds with similar modes of action have also been observed to exhibit similar behavior across multiple assays (). In contrast, in this study we use chemical hit based fingerprints constructed with selective compounds to infer biological relationships between assays. Interestingly, we show that the relationships between assays can only be captured when a stringent selectivity filter is applied to discard promiscuous compounds from the chemical hit profile. Currently, there is no consensus for the definition of compound promiscuity, and different promiscuity filters have been proposed in the literature. Sch  ure r et al calculated an 'inhibition frequency index' for each compound and applied a variable threshold, ranging from 5 to 20% of screens, depending on the number of HTS screens a given compound had been through. Although these studies have revealed interesting chemical moieties associated to unspecific signals in chemicals screens, the question of what level of selectivity is necessary to capture hits carrying information about specific biological signals has not been addressed yet. In this study, we have shown that a stringent promiscuity filter that first selects hits active in 520% of the projects (filter F2) and subsequently retains compounds with activity in 520% of the assays within a project (filter F3) is necessary to enrich for hits with specific biological activities. We reason that the low number of projects performed in the same experimental backgrounds generating the same unspecific signals might be the cause for the lack of correlation between hit and similarity of biological activities of two assays after the application of filter F2. Although this is partially overcome by discarding compounds active in several assays of the same project and consequently, performed in similar experimental backgrounds (filter F3), our approach also detects connections between cell free assays that are apparently unrelated. For example, the phospho ly pid Hydrolysis' assay is associated to the de ubi quit i lation assay (). A closer look at this connection reveals arte factual yet non promiscuous hits, as the shared hits of the two connections appear active in the control assays of the project (termed 'unspecific' chemical hits, see). This indicates that the stringent promiscuity filters applied here might, for some experimental conditions, be insufficient to discard unspecific hits, and additional control assays might be necessary to remove non-selective chemical hits. The presence of unspecific hits is also evidenced by the occurrence of edges that connect 'control' and 'experiment' assays. For example, the e cadherin Synthetic Lethal (Cell growth)' 'control' assay that controlled for the cytotoxicity of compounds in the human mammary epithelial hm le cell line is connected to the 'Wnt And lit hum Modulators (Wnt vector)' 'experiment' assay (), suggesting that the shared hits of the pair are not specific of the Wnt signalling process. This hypothesis is further corroborated by the known or suspected anticancer activity of the predicted targets [HDAC1 (), fnt a () and sigma non opioid i584
