upd tool is a computational tool for detection and classification of uni parental di so my (UPD) in trio snp microarray experiments. up ds are rare events of chromosomal mal segregation and describe the condition of two homologous chromosomes or homolo-gous chromosomal segments that were inherited from one parent. The occurrence of UPD can be of major clinical relevance. Though high throughput molecular screening techniques are widely used, detection of up ds and especially the subclassification remains complex. We developed upd tool to detect and classify up ds from SNP microarray data of parent child trios. The algorithm was tested using five positive controls including both iso and hetero dis omic segmental up ds and 30 trios from the HapMap project as negative controls. With upd tool we were able to correctly identify all occurrences of non mosaic UPD within our positive controls, whereas no occurrence of UPD was found within our negative controls. In addition, the chromosomal breakage points could be determined more precisely than by microsatellite analysis. Our results were compared with both the gold standard, microsatellite analysis and snp trio another program available for UPD detection. upd tool is platform independent, light weight and flexible. Because of its simple input format, upd tool may also be used with other high throughput technologies (e.g. next generation sequencing). Availability and implementation: upd tool executables, documentation and examples can be downloaded from

introduction in a normal diploid karyotype (46,XX or 46,XY, respectively), each chromosome pair consists of one maternal and one paternal inherited homologue. uni parental di so my (UPD) is characterized by the presence of a chromosome pair or homologous chromosomal segment that was inherited from solely one parent. up ds can be divided into maternal and paternal by origin of the homologous chromosomes. Further subclassification is based on the information whether both homologous chromosomes originate from the same is odi so my or both hetero di so my chromosomes of one parent. Also, mixtures of both subtypes (combined iso and hetero di so my are possible. The mechanisms leading to UPD are complex and were discussed in detail in a recent review (). Generally, UPD can affect each chromosome, and the incidence is estimated to be $1:3500 of live births. Phenotypes associated with UPD, owing to either imprinting disturbance or unmasking recessive mutations, have been described for nearly all autosomes (). The pathogenesis of UPD is determined by both epigenetic imprinting [e.g. silver russell syndrome (chr. 7, maternal), prader willi syndrome (chr. 15, maternal), beckwith wiedemann syndrome (chr. 11, paternal) and Angelman syndrome (chr 15, paternal)] as well as unmasking of autosomal recessive diseases [e.g. is odi so my of chromosome 9 in Leigh syndrome (. The clinical findings of two of our positive controls with UPD (7) were published previously (). Microsatellite analysis as well as methylation specific tests as a genome wide screening tool for up ds are laborious, expensive and imprecise owing to the limited number of markers that are available per chromosome. In contrast, the widely applied high throughput genotyping technologies such as whole genome high density SNP microarrays or next generation sequencing provide hundreds of thousands of genotypes in one experiment. Owing to homozygosity by descendants, microsatellite analysis as well as UPD detection based on genotypes may be of limited informative value in consanguineous families. Especially, trio experiments are thought to render UDP detection possible (). Genotype information from children and their parents allows detection of inheritance errors, also called Mendelian errors (ME). Causes for unexpected calls can be found not only in genotyping errors but also in UPD regions. Contrary to UPD regions, genotyping errors are evenly distributed over all chromosomes and occur at a low rate, e.g. 50.1% in an Affymetrix 50 K array (). Yet, detection of UPD and especially hetero dis omic regions as well as further subclassification of UPD regions (e.g. paternal, maternal) is still not routinely carried out. To our knowledge, only snp trio a web tool is publicly available and implements trio information for UPD detection (). Among the reasons for the development of upd tool *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. were the need for a lightweight and flexible tool with simple input and output file format that might be used with different genotyping techniques (microarrays but also next generation sequencing). upd tool was implemented as a portable and platform independent software solution for detection of both hetero and is odis omic regions on tab delimited SNP files.

conclusion upd tool is a fast, lightweight and platform independent tool for detection and classification of up ds. We were able to detect hetero and is odi so mies from maternal and paternal origin present in our positive controls. All UPD stretches were identified correctly, and breakpoints within a chromosome could be determined more precisely compared with microsatellite analysis. Owing to the simple input format, upd tool may likely be used to analyze SNPs of other high throughput platforms moreover upd tool is easy to install because it is platform independent and portable. upd tool currently does not evaluate copy number data for this reason, cn vs should be ruled out by another bioinformatic method before UPD detection. upd tool was written in C#, and we provide a platform independent executable for windows and linux, both 32 and 64 bit. The only requirement of upd tool is an installation of the .NET 4.0 or Mono framework. For generation of images, R has to be installed and added to the PATH environment variable. A data converter for the widely used genome wide Human SNP Array 6.0 (Affymetrix, Santa Clara) is provided. Additionally, upd tool comes with a tool that enables batch analysis of larger cohorts.
