Motivation: With rapidly increasing volumes of biological sequence data the functional analysis of new sequences in terms of similarities to known protein families challenges classical bioinformatics. Results: The ultrafast protein classification up roc toolbox implements a novel algorithm (Mosaic Matching) for large scale sequence analysis. up roc is by three orders of magnitude faster than profile based methods and in a meta genome simulation study achieved up to 80% higher sensitivity on unassembled 100 bp reads. Availability and implementation: up roc is available as an open source software at https://github. com gobi csu proc. Precompiled databases (Pfam) are linked on the up roc homepage: http://uproc. go bics de
introduction next generation sequencing (NGS) has stimulated the development of many new sequence analysis methods. In particular, meta genomic studies of microbial and viral assemblages require innovative algorithms to analyse the vast amount of anonymous and fragmented sequence data that is obtained from environmental or clinical samples. In a typical bioinformatics pipeline, the assignment of genomic or meta genomic sequences to known protein families is an essential step towards a characterization of the functional repertoire of a particular organism or community. The Pfam () database of protein families in combination with the HMMER () profile hidden Markov models is widely used for functional annotation of genomic and meta genomic sequences. Before the advent of HMMER 3.0, protein domain detection on large sequence collections had been computationally expensive, and several pre filtering methods () were suggested to speed up the analysis. Although such a prefilter approach has been included in HMMER 3.0, the processing of large meta genomic sequence files generated by NGS technologies can still be demanding in meta genomics and other NGS applications, not only the amount of sequence but also the limited length of sequencing reads can be challenging for a functional analysis (). Now that Illumina sequencing platforms are increasingly used in meta genomics we are facing huge collections of short reads often not longer than 100 bp. Here, the question arises what quality of the functional assignments can be expected for sequences that merely cover $10% of a typical microbial gene. In a recent study on transcript omic data showed that profile hidden Markov models substantially lose sensitivity on short reads. We have developed a toolbox for Ultrafast Protein Classification up roc that is available in terms of an open source software. Although up roc can in principle be applied to any protein sequence classification problem, the toolbox is predestined for functional analysis of meta genomes. First of all, the classification speed allows researchers to analyse large meta genomic datasets on a desktop computer without the requirement of large computer clusters or special purpose hardware. In addition, it also provides the necessary functionality to select open reading frames (ORFs) from DNA sequences. Besides the computational speed, our results on simulated V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press.

discussion the results on simulated short reads encourage the use of up roc for large scale meta genome analysis. For 100 bp reads the usual speed accuracy trade-off seems to be obsolete since up roc is both faster and more sensitive. The computationally more expensive profile methods that provide state of the art classification performance on full length protein sequences might not be optimal for this kind of short read data. This finding agrees well with a recent study on transcript omic data () where HMMER and other profile based methods showed inherent difficulties in classifying protein domains on short reads from weakly conserved regions. In our case, this is even more remarkable, because the HMMER program was also used for preparing all test examples on the basis of its predictions on full length sequences. The sensitivity rates clearly show that on 100 bp short reads HMMER does not recognize a considerable fraction of the protein domains that have been predicted in longer sequences before. For increasingly longer reads HMMER successively outperforms up roc in terms of sensitivity, while in terms of speed it remains $500 times slower. It is important to note that up roc requires a large protein database that well represents the sequence variation within different families. In particular, smaller databases that are based on full length protein sequences might require a homology extension before being used with up roc. This shows an important advantage of profile based methods that can even be used to represent tiny families with just a few sequences. Furthermore, it can also be expected that profile methods can better cope with the increasing overlap between families in full length databases. In turn, up roc is not restricted to protein families that are well representable by. Sensitivity (TPR) of protein domain detection on simulated short reads with best value in bold face multiple alignments. At the up roc homepage, we offer a precompiled database for a recent version of the KEGG orthologs () which are widely used for metabolic profiling in meta genomics and meta transcript omics. Beyond functional analysis, up roc can also be used for fast taxonomic profiling of meta genomes forwarding the protein domain hit counts to the tax y pro mixture model toolbox ().
