Motivation: A codon position could perform different or multiple roles in alternative transcripts of a gene. For instance, a non-synonymous position in one transcript could be a synonymous site in another. Alternatively, a position could remain as non-synonymous in multiple transcripts. Here we examined the impact of codon position plurality on the frequency of deleterious single nucleotide variations sn vs using data from 6500 human exo mes. Results: Our results showed that the proportion of deleterious sn vs was more than 2-fold higher in positions that remain non-synonymous in multiple transcripts compared with that observed in positions that are non-synonymous in one or some transcript(s) and synonymous or intronic in other(s). Furthermore, we observed a positive relationship between the fraction of deleterious non-synonymous sn vs and the number of proteins (alternative splice variants) affected. These results demonstrate that the plurality of codon positions is an important attribute , which could be useful in identifying mutations associated with diseases.

introduction a major task in clinical genomics is to identify mutations associated with human diseases (;). A number of computational prediction methods have been developed in the recent past to detect these deleterious mutations and to distinguish them from benign population polymorphisms (). Most of these methods examined the long term evolutionary consequences of a mutation using the multiple sequence alignments of human and other species. These methods predicted that mutations occurring in evolutionarily conserved positions are likely to be deleterious and hence have the potential to be associated with human diseases. Some of these methods evaluated the functional consequences of a mutation as well (). These methods proposed that mutations occurring in critical positions of a protein (such as a substrate binding site or a splice site) are likely to be deleterious as they disrupt the function and or structure of a protein or mRNA. Furthermore, these methods suggested that mutations that result in changes between dissimilar amino acids are more deleterious than those between similar amino acids. However unlike conservation based methods, these methods are applicable only to protein coding regions. Nevertheless, these function based methods have immense use in clinical genomics because almost 50% of the disease associated mutations were found to be located in protein coding regions (). Using conservation as well as function based methods, recent studies revealed an abundance of deleterious amino acid polymorphisms in human exo mes (). Although these methods are useful in predicting deleterious variants, additional methods are still required to improve the accuracy of finding them. For this purpose, it is important to examine the possibility of using various genomic features. In this study, we focused on the roles of a position in human protein coding genes. A codon position could perform different and or multiple roles in alternate transcripts of a gene. For instance, a non-synonymous position in one transcript could be a synonymous or intronic position in another (). On the other hand, a site could remain non-synonymous in multiple transcripts. It is not clear how this site plurality influences the frequency of occurrence of deleterious single nucleotide variations sn vs. Furthermore, it is interesting to examine the relationship between the frequency of deleterious non-synonymous sn vs and the number of proteins (alternative splice variants) affected. The availability of large exo me datasets has enabled us to address these issues.
