Motivation: Analysis of multiple genomes requires sophisticated tools that provide search, visualization, interactivity and data export. Comparative genomics datasets tend to be large and complex, making development of these tools difficult. In addition to scalability, comparative genomics tools must also provide user friendly interfaces such that the research scientist can explore complex data with minimal technical expertise. Results: We describe a new version of the Sybil software package and its application to the important human pathogen Streptococcus pneumoniae. This new software provides a feature rich set of comparative genomics tools for inspection of multiple genome structures, mining of orthologous gene families and identification of potential vaccine candidates. Availability: The s pneumoniae resource is online at http:// stre pneumo sybil i gsu maryland edu. The software, database and website are available for download as a portable virtual machine and from http://sourceforge.net/projects/sybil.

introduction the increasing throughput and reduced cost of second and third generation DNA sequencing technologies has resulted in a deluge of genome sequence data in the public domain. These require efficient bioinformatics tools enabling visualization and mining of multi genome comparisons. Such tools are difficult to develop because of the size and complexity of such large scale comparisons. The challenge is to develop a tool that can be flexible, extensible and usable while providing the following four basic features: search, visualization, interactivity and export.

DISCUSSION

conclusion as is typical in bioinformatics, the biological problem defines the needed software. Development of Sybil has been focused on manual data mining efforts, which give the user the power to navigate countable numbers of genomes in search of potentially important biological features. As datasets become larger and less manageable, the comparative genomics tools of the future will need to adapt to provide meaningful information without overwhelming the user. Sybil has addressed this problem by transitioning from a system capable of drawing a handful of genomes to one that is able to handle 100 genomes.
