Motivation: The interpretation of gene interaction in biological networks generates the need for a meaningful ranking of network elements. Classical centrality analysis ranks network elements according to their importance but may fail to reflect the power of each gene in interaction with the others. Results: We introduce a new approach using coalitional games to evaluate the centrality of genes in networks keeping into account genes interactions. The Shapley value for coalitional games is used to express the power of each gene in interaction with the others and to stress the centrality of certain hub genes in the regulation of biological pathways of interest. The main improvement of this contribution, with respect to previous applications of game theory to gene expression analysis, consists in a finer resolution of the gene interaction investigated in the model, which is based on pairwise relationships of genes in the network. In addition, the new approach allows for the integration of a priori knowledge about genes playing a key function on a certain biological process. An approximation method for practical computation on large biological networks, together with a comparison with other centrality measures, is also

introduction gene expression data may be collected by means of microarray technology (). Within a single experiment of this sophisticated technology, the level of expression of thousands of genes is estimated in a sample of cells under given conditions (genetic diseases, environmental exposition, pharmacologic treatment, levels of activation of a given pathway of genes, etc.). Several approaches have been proposed to identify 'central' genes of different biological pathways within the huge amount of information provided by this technology (). Gene co-expression networks () and other biological networks (e.g. representing protein protein interactions) are increasingly used to explore the system level * To whom correspondence should be addressed. functionality of genes and proteins (). Co-expression networks, for instance, are connection situations based upon the extent of correlation between pairs of genes across a gene expression dataset. Nodes are genes and connections are defined by co-expression of two genes. Often, the Pearson's correlation coefficient is the initial measure of gene co-expression. This measure is then transformed into an adjacency matrix, according to different alternative statistical procedures (). Depending on the aims of the study, weighted or unweighted networks, generated by the dicho to mization of the corresponding correlation matrix, may be considered. Analytical methods for network elements ranking are an important tool for the interpretation of gene interaction in co-expression networks. Centrality analysis ranks single elements according to their importance within the network structure, and different measures of centrality focus on various aspects of the structure of a network (), e.g. most central elements of protein networks were essential to predict lethal mutations (). Highly connected hub genes, largely responsible for maintaining network connectivity, were likely essential for yeast survival (), although standard centrality measures may fail to reflect the power of each gene to interact with the others. Cooperative game theory may also be used to analyze gene expression data see, (for instance,). In (), the class of microarray games has been introduced to quantitatively evaluate the relevance of each gene in generating or regulating a condition of interest (e.g. a disease), taking into account the observed relationships in all subgroups of genes. In the framework of microarray games, the relevance of genes is expressed in terms of the Shapley value (). The Shapley value attributed to a certain gene in a given microarray game corresponds to the relevance of that gene for the mechanisms governing the genomic effects of the condition under study. This game theoretic approach has been successfully applied to real datasets () and provides a characterization of a relevance index for genes which is mainly based on the role they play inside gene regulatory pathways (). A comparison between the results provided by the analysis of the Shapley value of microarray games and the results provided by classic statistical testing is discussed in connection with the pathogenesis of neuroblast ic tumors in (),

conclusion in this article, a new measure of the importance of genes in biological networks based on coalitional games is introduced. The new measure, calculated from the Shapley value of two coalitional games, has been used to express the centrality of each gene in interaction with the others and keeping into account a priori knowledge about genes playing a key function on a certain biological process. The use of  index as a centrality measure is supported by the basic intuition that it is a difference of power indices between a Page: 2729 27212730. An interaction network network network thick lines) and the interactions of a gkg situation described with only one key gene k (thin lines). Note that the subgraphs individuated by paths (4,2,3,1) and (4,2,6,5,1) satisfy the hypothesis (1), (2) and (3) of the TAM property. So, the TAM property would require that the sum of centrality values of nodes which are in (4,2,3,1) is larger or equal than the sum of nodes in (4,2,6,5,1). It is easy to check that, according to relations (4) and (8),
