Motivation: The past decade has seen the introduction of fast and relatively inexpensive methods to detect genetic variation across the genome and exponential growth in the number of known single nucleotide variants sn vs. There is increasing interest in bioinformatics approaches to identify variants that are functionally important from millions of candidate variants. Here, we describe the essential components of bion for matics tools that predict functional sn vs. Results: Bioinformatics tools have great potential to identify functional sn vs but the black box nature of many tools can be a pitfall for researchers. Understanding the underlying methods, assumptions and biases of these tools is essential to their intelligent application.

introduction the most common form of intra-species variation is the single nucleotide variant (SNV) (). Recent sequencing of whole human genomes has identified the number of sn vs in each individual to be in the range of 35 million (). Common sn vs have recently been a focus of population genetics and medical research. With the advent of high density SNV microarrays, researchers can do fast genome wide genotyping of study populations. This technology has been used to trace the ancestry of modern humans and migration patterns of ancient humans (). sn vs are now the most commonly used markers in case control association studies. genome wide association studies g was have identified over 3300 common sn vs with statistically significant correlations to disease phenotypes (http://www.genome.gov/gwastudies/ October 14, 2010). However, these correlations do not necessarily imply causality, and researchers have found that most significant sn vs identified by g was do not contribute biologically to the disease phenotype of interest (). While most sn vs are likely to be functionally neutral (), some sn vs have a functional impact and thus directly contribute to disease susceptibilities and drug sensitivities. Discovering these * To whom correspondence should be addressed.

conclusion in an age of personal genomics, SNV prioritization has become essential. This task can now be facilitated by SNV meta servers (), which are essentially black boxes to automate execution of multiple assessments, one for each of the many factors that can lead to a functional SNV. However, anyone who uses black box SNV assessment tools should understand how the assessments are made, and what their limitations are. One limitation shared by all of the prediction methods described in this review is that prediction relies on knowledge, and our knowledge is incomplete. For example, current ESS predictors are based on only one family of splicing factors (hnRNP family proteins), but there is no reason to believe that these proteins represent the complete universe of ess s. Happily, our knowledge is likely to expand thanks to new technologies. chips eq technology represents a significant advance in evaluating the impact of sn vs on DNA binding, because there is no requirement of knowing the precise binding sequences in advance. This technology will facilitate research on the impact of sn vs on DNA methylation, chromatin and transcription factor binding, and RNA processing (through clips eq. Additionally, the task of SNV assessment is likely to benefit from research currently underway on assessing the consequence of gains or losses of tfbs s predicting is res and further characterizing microRNA binding. Chromosomal segmentation may soon offer new insights on the medical relevance of intergenic sn vs by distinguishing active intergenic chromatin from large scale repressed chromatin (). A community wide effort cag i (critical assessment of genomic Interpretation) has been created to compare analytical methods to assess genomic variation through blind prediction, modeled after the CASP contests and should provide excellent information on what types of methods are effective in practice (http://genomecommons.org/cagi/).
