Motivation: us tilo x ins A and B are toxic cyclic tetrapeptide s Tyr-Val/Ala-Ile-Gly yv aig that were originally identified from usti lagi no idea virens, a pathogenic fungus affecting rice plants. Contrary to our report that us til ox in B is ribosomal ly synthesized in Aspergillus flavus, a recent report suggested that us tilo x ins are synthesized by a non ribosomal peptide synthetase in u virens. Thus, we analyzed the u virens genome, to identify the responsible gene cluster. Results: The biosynthetic gene cluster was identified from the genome of u virens based on homologies to the ribosomal peptide biosynthetic gene cluster for us til ox in B identified from a flavus. It contains a gene encoding precursor protein having five tyr val ile gly and three tyra la ile gly motifs for us tilo x ins A and B, respectively, strongly indicating that us tilo x ins A and B from u virens are ribosomal ly synthesized. Availability and implementation: Accession codes of the u virens and a flavus gene clusters in NCBI are BR001221 and BR001206, respectively.

introduction us tilo x ins are toxic cyclic peptides that were originally identified from usti lagi no idea virens, a pathogenic fungus affecting rice plant (). The circular moieties of these peptides are composed of Tyr-Val/Ala-Ile-Gly tetrapeptide s that are circular ized at the side chains of Tyr and Ile (). us til ox in A, a derivative of us til ox in peptides, contains a circular ized tetrapeptide with the composition of tyr val ile gly y vig whereas us til ox in B, another derivative of us til ox in peptides, contains the circular ized peptide of tyra la ile gly y aig the aromatic rings of the Tyr residues in both us tilo x ins A and B are modified by nor valine a non protein coding amino acid, through a sulfoxide bond () (). Recently, the us til ox in B biosynthetic gene cluster was experimentally identified from Aspergillus flavus using a novel method to predict gene clusters from transcriptome data, midd asm and the subsequent validation by liquid chromatography mass spectrometry analysis of the gene deletion mutants (). The us til ox in B gene cluster contains 15 genes including those encoding a fungal type C6 transcription factor, a major facilitator superfamily transporter and cytochrome P450. Until recently, this cyclic peptide was believed to be bio synthesized by the so called non ribosomal peptide synthetase (NRPS) because it contains a non protein o genic amino acid, nor valine in its chemical structure. However, bioinformatic analyses of amino acid sequence indicated that no NRPS domains were observed in the gene cluster (). Instead, a function unknown gene, ustA, with a translated product containing 16 repeats of the tetrapeptide y aig which is the exact amino acid sequence of the cyclic moiety of us til ox in B, was identified in the gene cluster () (). Consequently, us til ox in B was shown to be the first case of a ribosomal ly synthesized peptide reported from filamentous fungi (). Very recently reported the whole genome sequence of u virens and proposed that an NRPS gene cluster is responsible for biosynthesis of us tilo x ins in u virens. However, our analysis strongly suggests that an entirely different gene cluster is responsible for the us til ox in biosynthesis as ribosomal peptides in u virens based on homology to the us til ox in B biosynthetic gene cluster from a flavus
