Motivation: meta genomics research has accelerated the studies of microbial organisms, providing insights into the composition and potential functionality of various microbial communities. meta transcript omics (studies of the transcripts from a mixture of microbial species) and other meta omics approaches hold even greater promise for providing additional insights into functional and regulatory characteristics of the microbial communities. Current meta transcript omics projects are often carried out without matched meta genomic datasets (of the same microbial communities). For the projects that produce both meta transcript omic and meta genomic datasets, their analyses are often not integrated. meta genome assemblies are far from perfect, partially explaining why meta genome assemblies are not used for the analysis of meta transcript omic datasets. Results: Here, we report a reads mapping algorithm for mapping of short reads onto a de Bruijn graph of assemblies. A hash table of junction km ers km ers spanning branching structures in the de Bruijn graph) is used to facilitate fast mapping of reads to the graph. We developed an application of this mapping algorithm: a reference based approach to meta transcriptome assembly using graphs of meta genome assembly as the reference. Our results show that this new approach (called TAG) helps to assemble substantially more transcripts that otherwise would have been missed or truncated because of the fragmented nature of the reference meta genome
introduction meta genomes are being generated at an accelerating pace, revealing important properties of micro biomes. Other meta omic (e.g. meta transcript omic and meta proteomic techniques can provide additional insights, in particular into functional characteristics of microbial communities, such as gene activities and their regulatory mechanisms. Bacteria have low inventories of short lived mRNAs; as such, fluctuations in their mRNA pools provide a highly sensitive bioassay for environmental signals [e.g. the concentrations of dissolved organic carbon () and pollutant concentrations () relevant to microbes (. The acquisition of meta omics data on human micro biomes will enable us to refine the annotations of the meta genomes [the ENCODE () and mod encode () projects are great exemplars], and more importantly to study gene activity and its regulation () in complex microbial communities in order to understand how microbial organisms work as a community in response to changes in their environment, e.g. health conditions of their human hosts (). A recent meta transcript omic study of the human oral microbio me using patient matched healthy and diseased (periodontal) samples revealed that health and disease associated communities exhibit defined differences in metabolism that are conserved between patients while the metabolic gene V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.

discussion even though thousands of complete prokaryotic genomes and many more draft genomes are available, meta genomes are constantly found to contain many new species and new genes (). It is therefore important to develop methodologies for meta transcriptome data analysis that are not constrained by the sequenced genomes. With 'matched' meta genomic and meta transcript omic datasets, we believe that proper utilization of the meta genome data will help greatly the analysis of meta transcript omic data (and vice versa). The eventual integration of these datasets (as well as other meta omic datasets) will provide new insights on the composition, function and regulation of micro biomes. well assembled transcripts are important for the function annotation of the meta transcriptome and also for inferring gene regulatory mechanisms such as the operons. We developed a novel reads mapping algorithm read 2 graph that allows fast mapping of short reads from transcriptome sequencing onto the assembly graphs of reference genomes. We applied this mapping algorithm for meta transcriptome assembly, showing the utility of the de Bruijn assembly graph of the meta genome in downstream applications such as the meta transcriptome analysis. Our mapping tool is fast and can be applied to other applications, for example, mapping meta genomic sequencing reads onto the de Bruijn graph of closely related species for estimating the relative abundances of these species (). We have shown in a related research that genes are often broken into fragments in meta genome assembly, and multi edge spanning reads can stitch them together (). The mapping of multi edge spanning reads will also improve quantification of gene expression based on read counts, in particular for genes (from the same or different organisms) sharing highly similar sequences. In reality, however, we may still miss the mapping of a small fraction of multi edge spanning reads: if a read contains a sequencing error in the occurrence of a branching km er we can not find its location in the graph. Because of the low error rate (1%) in Illumina reads, we believe this fraction of reads is indeed negligible in meta transcript omic data analysis we note that de Bruijn graphs will naturally capture the genomic variations of the meta genomes in the graphs [e.g. the single nucleotide variations are represented as bulges (), the variations in tandem repeats are represented as wheels, and structural variations are represented long loops (, which is yet another advantage of using graphs instead of contigs to represent meta genomes. Genomic variations in meta genomes are naturally handled by our graph centric mapping approach. We expect that a combination of different approaches reference based and de novo) need to be applied to accomplish the comprehensive meta transcriptome analysis. As the references for meta transcriptome analysis, the matched meta genome will never be perfect, due to biological (rare species may be poorly sampled), experimental (some genomic regions may not be covered well) and computational (assemblers are not perfect) reasons. Integration of known reference genomes, matched meta genomes and even non matched meta genomes can maximize the coverage of references for reference based approaches. On the other hand, if a microbial community contains new, rare but highly expressed microbial species, their transcripts can only be revealed by de novo meta transcriptome assembly () but not by the reference based approaches such as the one presented in this article.
