There is an immediate need for tools to both analyse and visualize in real time single nucleotide polymorphisms, insertions and deletions, and other structural variants from new sequence file formats. We have developed var b software that can be used to visualize variant call format files in real time, as well as identify regions under balancing selection and informative markers to differentiate user defined groups (e.g. populations). We demonstrate its utility using sequence data from 50 Plasmodium falciparum isolates comprising two different continents and confirm known signals from gen-omic regions that contain important antigenic and anti-malarial drug resistance genes. Availability and implementation: The c based software var b and user manual are available from www pathogens eq org var b
introduction massively parallel sequencing (MPS) technologies are providing whole genome data on organisms that cause or have disease. These data are being used to catalogue genomic diversity, and in the context of research in humans, inform genome wide and fine-scale mapping projects. The technologies are capable of sequencing a small number of human genomes in a single run, making high throughput of human genomes technically possible. Pathogen genomes are much smaller, making them tractable for large genome diversity studies, enabling the tracking of their evolution over time and space. They are also more amenable for whole genome association studies, leading to the identification of variants associated with phenotypes such as drug resistance. To take full advantage of genetic variation exposed by whole genome sequencing across pathogen (and other) organisms, the development of interactive analysis and real time visualization tools is essential. The variant call format (VCF) has become the recognized data type for listing genomic variants, including single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and insertions and deletions (indels), usually derived from processing alignment files. The VCF format was developed by the 1000 Genomes project and has been adopted by large scale genome projects [e.g. UK10K, dbSNP (. It facilitates multi-sample curation and identification of SNPs, short indels and other types of structural variants and sample meta-data. The software suite vcf tools implement utilities for processing files (). Software to visualize VCF files is available (), but they perform limited or no population and statistical genetic analyses in real time directly from multi-sample files. New tools are urgently required because of the increasing use of MPS technologies in genomic epidemiological studies, and the need to rapidly translate the sequence variation into further experiments. This need has motivated the development of an all in one variant browsing and analysis software var b. under a non-random process, including directional selection (low negative values) or balancing selection (high positive values). The population differentiation Fst measure is also implemented () and quantifies allele frequency differences between user specified populations, with values ranging between 0 (no difference) and 1 (complete differentiation). It is possible to export the graphics and analysis outputs. var b was developed using the Qt cross platform and user interface framework qt project org
discussion the translation of sequence variation into further laboratory experiments, treatments and point of care interventions, requires the ability to interrogate genomic data. var b processes files of VCF format, displays the variants by position and quality as well as comparing them between groups to establish informative genetic markers and regions under selection. An advantage of the software is that it performs population and statistical analysis in real time and does not require calculations to be performed elsewhere. We have presented data from 50 Pf isolates to demonstrate the utility of the software and highlighted regions with differing allele frequencies that coincide with known drug resistance loci (e.g. pf crt as well as known vaccine candidates arising from considering regions under balancing selection (e.g. msp3.8). It is possible to process many hundreds of Pf or smaller genomes (e.g. bacterial) simultaneously. However, to aid processing of numerous much larger genomes, such as human, the software is capable of reading in single chromosomes. The modular computing architecture provides the flexibility to incorporate a number of extensions. These include the capacity to process BCF/BCF2 files, reading in informative meta tracks (e.g. genomic uniqueness), calculating other population genetic statistics and performing tests of association with a phenotype. Increased utility will also be possible through updates to the VCF format, to identify and annotate variants of greater size, such as large deletions.
