Identification of genetic alterations of tumor cells has become a common method to detect the genes involved in development and progression of cancer. In order to detect driver genes, several samples need to be simultaneously analyzed. The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) project provides access to a large amount of data for several cancer types. tgc a is an invaluable source of information , but analysis of this huge dataset possess important computational problems in terms of memory and execution times. Here, we present a r package called vega mc (Vega multi-channel), that enables fast and efficient detection of significant recurrent copy number alterations in very large datasets. vega mc is integrated with the output of the common tools that convert allele signal intensities in log R ratio and B allele frequency. It also enables the detection of loss of hetero zi go sity and provides in output two web pages allowing a rapid and easy navigation of the aberrant genes. Synthetic data and real data-sets are used for quantitative and qualitative evaluation purposes. In particular, we demonstrate the ability of vega mc on two large tgc a datasets: colon adenocarcinoma and glioblastoma multiforme. For both the datasets, we provide the list of aberrant genes which contain previously validated genes and can be used as basis for further investigations. Availability: vega mc is a r bioconductor Package, available at

introduction genetic alterations, such as deletions, amplification and loss of hetero zi go sity (LOH), represent an important component of tumor initialization and progression. Technologies based on Array Comparative Genomic Hybridization a cgh enabled the study of copy number alterations (CNAs) in cancer and developmental disorders. Recently, high density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping arrays snp cgh using a combination of two genotyping parameters, a normalized intensity measurement and an allelic ratio, have been used to detect CNAs, including LOH, with a high level of accuracy and resolution. Genotyping data consist of two channel intensity data corresponding to the two alleles used to compute normalized intensity and allele frequency. supplementary shows the typical analysis process that starting from raw data enables the detection of candidate genes. Analysis starts with processing of raw data for extraction of allele signal intensities. These intensity values are successively used to compute the log R ratio (LRR) and B allele frequency (BAF) associated with each probe. LRR and BAF are calculated by comparing the intensities of tumor samples with the intensities of the respective normal samples or alternatively with the intensities of a reference genome (such as, the HapMap reference genome) as also reported in the Supplementary Information. Data are then segmented or smoothed both to decrease the noise level and to aggregate adjacent probes into a single region. Generally, segmentation and data smoothing are performed on one sample at time and results are independent across the samples. The 'adjusted' dataset is the input for the next analysis tool that looks for recurrent CNAs. The distinction between regions functionally related with the tumor (driver CNA) and regions that are detected as altered by biological and experimental noise is a critical step for these tools. In order to deal with this problem, statistical frameworks have been widely used to compute the probability associated with driver mutations. Of course, these frameworks can gain statistical strength by the analysis of a large amount of samples. In this scenario, the TCGA project () represents an invaluable source of information, indeed, the TCGA database provides thousands of copy number samples for common cancer types. Given the resolution of snp cgh (with Affymetrix SNP6.0 2 millions of probes are observed for each sample), analysis of these large datasets is not a trivial task. In particular, for large datasets, memory and time requirements often represent enormous obstacles for most analysis tools. In the last step of the analysis, available online databases are used to get information on the genes overlapping the identified driver CNA. Here, we present a r bioconductor package that, exploiting a novel multichannel segmentation algorithm, identifies the driver genes from LRR and BAF observations (Supplementary). We test vega mc both on synthetic data which have been previously used to compare performance of other algorithms and on two TCGA datasets: colon adenocarcinoma (COAD) and glioblastoma multiforme (GBM). The analyzed TCGA datasets are composed of 424 samples of COAD and 571 samples of GBM, most of the tumor samples are also matched with normal tissues for a total of 870 samples in the COAD dataset and 992 samples in the GBM dataset, the processing of these *To whom correspondence should be addressed. data represents a challenging task. Results are publicly available and they can be used for further investigations.
