Insertional mutagenesis from virus infection is an important pathogenic risk for the development of cancer. Despite the advent of high throughput sequencing, discovery of viral integration sites and expressed viral fusion events are still limited. Here, we present viral fusion seq (VFS), which combines soft clipping information, read pair analysis and targeted de novo assembly to discover and annotate viral human fusions. VFS was used in an rnase q experiment , simulated dna seq experiment and re-analysis of published dna seq datasets. Our experiments demonstrated that VFS is both sensitive and highly accurate. Availability: VFS is distributed under GPL version 3 at http://hkbic.

introduction viral infection accounts for 1520% of human cancers (). well known cancer associated viruses include the Human papillomavirus (HPV) and the epstein barr virus (EBV), which are present in nearly all cervical cancers () and nasopharyngeal carcinoma (NPC) (), respectively. Hepatitis B virus (HBV) infection is a strong etiologic factor for hepatocellular carcinoma worldwide (). Some viruses like HPV and HBV commonly integrate into the host genome, where they predispose to genome instability and cancer risks (). Nevertheless, the ability to precisely locate the viral insertional sites has long been hindered by previous low resolution techniques and thus limiting research into the mutagenic effects of such integrations. Viral integration in the host can either be episomal or induce viral human fusion transcript (). Integration of HBV can be detected in as much as 90% of hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), where clonal expansion of the same integration site has been reported (). It is hence not only important to identify the sites of genome integrations, but also to discover transcribed viral human sequences, which both may possess a functional role in tumorigenesis. seq map 2.0, an earlier web based system, uses pre-defined viral features to locate viral integration sites (). Unfortunately, their framework is specific to the 454 sequencing platform and does not address the concerns many have of data privacy. Besides, reliability of the putative fusion breakpoints was not evaluated. More importantly, as HBV has no preferential sites in the human genome to be integrated into (), the framework could not discover novel viral human integrations. More recently, virus seq was proposed for detecting the presence of viral species in sequence data, and finding viral integration events using discordant Read Pair (RP) information. Through alignments, virus seq was able to identify regions of a chromosome that fused with a virus (). Here, we propose a genome wide viral fusion discovery and annotation pipeline. Our method resembles CREST () and clip crop (), both of which use soft clipping to identify genomic structural variations. What sets our method apart from theirs is our focus on viral integration and the use of viral genome(s) as the primary input to our pipeline. Our unified pipeline viral fusion seq (VFS) is used for discovering viral integration events and expressed fusion transcripts using high throughput sequencing (HTS). The most notable difference between VFS and other tools is that VFS uses both RP and Clipped Sequence (CS) information to find viral fusion events and breakpoints (Supplementary Section S1). Using the latter, VFS is able to discern fusion breakpoints accurately to single base resolution. Moreover, VFS is generalized to major sequencing platforms, and is applicable to both dna and rnase q data.
