Daily, mutability and recombination of RNA viruses result in the production of million variants. All these rapid genomic changes directly influence the functional sites of the protein, its 3D structure or its drug resistances. Therefore, it is important to simulate these drastic switches to determine their effects on virus populations. Many computer programs are able to simulate specific variations in DNA genomes, but are generally non adapted to RNA viruses. They simulate site specific selection pressures, but rarely pressures on covariant or on higher order correlated sites and no at all on synthetic lethal groups. That is why we felt it important to create vira pops a forward simulator that models specific RNA virus functions. It was designed for computational biologists, biologists and virologists. Availability and implementation: Free binaries are available through a software repository at http://petitjeanmichel.free.fr/itoweb.petitjean.

introduction rna viruses have different characteristics from other populations. Their high mutability rate, 100 times higher than those of bacteria or eukaryotes, allows the production of daily million mutations. These multiple mutants, under selective pressure, permit the emergence of new viral variants. Several population simulators called 'forward' are able to impose a selective pressure on mutations: cd pop (), Nemo2.2 (), simu pop (), sfs code () and Vortex (). These software solutions associate fitness to an allele and can combine several allele fitnesses. Unfortunately, this is done by adding or multiplying individual fitness that does not fit all situations. The covariation of two sites can define compensatory mutations (CM: the first mutation decreases the fitness of the organism and the second compensates the fitness lack of the first) or synthetic lethal (SL: mutations that are nonlethal when they are alone but become lethal when they are combined into a single genome). If pair of CMs are treated by existing simulator (), SLs are not. In the SL case, both mutations taken separately does not change the fitness of the virus, it is only when they appear together that the fitness is changed. Then we can not add or multiply fitness associated with each mutation or used the calculation done for CM. However, the synthetic lethal s are used for therapy developments () and viral vaccines. Therefore, it becomes crucial to be able to simulate them. In addition, the higher order correlated mutations (involving covariation of CM or SL type, but with a number 42 sites) are not covered by conventional simulators. Software programs dedicated to viral studies are able to predict drug resistances as hiv db (human immunodeficiency virus database) program from Stanford university (), to store clinical data related to human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) and hepatitis C virus treatment and subtyping tools as reg a () to calculate their pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics as sim cyp (), or to make epidemic model as FluTE (), but do not allow large group of mutations simulation as described earlier in the text. On one hand, Vortex, simu pop sfs code and cd pop softwares dedicated to population genetics do not take into account the essential tools to treat high mutability of RNA viruses. On the other hand, software more directly dedicated to virus handle databases related to drugs, geographic spread or drug resistances sim cyp reg a hiv db. But none of these two types of family simulator is able to handle viral populations at high rates mutability. Yet it is now essential to use such tools to meet the ever greater emergence of new mutations including those related to drug resistances. However, under selection pressure, new genomes appear quickly and increase the difficulty of treatment developments and stable vaccine design. In addition, due to high genome plasticity, the protein 3D structure becomes plural, making difficult docking work, and study of the active sites. Thus, it is necessary to simulate an RNA virus sequence population. We present in this manuscript an understandable, useful and easy to use RNA virus population simulator, designed to model a real situation such as virus population in a nave nave or infected patient ().
