Motivation: Given the abundance of genome sequencing and omics data, an opp rt unity and challenge in bioinformatics relates to data mining and visualization. The majority of current bio-informatics visualizations are implemented either as multi tier web server applications that require significant maintenance effort, or as client software that presumes technical expertise for installation. Here we present the Visual Omics Explorer (VOE), a cross platform data visualization portal that is implemented using only HTML and Javascript code. VOE is a standalone software that can be loaded offline on the web browser from a local copy of the code, or over the internet without any dependency other than distributing the code through a file sharing service. VOE can interactively display genomics, transcript omics epi genomics and meta genomics data stored either locally or retrieved from cloud storage services, and runs on both desktop computers and mobile devices. Availability and implementation: VOE is accessible at

introduction data visualization applications are key for representing, integrating and mining next generation sequencing and other types of omics data. A common paradigm involves omics data visualizations that are computed on a remote server and displayed through Common Gateway Interface web pages (UCSC, https://genome.ucsc.edu/), or using a Java client server architecture that provides interactive, local data visualizations (IGV,). Recently, a number of omics databases came online that provide rich Application Programming Interfaces (API,), or which combine the API with data storage and computational capacity for rent such as Google Genomics (https://cloud.google.com/genomics/). Furthermore, a new generation of omics data visualizations (), provide interactive interfaces that leverage computing within the web browser, and are completely decoupled from remote web servers. Here we present the Visual Omics Explorer (VOE), a data visualization portal that offers dynamic, mobile friendly omics data displays, combining the power of APIs with that of local compute within the browser using Javascript. VOE provides a diverse set of visualizations (, Supplementary) for data on the Google Genomics Cloud, genetic variants, chips eq rnase q and phylogenetic data, using HTML5 and, Javascript  D3 web technologies (https://github.com/mbostock/d3). VOE is standalone software that can be loaded offline on the web browser from a local copy of the code (https://github.com/BCIL/ voe archive master zip index html file), over the internet from git hub (http://bcil.github.io/VOE/) or online storage such as Amazon S3 (http://tinyurl.com/BioITCore), and similarly from Google Drive or Dropbox. VOE has been tested to work on all V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com current versions of desktop or mobile web browsers, and by using the phone gap framework (http://phonegap.com) we packaged VOE as a touch enabled mobile app for the Android system (http:// tinyurl com voe a pk
discussion we evaluated VOE with data processed using bioinformatics pipelines (http://galaxy.hunter.cuny.edu:8080/workflow/list_published), running on our local instance of the Galaxy server. For the chips eq pipeline (based on) data are for the H3K4 histone interactions on the MCF breast cancer line (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/ ena/data/view/SRP007976). We visualized the BED output of the pipeline and identified a large number of interactions on chromosome 17 (Supplementary), where histone modifications have been associated with breast cancer (). We also visualized an rnase q pipeline () output using prostate cancer data (http://www.ebi.ac.uk/arrayexpress/ex periments emtab567 and found overexpression of the MYC and TSPAN13 genes (Supplementary), known to be involved in this type of cancer (). VOE provides an interactive, mobile friendly omics visualization platform in the form of self contained code, running within the web browser. With release of this software, we aim to present a new paradigm for bioinformatics visualizations, in contrast to the complex software stacks and monolithic web server setups. Our implementation uses purely Javascript, and enabled us to easily bundle VOE as a mobile application. As sequencing is becoming a commodity and with widespread use of powerful, yet portable computational platforms such as tablets as smartphones, software following a similar paradigm with VOE running on mobile platforms can find applications in the clinic and doctor's offices. Furthermore, new HTML5 standards (http://www.w3.org/TR/2015/WD-work ers-20150924/) including web workers, allow development of multithreaded web browser applications that utilize multiple CPU cores for scalability. We plan to further develop VOE using these standards, and also support other developers utilizing our open source code in this respect.
