Recent technological progress has greatly facilitated de novo genome sequencing. However, de novo assemblies consist in many pieces of contiguous sequence (contigs) arranged in thousands of scaffolds instead of small numbers of chromosomes. Confirming and improving the quality of such assemblies is critical for subsequent analysis. We present a method to evaluate genome scaffolding by aligning independently obtained transcriptome sequences to the genome and visually summarizing the alignments using the Cytoscape software. Applying this method to the genome of the red fire ant Solenopsis invicta allowed us to identify inconsistencies in 7%, confirm contig order in 20% and extend 16% of scaffolds. Contact: oksana.ribagrognuz@unil.ch; yannick wurm uni lch Availability: Scripts that generate tables for visualization in Cytoscape from fast a sequence and scaffolding information files are publicly available at https://github.com/ksanao/TGNet.

introduction de novo assemblies of eukaryotic genomes consist in many pieces of contiguous sequence (contigs) arranged in thousands of scaffolds instead of a few scaffolds corresponding to the chromosomes (). Evaluating the qualities of such assemblies is a major challenge, especially in emerging model organisms that lack reference genomes. Independently obtained mRNA or protein sequences, or pairs of sequences separated by known genomic distances can be aligned to a genome assembly to help assess its quality (). However, it is difficult to systematically evaluate the thousands or millions of resulting alignments. abyss explorer () provides a global view of a genome assembly, but it displays only the information used to create that assembly. Other visualization tools often display alignments of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: School of Biological and Chemical Sciences, Queen Mary, University of London, London E1 4NS, UK. individual sequences, but fail to provide genome level overviews (; Supplementary). We present an approach for genome quality assessment based on a general visualization tool, Cytoscape (), which is a popular platform to visualize and analyze molecular interaction networks ().examined synteny between meta genomic scaffolds using Cytoscape, thus demonstrating its potential for visualizing genomic alignments. Here, we show that Cytoscape can be used for visually representing alignments between independently obtained mRNA sequences, genome contigs and scaffolds. It allows rapid confirmation of intra scaffold connections between contigs and detection of possible scaffold extensions and inconsistencies.
