Motivation: Single cell time-lapse microscopy is a powerful method for investigating heterogeneous cell behavior. Advances in microfluidic lab on a chip technologies and live cell imaging render the parallel observation of the development of individual cells in hundreds of populations possible. While image analysis tools are available for cell detection and tracking, biologists are still confronted with the challenge of exploring and evaluating this data. Results: We present the software tool viz ardous that assists scientists with explorative analysis and interpretation tasks of single cell data in an interactive, configurable and visual way. With viz ardous lineage tree drawings can be augmented with various, time resolved cellular characteristics. Associated statistical moments bridge the gap between single cell and the population average level. Availability and implementation: The software, including documentation and examples, is available as executable Java archive as well as in source form at https://github.com/modsim/vizardous.

introduction single cell analysis with time-lapse (fluorescence) microscopy has been widely established in the life sciences in recent years. Whereas microarray analysis and flow cytometry yield population level data at a particular point in time, time-lapse live cell imaging targets the assessment of individual cell parameters with their spatial and temporal (lineage) context. Microfluidic lab on chip technologies have enabled the parallel cultivation of hundreds of cells over several generations (). Combined with time-lapse imaging, it has been used, e.g. to study the dynamics of cellular regulation mechanisms and stochasticity of metabolism (), to investigate cellular size homeostasis () and phenotypic heterogeneity in dependence of stressors as well as the detection of rare events (). The easy availability of time resolved data poses new challenges on data analysis by the mere amounts and complexity of acquired information. While several, typically organism specific image analysis tools are available for cell detection, feature extraction and tracking tools for the generic task of analyzing and understanding this information are lacking. We developed the software tool viz ardous to assist researchers with the following single cell data related tasks: (i) visualize data with single cell resolution in the lineage context, (ii) visually detect emerging structural patterns such as (a)symmetries in subtrees and (iii) assessing joint cellular properties and structural motifs.

description the single cell community has adopted phylogenies (lineage trees,
