Motivation: As disease loci are rapidly discovered, an emerging challenge is to identify common pathways and biological functionality across loci. Such pathways might point to potential disease mechanisms. One strategy is to look for functionally related or interacting genes across genetic loci. Previously, we defined a statistical strategy, Gene Relationships Across Implicated Loci (GRAIL), to identify whether pair-wise gene relationships defined using PubMed text similarity are enriched across loci. Here, we have implemented viz grail a software tool to display those relationships and to depict the underlying biological patterns. Results: Our tool can seamlessly interact with the GRAIL web site to obtain the results of analyses and create easy to read visual displays. To most clearly display results, viz grail arranges genes and genetic loci to minimize intersecting pair-wise gene connections. viz grail can be easily applied to other types of functional connections, beyond those from GRAIL. This method should help investigators appreciate the presence of potentially important common functions across loci. Availability: The GRAIL algorithm is implemented online at

introduction as genome wide association studies rapidly identify genetic loci for a broad range of phenotypes, investigators are critically focused on identifying key pathways and biological processes suggested by genetic findings (). We have separately described a computational strategy, Gene Relationships Across Implicated Loci (or GRAIL), that uses statistical text mining strategy to rapidly identify genes across multiple loci that are similar to each other, and to then assess if that degree of similarity is more than might be expected by chance (). The approach depends on pairs of related genes using 525 000 PubMed article abstracts identified using word similarity metrics. GRAIL has now been applied to prioritize SNPs for replication or to demonstrate common function among genes near associated SNPs across a wide range of phenotypes including height (), rheumatoid arthritis (), Crohn's disease). the figure (see Supplementary Material). Briefly, we define an objective function that calculates the total burden of intersections, weighing intersections between thicker connections more heavily. Then we iteratively chose random loci with at least one gene with an intersecting connection, and then we try manipulating the arrangement by either (i) moving the locus to each of the different positions in the circle, (ii) swapping the locus with every other locus in the circle or (iii) inverting different segments of the circle starting from that locus and ending at other positions. At each iteration, we chose the manipulation that most reduces the total number of intersecting connections and update the arrangement iteratively. Once the loci have been arranged, then genes within each of the loci are permuted to reduce the number of total intersections.
