We present vor o prot an interactive cross platform software tool that provides a unique set of capabilities for exploring geometric features of protein structure. vor o prot allows the construction and visualization of the Apollonius diagram (also known as the additively weighted Voronoi diagram), the Apollonius graph, protein alpha shapes, interatomic contact surfaces, solvent accessible surfaces, pockets and cavities inside protein structure. Availability: vor o prot is available for Windows, Linux and Mac OS X operating systems and can be downloaded from

introduction the ability to analyze and visualize geometric features of 3D protein structure is fundamental for studies of protein folding, residue packing, docking, protein protein interactions, etc. Considering protein structure to be a set of points, each point corresponding to an atom, the use of the Voronoi diagram () and its dual, the Delaunay triangulation (), offers a powerful approach in such analysis (). However, a more realistic representation of an atom is not a point, but the sphere of a Van der Waals radius. Considering protein structure to be a set of spheres, the more appropriate geometric data structures are the Apollonius diagram (also known as additively weighted Voronoi diagram) () and its dual, Apollonius graph. Yet, so far both have been exploited for protein structure analysis only to a limited extent. One of the few available tools, voronoi a (), uses the additively weighted Voronoi diagram to investigate protein structure packing. It is mainly a console tool, which provides a simplified drawing of inner cavities through a PyMOL plug-in, but does not allow a more advanced visualization. We are aware of two other reports describing the use of the Apollonius diagram for the visualization and analysis of protein structure (), but the corresponding software is not publicly available. Other reported tools do not exploit the Apollonius diagram. For example, Voro3D () uses an extension of the Voronoi tessellation of points. Its main drawback is that it represents each residue by a single point. Another program, prov at (), integrates Qhull (a tool used to compute Voronoi diagram of points) and PyMOL into a pipeline. Unfortunately, it * To whom correspondence should be addressed. seems to be no longer publicly available. py det () also uses Qhull and PyMOL, but it only provides visualization of the Delaunay triangulation of protein structure. Thus, although the Apollonius diagram and the Apollonius graph are powerful geometric constructs, their potential in studies of protein structure is far from being fully utilized. To remedy this situation, we developed vor o prot a versatile protein structure analysis and visualization tool.

conclusion the Apollonius graph and the Apollonius diagram extensively exploited by vor o prot not only enable various representations of protein structure but also provide powerful analytical methods of solving complex computational geometry problems such as the detection of inner cavities, the delineation of interatomic contact areas and the surface curvature analysis.
