vs docker is an original program that allows using AutoDock4 for optimized virtual ligand screening on computer clusters or multiprocessor workstations. This tool is the first implementation of parallel high performance virtual screening of ligands for MS windows based computer systems. Availability: vs docker 2.0 is freely available for non-commercial use at http://www.bio.nnov.ru/projects/vsdocker2/

introduction virtual screening is a process of searching for small biologically active molecules (ligands) from large compound databases by means of computer assisted techniques (). Virtual screening is based on molecular docking which currently plays an essential role both in the study of macromolecular structure and interaction and in drug design (). However, molecular docking is extremely demanding for computing resources; on the other hand, modern research often requires analysis of a large set of small ligands at acceptable time. This reason determines a wide use of high throughput computing clusters and algorithms. AutoDock4 is one of the most widely used instruments for molecular docking (), but it is not adapted for parallel working on a multiprocessor cluster. An example of auto dock adaptation for Linux cluster system is do vis (). However, there was no similar utility for MS Windows systems to date. To address this problem, we have developed a new software tool termed vs docker. This software possesses several features ensuring the increased performance of a screening process. vs docker provides automation of all virtual screening steps, including ligand and receptor preparation, docking itself and analysis of results. Balanced distribution of cluster resources allows parallel screening of a large number of ligands. vs docker works both on multiprocessor computing clusters and * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: if om the f irc Institute for Molecular Oncology Foundation, Via adam ello 16, 20139 Milan, italy multiprocessor workstations operated by Windows. This makes possible an execution of virtual screening tasks even on a single high performance multicore desktop that can be found virtually in every laboratory.

DESCRIPTION
