Accurate prediction of amyloid forming amino acid sequences remains an important challenge. We here present an online database that provides open access to the largest set of experimentally characterized amyloid forming hexapeptide s. To this end, we expanded our previous set of 280 hexapeptide s used to develop the Waltz algorithm with 89 peptides from literature review and by systematic experimental characterisation of the aggregation of 720 hexapeptide s by transmission electron microscopy, dye binding and Fourier transform infrared spectroscopy. This brings the total number of experimentally characterized hexapeptide s in the waltz db database to 1089, of which 244 are annotated as positive for amyloid formation. Availability and implementation: The waltz db database is freely available without any registration requirement at http://waltzdb.

introduction amyloid formation by proteins is widely recognized as a pathogenic mechanism in diverse diseases such as Alzheimer Disease and type II diabetes, but also as a functional mechanism of biological nanostructure formation, such as the chorion protein that stabilizes insect eggshell (). It has been generally established that the formation of amyloid fibrils by proteins is nucleated by short aggregation prone segments (APR) of the polypeptide chain, which are a necessary and sufficient requirement to allow amyloid conversion of a folded protein (). In amyloid, these short stretches form an intermolecular beta sheet that runs parallel to the fiber axis, indicated as the cross beta structure (). The sequence that constitute APRs are usually characterized by a high beta sheet propensity and hydrophobicity and a low net charge (). Computational tools have been developed to predict a mylo genic or aggregation propensities of proteins by detecting APRs in polypeptide sequences, reviewed elsewhere (). We earlier developed the Waltz amyloid prediction algorithm (Maurer), which is a data based statistical method that uses a position specific scoring matrix for its data representation. As the quality of statistical methods depends critically on the quantity (number and sequence diversity of known positive and negative examples) and quality (confidence of the amyloid status) of the available data, we decided to increase the available high confidence learning data by an order of magnitude. This was achieved by expanding the set of 280 hexapeptide s of known amyloid forming proteins with an additional experimentally verified 720 hexapeptide s derived from 63 different proteins, combined with an additional 89 peptides derived from literature review, bringing the total number of hexapeptide s to 1089. V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals permission soup com
