whole genome bisulfite sequencing w gbs has emerged as the gold standard technique in genome scale studies of DNA methylation. Mapping reads from w gbs requires unique considerations that make the process more time consuming than in other sequencing applications. Typical w gbs data sets contain several hundred million reads, adding to this analysis challenge. We present the WALT tool for mapping w gbs reads. WALT uses a strategy of hashing periodic spaced seeds, which leads to significant speed up compared with the most efficient methods currently available. Although many existing w gbs mappers slow down with read length, WALT improves in speed. Importantly, these speed gains do not sacrifice accuracy.

introduction dna methylation is essential for many biological processes and is found altered in a variety of human diseases (). Technological advances over the past decade have enabled whole genome bisulfite sequencing w gbs which has become the gold standard approach for studying cytosine (C) methylation due to its ability to quantify methylation levels unambiguously for nearly all Cs in mammalian genomes. Treatment with sodium bisulfite converts each unmethylated C into uracil, which is reported as thymine (T) in sequenced reads. The most computationally intensive step analysis of w gbs data is to map reads to the reference genome. The bisulfite conversion makes mapping more complicated, and each data set typically includes hundreds of millions of reads. In recent years, several mappers have been developed specifically for reads from bisulfite sequencing, which we refer to here as 'bisulfite reads'. These mappers use a variety of strategies. For example, Bismark () converts every C in the reads and the reference genome to T, then applies Bowtie () to map the converted reads to the converted reference genome. bs map () builds a pre-compiled hash table to minimize the cache miss latency when searching possible genome positions for km ers. bs map also applies a bitwise masking method to efficiently count the number of mismatches for asymmetric conversion of C!T. Existing tools are not fast enough to map a large w gbs data set in a day using a single processing core. The challenge in mapping bisulfite reads is derived from two related sources: accommodating the asymmetric conversion of C!T, and the reduced entropy of the alphabet (i.e. nearly 50% T). Here we present WALT, a new mapper for bisulfite reads. WALT is faster than existing methods, and has advantages in accuracy.
