chip based technology is becoming the leading technology to globally profile thousands of transcription factors and elucidate the transcriptional regulation mechanisms in living cells. It has evolved rapidly in recent years, from hybridization with spotted or tiling microarray chip chip to pair end tag sequencing chip pet to current massively parallel sequencing chips eq. Although there are many tools available for identifying binding sites (peaks) for chip chip and chips eq few of them are available as easy accessible online web tools for processing both chip chip and chips eq data for the chip based user community. As such, we have developed a comprehensive web application tool for processing chip chip and chips eq data. Our web tool w chi peaks employed a probe based (or bin based enrichment threshold to define peaks and applied statistical methods to control false discovery rate for identified peaks. The web tool includes two different web interfaces: PELT for chip chip BELT for chips eq where both were tested on previously published experimental data. The novel features of our tool include a comprehensive output for identified peaks with GFF, BED, bed graph and .wig formats, annotated genes to which these peaks are related, a graphical interpretation and visualization of the results via a user friendly web interface.

introduction chip based technology is becoming the leading technology to globally profile thousands of transcription factors and elucidate the transcriptional regulation mechanisms in living cells (). It has evolved rapidly in recent years, from hybridization with spotted or tiling microarray chip chip (), to pair end tag sequencing chip pet (), to current massively parallel sequencing chips eq (). Despite the fact that microarray based chromatin immune precipitation (ChIP) method, chip chip is gradually being replaced by the emerging sequencing based method such as ChIP seq, both methods are currently being used in many laboratories as * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a major tool to survey transcription factor binding patterns, study various histone modifications in an unbiased manner. Currently available tools for the chip chip data are exemplified and comprehensively compared in the spike in data (). chips eq technology and related computational tools are also reviewed in Park (2009). cis genome provided an integrated analyzing software system for both technologies (). While we appreciate the accuracy and efficiency of these tools, few of them are available as easy accessible online web tools for processing both chip chip and chips eq data for the chip based user community. As such, we have developed a comprehensive web application tool for processing chip chip and chips eq data. Our web tool w chi peaks employed a probe based (or bin based enrichment threshold to define peaks and applied statistical methods to control false discovery rate for identified peaks. The web tool includes two different web interfaces: probe based enrichment threshold level (PELT) for chip chip and BELT bin based enrichment threshold level) for chips eq where both were tested on previously published experimental data.
