cell maps is an HTML5 open source web tool that allows displaying, editing, exploring and analyzing biological networks as well as integrating metadata into them. Computations and analyses are remotely executed in high end servers, and all the functionalities are available through RESTful web services. cell maps can easily be integrated in any web page by using an available JavaScript API. Availability and Implementation: The application is available at: http://cellmaps.babelomics.org/ and the code can be found in: https://github.com/opencb/cell-maps. The client is implemented in JavaScript and the server in C and Java.

introduction networks are becoming increasingly important to understand the relationships between genotype and phenotype, specifically in the context of disease. Consequently, the demand for efficient network visualization and analysis tools, which can interoperate with modern data analysis environments, such as the web, is increasing in parallel. Most of the available web based network analysis portals often offer limited functionality, typically restricted to network visualization and, in some cases, simple analysis options, such as gene mania () or STRING (). Other web tools are available, but based on Java, such as on dex Web () or Visant (). Very recently, a JavaScript library with Cytoscape functionalities has been made available (). Here, we present cell maps an open source HTML5 web based application that brings advanced visualization and network analysis to end users. Additionally, a JavaScript API was developed to facilitate the integration of cell maps in any web page. cell maps offers the interactivity and the graphical advanced features typical for desktop applications and the performance of client server applications a JavaScript API facilitates an easy integration of the cell maps client by using plain HTML tags. Computations and analyses are executed in remote high end servers and all the functionalities are available through RESTful web services. Data and session results can be stored and recovered locally or in remote servers (for registered users), where computation is performed. Relevant biological network information, including IntAct interactions, is available through cell base () web services (http://bioinfo. hpc camac uk cell baseweb services rest. KEGG and Reactome pathways are directly taken from their respective web services. cell maps runs in the latest versions of 'evergreen' web browsers (Chrome, Firefox, Safari and Edge) and has no browser plugins or other libraries requirement.
