We developed a mixed Protein Structure Network (PSN) and Elastic Network model normal Mode Analysis en mn ma based strategy (i.e. psn enm to investigate structural communication in bio macromolecules. The approach starts from a Protein Structure Graph and searches for all shortest communication pathways between user specified residues. The graph is computed on a single preferably high resolution structure. Information on systems dynamics is supplied by en mn ma. The psn enm methodology is made of multiple steps both in the setup and analysis stages, which may discourage inexperienced users. To facilitate its usage, we implemented web psn a freely available web server that allows the user to easily setup the calculation, perform post-processing analyses and both visualize and download numerical and 3D representations of the output. Speed and accuracy make this server suitable to investigate structural communication, including all oster is m in large sets of bio macromolecular systems. Availability and implementation: The web psn server is freely available at http://webpsn.hpc. uni more it
introduction concepts and methods borrowed from graph theory are being increasingly used to study several aspects of structural biology, including structural communication that comprises all oster is m. The graph based approach defined as Protein Structure Network (PSN) has been implemented in the freely available word om software (). It computes network features (e.g. nodes, hubs, links, etc.) and shortest communication pathways on ensembles of structures generally derived from Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations. With this approach, information on system's dynamics participates both in building the Protein Structure Graph (PSG) and in searching for the shortest communication pathways. In a recent development of the method intended for high throughput investigations, the PSG is computed on a single high resolution structure rather than an MD trajectory and information on system's dynamics (i.e. cross correlation of atomic motions) is supplied by Elastic Network model normal Mode Analysis en mn ma () (see Supplementary Methods for detailed information). The approach, hereafter indicated as psn enm is powerful and fast but complex in the setup and analysis steps. To foster wide usage, the method was therefore implemented in a web server web psn that provides the user with a friendly graphical interface for setting the input and visualizing the output, while hiding all computation and data management steps.
