The webstar 3d web server is a user friendly online interface for the alignment of RNA 3D structures. The website takes as input two files, each of which can be in either PDB or mmCIF format, containing the desired structures to align, via a PDB code or user upload. In return, the user is presented with a visualization of the aligned structures in Jmol or js mol along with the corresponding sequence alignment, and the option to download the nucleotide mapping of the structures and a PDB file containing the aligned, superimposed structures. Availability and Implementation: The webstar 3d is available at

introduction it is recently discovered that noncoding RNAs nc rnas are involved in nearly every cellular process, including gene expression and other aspects of cellular metabolism (). As nc rnas are genetic end products, their functions are implicated primarily by their secondary and tertiary structures. This has motivated an increasing research interest in methods for the comparative analysis of RNA structures, as key evolutionary and functional relationships between RNA molecules can be inferred from their structural alignments. With the rapidly growing archive of RNA 3D structures in the Protein Data Bank (PDB), numerous tools have been developed for the alignment of their tertiary structures, such as SARA (), R3DAlign () and LaJolla (). Typically, these tools utilize the comparison of base pairing interactions between molecules (e.g. SARA, R3DAlign), or they encode key structural features of these molecules, such as RNA backbones and nucleotide torsion angles, as sequential information that can be further processed (e.g. LaJolla). star 3d implements an alternative approach that identifies the consensus of stacks between two RNA molecules, and uses this information to constrain the alignment of loop regions (). First, sub stacks with similar 3D structures are identified and assembled into conserved stack pairs, from which a sparse compatible graph is generated based on the secondary structure relations and spatial distances. Then, a tree like consensus structure of the two molecules is generated by efficiently finding the maximal clique in the compatible graph. Finally, loop regions between the two molecules are ordered based on the consensus structure such that a loop region from one RNA structure only needs to be compared to its matching partner from the other structure. The stack and loop alignments are then combined into the final result. This approach results in efficient RNA 3D structural alignment that matches the precision of other state of the art tools. Here, we present the webstar 3d web server: a web interface for the alignment of RNA 3D structures that provides the core functionality of star 3d along with some additional features.

conclusion as nc rnas are involved in numerous cellular processes, and their functions are implicated by their structures, there is a growing interest in tools for the comparative analysis of RNA structures. For this reason, we have presented a user friendly web server tool for the tertiary structure alignment of RNA molecules. Because the underlying star 3d algorithm takes a fundamentally different approach to, chain A) and mouse tRNA (PDB: 3rg5, chain A). The topmost container shows the Jmol docking of the aligned structures; the first and second structures are colored red and blue, respectively, with aligned regions colored in a darker hue. Directly below are the options to download the nucleotide mapping, the PDB of the docked structures and the sequence alignment. Then follows the secondary structure alignment corresponding to the 3D structural alignment RNA 3D structural alignment than existing tools, webstar 3d performs faster on alignments of comparable, or better, quality compared to state of the art tools.
