Motivation: Despite the rapid decline in sequencing costs, sequencing large cohorts of individuals is still prohibitively expensive. Recently, several sophisticated pooling designs were suggested that can identify carriers of rare alleles in large cohorts with a significantly smaller number of pools, thus dramatically reducing the cost of such large scale sequencing projects. These approaches use combinatorial pooling designs where each individual is either present or absent from a pool. One can then infer the number of carriers in a pool, and by combining information across pools, reconstruct the identity of the carriers. Results: We show that one can gain further efficiency and cost reduction by using weighted designs, in which different individuals donate different amounts of DNA to the pools. Intuitively, in this situation, the number of mutant reads in a pool does not only indicate the number of carriers, but also their identity. We describe and study a powerful example of such weighted designs, using non-overlapping pools. We demonstrate that this approach is not only easier to implement and analyze but is also competitive in terms of accuracy with combinatorial designs when identifying rare variants, and is superior when sequencing common variants. We then discuss how weighting can be incorporated into existing combinatorial designs to increase their accuracy and demonstrate the resulting improvement using simulations. Finally, we argue that weighted designs have enough power to facilitate detection of common alleles, so they can be used as a cornerstone of whole exo me sequencing projects.

introduction the need for low cost large scale rare mutation screens is on the rise, with the current shift of genome wide association studies towards rare variants (). Another major application of rare variants genotyping is in prenatal screens for rare genetic disorders; for example, the Israeli ministry of health sponsors carrier screening tests for a list of 36 severe and frequent genetic diseases (with prevalence higher than 1 in 1000 live births) in 35 different localities communities (). The Israeli ministry of health also provides free of charge screening for tay sachs a recessive neurodegenerative disorder which is fatal by the age of 23, to couples of Jewish descent (), as well as screens for Thalassemia (an inherited autosomal recessive blood disease) to all the Arab and Druze populations * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and Jews of Mediterranean or Asiatic descent (). Recent studies have described how sophisticated pooling designs for high throughput sequencing (HTS) technologies can be used to dramatically reduce the number of pools required for carrier identification, and, therefore, can reduce the costs of such large scale carrier screens drastically (). The cost reduction is accomplished because most of the cost of such projects is typically in the capture stage, which has to be performed only once per pool. Reducing the capture cost, even at the price of increasing the amount of sequencing, can lead to very significant decrease in overall cost (see typical calculations in Section 6.2 below). Using a smaller number of pools reduces the overall ability to reconstruct the genomes, but the theory of sparse signal recovery, also known as compressed sensing (), guarantees that with high probability the carriers of rare mutations can be identified. In the traditional pooled testing setup, the result of testing each pool is a true false value (). This is the framework adopted by who use the number of wild type and mutant allele reads in each pool to infer whether a pool contains carriers or not. However, the information obtained by sequencing a pool of mixed DNA is not limited to a true false indication as to the presence of a carrier in the pool. The number of mutant and wild type allele reads can be used to infer the number of carriers within each pool, where a high number of mutant reads is an indication of a high proportion of mutant allele carriers in the pool. This difference between the typical pooled testing scenario and the technology scenario was the basis of several recent works () which suggested more complicated designs that take the specific scenario into account and design more efficient pooling and decoding strategies for identification of rare allele carriers take a random design approach to identify extremely rare carriers while take a more structured approach and use a design based on the Chinese reminder theorem (CRTD) to identify rare allele carriers. These designs allow for the identification of multiple carriers. Another design which has been used in similar contexts is the shifted transversal design (STD) (). One common feature of these designs is that they are all combinatorial: each individual is either present in a pool or absent from it. Using this combinatorial approach, one can, at best, hope to infer the number of carriers in a pool but not their identity. This information is accumulated across the overlapping pools and the identity of the carriers is then decoded in a manner reminiscent of the way one solves a Sudoku puzzle.
