We propose a targeted re-sequencing simulator wes sim that generates synthetic exo me sequencing reads from a given sample genome. wes sim emulates conventional exo me capture technologies , including agilent s sure select and nimble gens seq cap to generate DNA fragments from genomic target regions. The target regions can be either specified by genomic coordinates or inferred from in silico probe hybridization. Coupled with existing next generation sequencing simulators, wes sim generates a realistic artificial exo me sequencing data, which is essential for developing and evaluating exo me targeted variant callers. Availability: Source code and the packaged version of wes sim with manuals are available at

introduction generation of simulated next generation sequencing (NGS) reads serves the essential gold standard in developing and evaluating variant detection algorithms. Many tools, including wg sim (), have been developed for artificial NGS read generation. Recent studies, such as ART (), pIRS () and gems im (), have accomplished more realistic simulation by reproducing known biases coming from sequence context and empirical platform dependent errors. Although the current simulators mainly focus on realistic NGS read generation, we address another important problem on specifying target regions. whole exo me sequencing (WES) is currently being regarded as a superior option for disease variant finding studies; it is cost effective much smaller in size and easier to interpret results. As typical statistics of whole exo me sequencing data (e.g. coverage, read distribution and bias) are distinct from that of whole genome sequencing data, variant detection tools are usually required to calibrate their algorithms for practical use of exo me data (). This naturally demands more realistic simulation of exo me sequencing to promote accuracy of variant calling tools by providing a statistical base for performance evaluation. wes sim emulates the exo me capture procedure that forms the basis of major commercial solutions (such as agilent s sure select and roche nimble gens seq cap by implementing i DNA shearing to generate random fragments, (ii) probe capture by hybridization and (iii) single or paired end sequencing of the selected fragments. Other important features including fragment length and gc content were rigorously considered to reproduce more accurate coverage biases. We compared our synthetic data with real WES data to confirm the similarity of major statistics. The exo me capture process is highly optimized so that the overall running time is only bounded by the NGS read generation step.
