The rapid development of CRISPR-Cas9 mediated genome editing techniques has given rise to a number of online and stand-alone tools to find and score crisp r sites for whole genomes. Here we describe the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute Genome Editing database (WGE), which uses novel methods to compute, visualize and select optimal crisp r sites in a genome browser environment. The WGE database currently stores single and paired crisp r sites and pre-calculated off target information for crisp rs located in the mouse and human exo mes. Scoring and display of off target sites is simple, and intuitive, and filters can be applied to identify high quality crisp r sites rapidly. WGE also provides a tool for the design and display of gene targeting vectors in the same genome browser, along with gene models, protein translation and variation tracks. WGE is open, extensible and can be set up to compute and present crisp r sites for any genome. Availability and implementation: The WGE database is freely available at www.sanger.ac.uk/htgt/

introduction crisp rcas technology is a powerful tool for genome editing that can be applied to virtually any species, from viruses to plants to mammals (). The crisp rcas system, exemplified by Cas9 from Streptococcus pyogenes, is an rna guided endonuclease that can be targeted to specific sequences by watson crick base pairing between a guide RNA grn a molecule and a 20 bp target sequence adjacent to an obligate NGG proto spacer adjacent motif (PAM). By replacing the first 20 bp of the grn a with the desired target sequence Cas9 can be re-programmed to induce a double stranded break at any N (20) NGG site in the genome. The Cas9 endonuclease will tolerate some mismatches in the alignment between the grn a and target DNA sequence and off target damage can occur at other sites in the genome with high sequence similarity to the crisp r site (). Therefore, when designing grn as for genome editing, it is important to consider potential off target sites as well as the position of the grn a site within a gene. Many web delivered software solutions are available for choosing highly specific crisp r sites in vertebrate genomes (Supplementary). Some require the input of target or grn a sequences (; http://www. bench ling com. Others provide a basic genome browser (http://hori z on desk gen com. One can be run locally (), and a few have more involved scoring schemes, both for grn as and off targets (e.g.; http:// www bench ling com. Some use a heuristic short read aligner such as Bowtie () to compute grn a specificity (). Here we describe WGE (http://www.sanger.ac.uk/htgt/wge). In contrast to existing websites, WGE guides the genome editing
