Motivation: Circadian rhythms date back to the origins of life, are found in virtually every species and every cell, and play fundamental roles in functions ranging from metabolism to cognition. Modern high throughput technologies allow the measurement of concentrations of transcripts, metabolites and other species along the circadian cycle creating novel computational challenges and opportunities, including the problems of inferring whether a given species oscillate in circadian fashion or not, and inferring the time at which a set of measurements was taken. Results: We first curate several large synthetic and biological time series datasets containing labels for both periodic and a periodic signals. We then use deep learning methods to develop and train BIO_CYCLE, a system to robustly estimate which signals are periodic in high throughput circadian experiments, producing estimates of amplitudes, periods, phases, as well as several statistical significance measures. Using the curated data, BIO_CYCLE is compared to other approaches and shown to achieve state of the art performance across multiple metrics. We then use deep learning methods to develop and train bio clock to robustly estimate the time at which a particular single time point transcript omic experiment was carried. In most cases, bio clock can reliably predict time, within approximately 1 h, using the expression levels of only a small number of core clock genes. bio clock is shown to work reasonably well across tissue types, and often with only small degradation across conditions. bio clock is used to annotate most mouse experiments found in the GEO database with an inferred time stamp.

introduction the importance of circadian rhythms can not be overstated: circadian oscillation have been observed in animals, plants, fungi and cyanobacteria and date back to the very origins of life on Earth. Indeed, some of the most ancient forms of life, such as cyanobacteria, use photosynthesis as their energy source and thus are highly circadian almost by definition. These oscillations play a fundamental role in coordinating the homeostasis and behavior of biological systems, from the metabolic (Eckel) to the cognitive levels (). Disruption of circadian rhythms has been directly linked to health problems () ranging from cancer, to insulin resistance, to diabetes, to obesity and to premature ageing (). At their most fundamental level, these oscillations are molecular in nature, whereby the concentrations of specific molecular species such as transcripts, metabolites and proteins oscillate in the cell with a 24 h periodicity. Modern high throughput technologies allow large scale measurements of these concentrations along the circadian cycle thus creating new datasets and new computational challenges and opportunities. To mine these new datasets, here we develop and apply machine learning methods to address two questions: (i) which molecular species are periodic? and (ii) what time or phase is associated with high throughput transcript omic measurements made at a single time point At the molecular level, circadian rhythms are in part driven by a genetically encoded, highly conserved, core clock found in nearly every cell based on negative transcription translation feedback loops, whereby transcription factors drive the expression of their own negative regulators (), and involving only a dozen genes (). In the mammalian core clock (), two bHLH transcription factors, CLOCK and BMAL1 heterodimer ize and bind to conserved E-box sequences in target gene promoters, thus driving the rhythmic expression of mammalian Period (Per1, Per2 and Per3) and crypto chrome (Cry1 and Cry2) genes (). PER and CRY proteins form a complex that inhibits subsequent clock bmal1 mediated gene expression (). The master core clock located in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) () of the hypothalamus interacts with the peripheral core clocks throughout the body (). In contrast to the small size of the core clock, high throughput transcript omic (DNA microarrays, rnase q or meta bolo mic (mass spectrometry) experiments (, have revealed that a much larger fraction, typically on the order of 10%, of all transcripts or metabolites in the cell are oscillating in a circadian manner. Furthermore, the oscillating transcripts and metabolites differ by cell, tissue type, or condition (). Genetic, epigenetic and environmental perturbations such as a change in diet can lead to cellular reprogramming and profoundly influence which species are oscillating in a given cell or tissue (). When results are aggregated across tissues and conditions, a very large fraction, often exceeding 50% and possibly approaching 100%, of all transcripts is capable of circadian oscillations under at least one set of conditions, as shown in plants (), cyanobacteria and algae () and mouse (). In a typical circadian experiment, high throughput omic measurements are taken at multiple time points along the circadian cycle under both control and treated conditions. Thus the first fundamental problem that arises in the analysis of such data is the problem of detecting periodicity, in particular circadian periodicity, in these time series. The problem of detecting periodic patterns in time series is of course not new. However, in the cases considered here the problem is particularly challenging for several reasons, including: (i) the sparsity of the measurements (the experiments are costly and thus data may be collected for instance only every 4 h); (ii) the noise in the measurements and the well known biological variability; (iii) the related issue of small sample sizes (e.g. n  3); (iv) the issue of missing data; (v) the issue of uneven sampling in time; and (vi) the large number of measurements (e.g. 20 000 transcripts) and the associated multiple hypothesis testing problem. Here we develop and apply deep learning methods for robustly assessing periodicity in high throughput circadian experiments, and systematically compare the deep learning approach to the previous, non machine learning, approaches (). While this is useful for circadian experiments, the vast majority of all high throughput expression experiments have been carried, and continue to be carried, at single time points. This can be problematic for many applications, including applications to precision medicine, precisely because circadian variations are ignored creating possible confounding factors. This raises the second problem of developing methods that can robustly infer the approximate time at which a single time high throughput expression measurement was taken. Such methods could be used to retrospectively infer a time stamp for any expression dataset, in particular to improve the annotations of all the datasets contained in large gene expression repositories, such as the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (), and improve the quality of all the downstream inferences that can be made from this wealth of data. There may be other applications of such a method, for instance in forensic sciences, to help infer a time of death. In any case, to address the second problem we also develop and apply deep learning methods to robustly infer time or phase for single time high throughput gene expression measurements.

conclusion deep learning methods can be applied to high throughput circadian data to address important challenges in circadian biology. In particular, we have developed BIO_CYCLE to detect molecular species that oscillate in high throughput circadian experiments and extract the characteristics of these oscillations. Remarkably, BIO_CYCLE can be trained with large quantities of synthetic data preventing any kind of overfitting. We have also developed bio clock to infer the time at which a transcript omic sample was collected from the level of expression of a small number of core clock genes. Both methods will be improved as more data becomes available and, more generally, deep learning methods are likely to be useful to address several other related circadian problems, such as analyzing periodicity in high throughput circadian proteomic data, or inferring sample time in different species. In particular, developing methods for annotating the time of all the human gene expression experiments, contained in GEO, and other similar repositories, would be valuable. Such annotations could be important for improving the interpretation of both old and new data and discovering circadian driven effects that may be important in precision medicine and other applications, for instance to help determine the optimal time for administering certain drugs b deep learning approaches for circadian rhythms i17
