Motivation: The scientific literature contains a wealth of information about biological systems. Manual curation lacks the scalability to extract this information due to the ever increasing numbers of papers being published. The development and application of text mining technologies has been proposed as a way of dealing with this problem. However, the inter-species ambiguity of the genomic nomenclature makes mapping of gene mentions identified in text to their corresponding Entrez gene identifiers an extremely difficult task. We propose a novel method, which transforms a MEDLINE record into a mixture of adjacency matrices; by performing a random walk over the resulting graph, we can perform multi-class supervised classification allowing the assignment of taxonomy identifiers to individual gene mentions. The ability to achieve good performance at this task has a direct impact on the performance of normalizing gene mentions to Entrez gene identifiers. Such graph mixtures add flexibility and allow us to generate probabilistic classification schemes that naturally reflect the uncertainties inherent, even in literature derived data. Results: Our method performs well in terms of both micro and macro averaged performance, achieving micr of 1 of 0.76 and macro f 1 of 0.36 on the publicly available dec a corpus. re curation of the dec a corpus was performed, with our method achieving 0.88 micr of 1 and 0.51 macro f 1. Our method improves over standard classification techniques [such as support vector machines (SVMs)] in a number of ways: flexibility, interpretability and its resistance to the effects of class bias in the training data. Good performance is achieved without the need for computationally expensive parse tree generation or bag of words classification.

introduction the scientific literature contains a wealth of information about biological organisms that is relevant for biomedical scientists: from descriptions of protein protein interactions pp is * To whom correspondence should be addressed.() to parameters for models of biological systems (). The ever increasing publication rate now means that it has become impossible for manual curators to extract this information comprehensively. This situation has led to a sustained interest in the development and application of text mining (TM) methods to the biological and biomedical domain (). Many organisms are used to investigate biological processes and phenomena () with the expectation that any understanding obtained can be applied to other organisms (e.g. the zebrafish immune system is used as a model of the human immune system). However, in some cases this mapping of experimental results is not justified due to inter-species variation (i.e. a protein may be subject to neo sub functionalization which could lead to erroneous inferences being drawn. Therefore, it is important to identify the species to which any genes (and other entities of interest) mentioned in a paper belong, and in which species the experiments were performed in order to reduce the chances of this kind of mistake occurring. Here, we provide a new method that is able to achieve this automatically embedded in a TM framework. A typical TM pipeline works by first recognizing or tagging named entities (NEs) of interest (e.g. gene mentions or species mentions) in a block of text and then normalizing or mapping these mentions to canonical unique identifiers (e.g. Entrez gene identifiers or NCBI Taxonomy identifiers). This normalization process facilitates summarizing and integration of results obtained using TM with other types of biological knowledge. However, the ambiguity and variability of the genomic nomenclature makes this task extremely challenging. A single gene mention can potentially refer to many genes within a species or across species. The inter-species ambiguity of the genomic nomenclature () means that identifying the correct species of a gene mention is an important subtask of gene normalization (), but despite of this there has been only limited work in this area investigated methods to identify the focal organisms of an abstract using a custom species tagger and various heuristics. This work showed that identifying the species mentioned in an abstract was beneficial both for gene normalization and PPI extraction. Genes from several species can be mentioned in a single article (e.g. an article on evolutionary analysis of a gene may refer to its homologues in multiple species) so it is important to perform species disambiguation at the level of an individual gene mention. Not performing species driven gene name disambiguation led to poor performance in the bio creative bc page 255 254260

discussion unlike other classification (e.g. SVMs) approaches, our method does not provide a hard classification yes no and instead provides a probability associated with each classification it makes. This probability reflects both the uncertainty in assigning a species word to a gene mention, and in the normalization of a species word to an NCBI taxonomy identifier, allowing uncertainty to be propagated. Thus, the reliability of the proposed species identifier can be assessed directly, and we do not artificially inflate confidence in a given classification. Where there is insufficient evidence in the abstract to distinguish between the species of an entity, a Maximum Entropy (MaxEnt) approach is followed where all potential taxonomy identifiers are assigned a uniform probability (no classification is made). Like the relation method proposed by, our method does not require separate training data for each class species and instead assumes that authors propose the species of an entity in a uniform manner over all species. The method is conceptually similar to construction integration model proposed by Kintsch (1988).In the absence of any species words, it is not possible to propose a taxonomy identifier for any gene mentions within that abstract. In future, it may be possible to use an imputation step where we could probabilistically assign an identifier based on the frequency of species in PubMed, or by looking at its candidates in bio thesaurus () and assigning a uniform probability over all potential taxonomy identifiers. The performance of any species disambiguation method is highly dependent on the performance of the components responsible for tagging and normalizing species words. Here, we used both the nac tem Species Word Detector and the LINNAEUS tagger for species named entity recognition (NER), and any publicly available custom built species tagger could be used [e.g. tax on grab () or the organism tagger (. One of the issues with species name identification is that authors can use the genus name as shorthand for the species name. Performance of the method would improve if genus names were identified and normalized to the major model organism in that genus [e.g. identifying and normalising Arabidopsis to Arabidopsis thaliana

conclusion our method performs well in terms of both macro and micro averaged performance of previous methods and shows significant improvements over the RELATION method proposed by. Most importantly, our approach, once the reliable Page: 260 254260
