x ibd performs pairwise relatedness mapping on the X chromosome using dense single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data from either SNP chips or next generation sequencing data. It correctly accounts for the difference in chromosomal numbers between males and females and estimates global relatedness as well as regions of the genome that are identical by descent (IBD). x ibd also generates novel graphical summaries of all pairwise IBD tracts for a cohort making it very useful for disease locus mapping.

introduction genomic regions that have been inherited from a common ancestor are said to be identical by descent (IBD). Identification of IBD regions has proven useful in many applications, including discovery and quantification of unknown or misspecified familial relatedness () and disease mapping where a region inherited in multiple affected individuals is indicative of a critical region containing disease susceptibility genes (). Several methods have been proposed for inferring IBD, however few allow for analysis of the X chromosome. This is unfortunate as the X chromosome allows for inference of more distant relatedness than autosomes since fewer recombination events occur, resulting in IBD segments that are sustained over longer periods of time. Current IBD analysis of the X chromosome is based on identity by state sharing, which is non probabilistic and does not necessarily imply IBD (). Here we present x ibd the only hidden Markov model (HMM) that infers IBD on the X chromosome in addition to the autosomes, where IBD is detectable between individuals with a recent common ancestor, within 25 generations, rather than more distant relatedness. Many IBD methodologies rely on large cohorts to estimate allele frequency data or to infer linkage disequilibrium structure. x ibd can be applied to as few as two samples with the option to use HapMap allele frequency data for 11 populations. Furthermore, it can be applied to either single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) chip or next generation sequencing (NGS) data exo me or genome wide).
