Motivation: large scale chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry xl ms analyses are quickly becoming a powerful means for high throughput determination of protein structural information and protein protein interactions. Recent studies have garnered thousands of cross-linked interactions, yet the field lacks an effective tool to compile experimental data or access the network and structural knowledge for these large scale analyses. We present x linkdb 2.0 which integrates tools for network analysis, Protein Databank queries, modeling of predicted protein structures and modeling of docked protein structures. The novel, integrated approach of x linkdb 2.0 enables the holistic analysis of xl ms protein interaction data without limitation to the cross linker or analytical system used for the analysis. Availability and Implementation: x linkdb 2.0 can be found here, including documentation and help: http://xlinkdb.gs.washington.edu/.

introduction large scale structural characterization of interactions within proteins and protein complexes is a major goal of structural proteomics. Recent efforts have generated datasets featuring thousands of peptide peptide links used to build networks of protein protein interactions pp is. Yet, the full depth of these datasets is often unrealized as (i) the structural data inherent to chemical crosslinking mass spectrometry xl ms networks remains untapped on a network wide scale, particularly for proteins lacking empirically derived structures and (ii) there is currently no centralized platform to host these large scale networks. To address the lack of network level structural information we present x linkdb 2.0 (hereafter x linkdb a web resource designed to integrate xl ms data with databases of protein structures, enable generation of protein structure models for proteins lacking known structures, and generate automated protein protein docking models. Protein structures are derived from empirical data when available (Protein Databank, PDB) or through high quality structural prediction (Modeller). Similarly, structures of docked interacting proteins are queried from the PDB or docked with patch dock. xlink dbs automation allows for the first, cross platform streamlined structural analysis of large xl ms datasets and provides a curated, ever growing reference database of cross-linked protein interactions for the general community. features), and relatively low runtime make IMP ideal for high throughput analyses () (). The user input for x linkdb is a tab delimited text file with only six columns to identify crosslinked peptides and protein accessions: peptide sequence #1, protein UniProt accession #1, the relative position of the crosslinked residue within peptide #1, peptide sequence #2, protein UniProt accession #2 and the relative position of the crosslinked residue within peptide #2. x linkdb has been preloaded with publicly available example xl ms datasets from previous analyses. Importantly, as demonstrated by the publicly accessible datasets within x linkdb data from any xl ms pipeline can be used as the input, including that generated by pLink (), xlink x (), or ReACT (). x linkdb generates protein protein interaction networks and queries the Uniprot database to determine the amino acid sequences for all input proteins (Supplementary). x linkdb then queries the PDB to determine if a PDB structure exists for the protein and maps identified crosslinked residues to these structures. If no PDB structure exists x linkdb generates a homology model using Modeller. Through the PDB query or Modeller prediction, x linkdb seeks to establish an associated PDB structure or structural model for each protein from the original input. For cross-linked relationships identified between two proteins (multi-protein complexes) x linkdb will automatically query the PDB again, this time searching for co protein structures that contain both input proteins. If no co protein structures are identified, x linkdb initiates IMP's integrative docking to determine interaction interfaces of these proteins using sites of crosslinking as empirical distance constraints. Finally, x linkdb retains the top ranked docked model for each protein complex. Modeling and docking jobs are scheduled and initiated via a Jenkins server and job queueing is performed via a centralized Sun Grid Engine. In this manner, the docking and modeling platforms are maintained separately from network analysis. All associated structures, models, docked models and crosslinked residues therein can be visualized using Jmol directly within the user's web browser.
