Interpretation of electron to mo grams is difficult due to the high noise levels. Thus, denoising techniques are needed to improve the signal to noise ratio. x msf (Microscopy Mean Shift Filtering) is a fast, user friendly application that succeeds in filtering noise while preserving the structures of interest. It is based on the extension to 3D of a method widely applied in other image processing fields under very different scenarios. x msf has been tested for a variety of to mo grams showing a great potential to become a state of the art filtering program in electron tomography. Applied iteratively, the algorithm yields pre segmented volumes facilitating posterior segmentation tasks. Moreover, execution times remain low thanks to parallel computing techniques to exploit current multicore computers.

introduction electron tomography (ET) has gained interest in recent years for its ability to image relatively big and heterogeneous specimens in a near to native state (). Low electron doses are used to reduce the radiation damage, which makes the reconstructed volumes exhibit low signal to noise ratios (SNR). Thus, noise reduction is essential to increase the SNR and to facilitate visual inspection, segmentation and, in the end, interpretation of volumes. Different denoising techniques have been applied with different degree of success. Gaussian filtering techniques allow fast noise reduction but tend to blur volume features, not discerning between noise and signal. Recently, iterative median filtering (van der) has emerged as a simple and nonlinear technique to filter electron to mo grams but it is not optimal under extremely noisy conditions. Bilateral filtering is an anisotropic filtering technique that has drawn some attention in this field (). It is based on adaptive Gaussian filtering that accounts for both spatial and intensity distances. Anisotropic nonlinear diffusion (AND) techniques adapt the strength and direction of the filtering to the local structure (). They are prevalent because the SNR is significantly enhanced while the important structural information is preserved. However, their computational demands are large and they have a number of parameters whose tuning is not * To whom correspondence should be addressed. trivial. For those reasons, the availability of new, fast methods that are easy to use are very welcome in ET. This work proposes to use a filtering technique based on the Mean Shift algorithm (). Mean Shift image filtering and segmentation has been previously used with success in different image and video processing areas such as photo edition, video tracking systems, etc. Here, we have extended this algorithm for the 3D case and have prepared a program for public use, x msf (Microscopy Mean Shift Filtering). The resulting filtering program is highly intuitive and user friendly and, moreover, yields good results under different SNR circumstances. Also, if applied iteratively, it has shown a great potential as a preliminary step for segmentation tasks chip expected to grow rapidly in the near future, the user is expected to benefit from this feature greatly. Memory consumption is twice the size of the tomogr am image being processed.

conclusion x msf has a great potential of application in ET. It has shown to deal well with disadvantageous noisy conditions present in electron to mo grams while preserving important structural features. The parallel implementation of the algorithm allows a nearly linear speed up in multicore machines, providing fast results at a reduced cost. In terms of execution time and image quality, x msf outperforms other standard methods in many applications. x msf has the additional advantage of its ability to perform pre segmentation of complex to mo grams which is essential in this field.
