Motivation: Computer Aided Identification systems provide users with the resources to relate morpho anatomic observations with tax a names and to subsequently access other knowledge about the organisms. They have the ability to manage descriptive data and make identifications through interactive keys. They are essential for both authors and users of biodiversity information. x per 2 version 2.0 is one of the most user friendly tools in its category and provides a complete environment dedicated to taxonomic management. Availability: x per 2 software can be freely downloaded at

introduction linnaeus wrote that naming is the first stage of knowledge. Indeed, names of tax a are the main access keys to biological information (). They link the real world of living organisms and the conceptual world proposed by system at ists through the description and characterization of tax a. Identifying life forms is crucial for all activities related to biology and their taxonomic descriptions are more than necessary in the study of Biodiversity (). system at ists inventory, study and structure biological diversity as precisely as possible (). All this information may be summarized into knowledge bases to perform identification of specimens for new inventories and monitoring surveys, phylogenetic analyses, as well as biogeographic and ecological studies. A significant increase of this kind of digitized information should be expected in a near future. The deep social and scientific impact of web 2.0 stimulates sharing of digital data and proposals of cyber taxonomy projects to study global biodiversity and climate changes. The generalization and the integration of knowledge-base management systems into current taxonomic work may be the next revolution in taxonomy. International projects are already opening the way of this new, delocalized taxonomy.

conclusion many international projects such as GBIF, EDIT, BIOTA, Catalogue of Life, Encyclopedia of Life, key2 nature etc. have a common purpose: sharing knowledge and providing free web access to Biodiversity Information (
