Motivation: Chemical cross-linking of proteins or protein complexes and the mass spectrometry based localization of the cross-linked amino acids in peptide sequences is a powerful method for generating distance restraints on the substrates topology. Results: Here, we introduce the algorithm x walk for predicting and validating these cross-links on existing protein structures. x walk calculates and displays non-linear distances between chemically cross-linked amino acids on protein surfaces, while mimicking the flexibility and non-linearity of cross linker molecules. It returns a solvent accessible surface distance, which corresponds to the length of the shortest path between two amino acids, where the path leads through solvent occupied space without penetrating the protein surface. Availability: x walk is freely available as a web server or stand-alone JAVA application at http://www.xwalk.org.

introduction in computational structural biology, distance restraints from chemical cross-linking experiments have so far been employed as an upper limit on the Euclidean distance between a pair of cross-linked amino acids (). However, deducing the crosslink ability of an amino acid pair by measuring the length of a Euclidean distance vector disregards the fact that the vector often penetrates segments of the protein have recognized this problem and implemented a short-cut algorithm that computes the shortest path between two cross-linked amino acids by using vertices from a protein surface triangulation and convex hull, while have explicitly modeled the cross linker molecule onto existing protein structures. We have implemented x walk which resembles the approach taken by instead uses grids and a search algorithm to compute the length of the shortest path (), which shall be referred to as solvent accessible surface distance sas d. Our code is the only of its kind being open source and available in form of a web server. * To whom correspondence should be addressed however the shortest path with an sas d of 59.2  reveals that the Euclidean distance vector actually penetrates the protein, leaving the only option to connect both amino acids via a long detour over the protein surface (chain of spheres colored blue to red for distances of 059 ., respectively). (b) Argonaut protein from the rna induced silencing complex (RISC) with page 2164 21632164
