Motivation: Computationally generated non-native protein structure conformations (or decoys) are often used for designing protein folding simulation methods and force fields. However, almost all the decoy sets currently used in literature suffer from uneven root mean square deviation (RMSD) distribution with bias to non-protein like hydrogen-bonding and compactness patterns. Meanwhile, most protein decoy sets are pre-calculated and there is a lack of methods for automated generation of high-quality decoys for any target proteins. Results: We developed a new algorithm, 3DRobot, to create protein structure decoys by free fragment assembly with enhanced hydrogen-bonding and compactness interactions. The method was benchmarked with three widely used decoy sets from ab initio folding and comparative modeling simulations. The decoys generated by 3DRobot are shown to have significantly enhanced diversity and evenness with a continuous distribution in the RMSD space. The new energy terms introduced in 3DRobot improve the hydrogen-bonding network and compactness of decoys, which eliminates the possibility of native structure recognition by trivial potentials. Algorithms that can automatically create such diverse and well-packed non-native conformations from any protein structure should have a broad impact on the development of advanced protein force field and folding simulation methods. Availiablity and implementation:
IntroductionIt has been more than 50 years since Anfinsen first showed that the native structure of protein molecules corresponds to the state with the lowest free energy (). However, ab initio folding of proteins from the first principle remains a significant unsolved problem in biophysics and computational biology. One of the major barriers is the difficulty in designing accurate force fields that can recognize the native state as the lowest energy, and meanwhile possess an energy funnel with a medium-range energy-RMSD correlation that can guide the folding simulation towards the native state (). A critical step to protein folding force field development is the preparation of a set of non-native protein structures, usually generated by computer (called structure decoys), which can be used to guide the design, train and benchmark of the energy terms (). However, creating appropriate structure decoys is highly non-trivial and many efforts have been made to address the problem. For example,proposed to construct structure decoys by randomly rotating structural segments of known native structures around a set of selected flexible hinges. Since native structure features, such as hydrophobic V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com core and contact specificities of amino acids, can be destroyed in the segment permutations, the native structure can be quite easily recognized by knowledge-based potentials that were extracted from the statistics of experimental structures (). To partly amend this issue,and Xu and Zhang (2012) generated structure decoys by ab initio folding simulations through Rosetta and QUARK programs, respectively. Because extensive energy optimizations are conducted in the folding simulations, one advantage of the folding-based decoy set is that the native states cannot be easily recognized from the decoys by simple knowledge-based potentials (). However, one issue of such decoy sets is that ab initio folding simulations cannot generate near-native structure conformations (say  3 A  ) due to the inherent difficulties in ab initio folding, in particular for the medium-to large-size proteins with complicated topology; this renders the decoys useless for the potential development that aims to recognize near-native structures (e.g. for high-resolution refinement). To enrich near-native decoy generation, John andproposed to generate decoys by mutations of threading alignments followed by comparative modeling using Modeller; similarly,constructed structure decoys by iterative threading assembly simulations based on I-TASSER. Because these decoys are built on specific homologous templates, the conformations are often aggregated into a few clusters around the template structures, which make it difficult to examine the continuous energy funnel and the energy-RMSD correlation of the force fieldsuch energy funnel and correlation are critical in guiding successful protein folding simulations (). Even though many decoy sets used in literature were generated by extensive folding simulations, somewhat surprisingly, almost all the currently existing decoy sets have some level of correlations between the RMSD to the native and the radius of gyration or secondary structure distribution (see Supplementary). This means that the structure deviations have been created by sacrificing the hydrogen-bonding networks and/or the compactness of the native structures in the decoy construction simulation processes. Therefore, the native structure can be easily discriminated from the decoys by simply counting their secondary structure density or the compactness score. Energy training based on such decoys may introduce extra bias to the secondary structure and compactness weights that are not reflected in the native structures. To improve the quality of the decoy structures,proposed a strategy to refine existing decoy sets by extra energy minimization simulations; meanwhile, additional decoy structures were added from the native structure perturbation and random dihedral angle sampling to increase the difficulty of decoy recognition by various scoring functions. Finally, it is important to note that many protein folding and structure prediction studies need structure decoys for specific protein targets that the authors are interested in. However, most decoy sets in literature have been pre-generated, which further limits their use for more general studies. In this work, we aim to develop a new algorithm, 3DRobot, dedicated for high-quality protein decoy generation by the extension of I-TASSER-based fragment structure assembly simulations. To increase structure diversity, multiple continuously distributed structure scaffolds will be collected from the PDB library, with new energy terms introduced to enhance the hydrogen-bonding and residue packing interactions. The on-line server and the executable program are freely available at http://zhanglab.ccmb.med.umich. edu/3DRobot, which allow users to generate high-quality structure decoys from any given target structures.