Motivation: The proportion of non-differentially expressed genes (π 0) is an important quantity in microarray data analysis. Although many statistical methods have been proposed for its estimation, it is still necessary to develop more efficient methods. Methods: Our approach for improving π 0 estimation is to modify an existing simple method by introducing artificial censoring to P-values. In a comprehensive simulation study and the applications to experimental datasets, we compare our method with eight existing estimation methods. Results: The simulation study confirms that our method can clearly improve the estimation performance. Compared with the existing methods, our method can generally provide a relatively accurate estimate with relatively small variance. Using experimental microarray datasets, we also demonstrate that our method can generally provide satisfactory estimates in practice.
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray technology is a powerful tool for studying complex diseases () and for assessing the effects of drugs () at the molecular level. It is an experimental method by which thousands of genes can be printed on a small chip and their expression can be measured simultaneously (). It can be used to detect changes in gene expression between normal and abnormal cells, which enables scientists to detect novel disease-related genes (). Many statistical methods have been developed for this purpose (). Although other advanced genomics technologies, such as RNA sequencing (), have been developed, microarrays have been continuously used for broad biomedical studies (). Furthermore, since the structures of data from different genomics technologies are basically * To whom correspondence should be addressed. similar, methods for analyzing microarray data can also be useful for analyzing other similar genomics data. Performing statistical tests for a large number of genes raises the need for an adjustment for multiple hypothesis testing (MHT). A widely used method to address this issue is the false discovery rate (FDR;) that evaluates the proportion of false positives among claimed positives. FDR control is less stringent than the traditional family-wise error rate (FWER) control such as the Bonferroni correction, and provides more power for discovering differentially expressed genes. However, estimating FDR involves the estimation of  0 , the proportion of non-differentially expressed (null) genes [(1 0 ) corresponds to the proportion of differentially expressed genes]. A reliable estimate of  0 is also of great importance to the sample size calculation for microarray experiment design (). A variety of methods have been proposed for estimating  0 .proposed qvalue. This method uses the ordered P-values and a cubic spline, and estimates  0 as the value of the fitted spline at a value close to 1.suggested BUM, a 'beta-uniform' mixture model with the estimate of  0 being the value of the fitted model at 1. convest, a method introduced by, utilizes a non-parametric convex decreasing density estimation method and gives the value of the density at 1 as an estimate of  0. A histogram-based method has also been proposed (). The above methods usually provide conservative estimates of  0 ; in other words, they are expected to give positively biased  0 estimates. This has been considered an advantage, since it protects against overestimating the number of differentially expressed genes. Many other methods have also been proposed for estimating  0 .proposed a non-parametric moment-based method coupled with sample-splitting to achieve the identifiability and obtained a closed-form formula for  0 .presented the successive exclusion procedure (SEP), which successively excludes genes until the remaining u-values (transformed P-values) are sufficiently close to a uniform distribution U. SEP estimates  0 by J/m, where J is the estimated number of null genes, and m is the total number of genes.estimated the marginal density of P-values using a Bernstein polynomial density estimation, and gave a closed-form expression for their  0 estimator.obtained an estimate of  0 through Bayesian inference from a mixture model, which requires the distribution of P-values from non-null genes to be stochastically smaller than that from null genes. In addition to the above methods, there are still many other proposed methodsPage: 641 640646
DISCUSSIONMicroarrays have been widely used in biological and medical studies. An accurate estimate of the proportion of differentially expressed genes is important in false positive control and experiment design. Therefore, the improvement of existing estimation methods still remains important. Our proposed method for estimating  0 provides an effective solution. Although it is arbitrary, the choice of  = 0.05 provides an overall satisfactory performance. In our simulation study, the advantage of using our method is clear in the cases of moderate and large sample size (18+18 and 30+30). In these cases, our method outperforms (w.r.t. RMSE) the other methods considered in this study. In the case of small sample, BUM has a satisfactory performance. Our method may be improved if an efficient method for the automatic selection of  can be developed. This issue will be pursued in our future research. Although none of the  0 estimation methods mentioned above considers the effect of gene networks and interactions, dependence among genes is still a difficult issue in microarray data analysis (). However, as investigated by, methods that are based on the independence assumption perform quite well in general situations of weak positive dependence, and a positive dependency structure is common in many situations. A satisfactory performance under weak positive dependence has also been confirmed in our simulation studies.