Motivation: Next-generation RNA sequencing offers an opportunity to investigate transcriptome in an unprecedented scale. Recent studies have revealed widespread alternative polyadenylation (polyA) in eu-karyotes, leading to various mRNA isoforms differing in their 3 0 un-translated regions (3 0 UTR), through which, the stability, localization and translation of mRNA can be regulated. However, very few, if any, methods and tools are available for directly analyzing this special alternative RNA processing event. Conventional methods rely on annotation of polyA sites; yet, such knowledge remains incomplete, and identification of polyA sites is still challenging. The goal of this article is to develop methods for detecting 3 0 UTR switching without any prior knowledge of polyA annotations. Results: We propose a change-point model based on a likelihood ratio test for detecting 3 0 UTR switching. We develop a directional testing procedure for identifying dramatic shortening or lengthening events in 3 0 UTR, while controlling mixed directional false discovery rate at a nominal level. To our knowledge, this is the first approach to analyze 3 0 UTR switching directly without relying on any polyA annotations. Simulation studies and applications to two real datasets reveal that our proposed method is powerful, accurate and feasible for the analysis of next-generation RNA sequencing data. Conclusions: The proposed method will fill a void among alternative RNA processing analysis tools for transcriptome studies. It can help to obtain additional insights from RNA sequencing data by understanding gene regulation mechanisms through the analysis of 3 0 UTR switching. Availability and implementation: The software is implemented in Java and can be freely downloaded from http://utr.sourceforge.net/.
INTRODUCTIONThe past two decades have witnessed dramatic changes brought on by high-throughput technology in both statistics and the biological sciences. Hybridization-based microarray technology, which emerged in the late 1990s, had been widely applied by researchers for more than a decade and led to a myriad of seminal advances. During the past few years, next-generation sequencing (NGS) has matured as a more powerful and accurate tool. It is replacing the once dominant microarray technology in all areas of application because of its affordable cost and highly accurate digital resolution (). For transcriptome study, the introduction of RNA-Seq technology along with new analytic methods makes it possible to address an increasing number of compelling biological questions that may not be possible using microarray technology. In particular, alternative RNA splicing and processing, common phenomena in eukaryotes, play so critical a role in gene function regulation that they receive much attention in RNA-Seq analysis () and motivate quite a few methodological developments. For example, Mixture of Isoforms (MISO) uses a probabilistic mixture model to quantify alternative splicing and processing, and it, then, tests the equality of transcript isoform ratios between samples (); multivariate analysis of transcript splicing (MATS), by using a Bayesian statistical framework, offers the flexibility to identify differential alternative splicing and processing events that match a given userdefined pattern (); DEXSeq uses generalized linear models to test for differential usage of exons and provides reliable control of false discoveries by taking biological variation into account (); other developments include (). Despite the success of these methods, detecting 3 0 untranslated regions (3 0 UTR) switching remains challenging. Very few, if any, methods and tools are available for directly analyzing this special alternative RNA processing event. The pre-mRNA 3 0 end processing plays a crucial role in eukaryotic mRNA maturation (). Through cis elements in the 3 0 UTR of mRNAs, post-transcriptional gene regulation frequently occurs and determines the stability, localization and translation of mRNA (). These roles are mediated by interactions with RNA-binding proteins and microRNAs (miRNAs) (). Over half of mammalian genes contain alternative cleavage and polyadenylation (or polyA) sites, which lead to various mRNA isoforms differing in their 3 0 UTRs (). Alternative cleavage and PolyAdenylation (APA) in 3 0 UTR, including shortening and lengthening events, have recently been identified as global phenomena under different cell conditions () and different species (). They have also *To whom correspondence should be addressed. drawn much attention in cancer studies (). In contrast with the increasingly recognized importance of APA, computational methods and tools for the APA analysis using RNA-Seq are underdeveloped. In unraveling APA regulation, Ji and colleagues scored relative expressions by taking the ratio of short reads density in extended and common regions, as defined by distal and proximal polyA sites, respectively (). A higher score, therefore, indicated higher abundance of long 3 0 UTR isoform. A similar approach was taken in a recent tandem 3 0 UTR analysis, where the statistical significance was assessed by Fisher's exact test for the switch score under different conditions (). The same group further improved the approach and implemented a new computational tool, MISO (). Specifically, tandem 3 0 UTR was treated as special alternative processing, and thus the quantification of expression level for each isoform can be estimated by computing Percent Spliced Isoform. These existing methods, however, have one critical drawback, namely, they rely on prior knowledge of annotated polyA sites. For example, MISO constructs 3 0 UTR isoform based on polyA sites information collected from the PolyA site database (). It is noted that the polyA sites from the current database are computationally inferred from cDNA (complementary DNA) / EST (expressed sequence tag) sequences. It is far from complete and may also contain false-positive findings. Therefore, these approaches that depend on polyA information may not be precise or powerful because of incomplete information of all potential cleavage sites on 3 0 UTR. In this article, we propose using a change-point model for identifying 3 0 UTR switching. To our knowledge, this is the first available method that allows investigators to directly analyze 3 0 UTR length changes without being dependent on polyA site information. To determine whether a 3 0 UTR is shortening or lengthening to a certain extent, we further develop an additional testing procedure to make directional decisions. We show that this directional procedure can control the mixed directional FDR (mdFDR) at a pre-specified nominal level. Simulation studies in various settings and applications to two real NGS datasets have demonstrated that our proposed change-point model and the testing framework are powerful and accurate. The methods developed in this article have been implemented using Java in a computationally efficient and user-friendly software package available from http://utr.sourceforge.net/. This tool will allow investigators to analyze next-generation RNA sequencing data in an effective and efficient way. The rest of the article is organized as follows. First, we introduce a change-point model based on a likelihood ratio test, followed by an iterative procedure for computing P-values. We then present a new directional testing procedure for identifying dramatic shortening or lengthening events while controlling mdFDR at a nominal level. We perform simulation studies to investigate numerical performance of the proposed method. Moreover, we apply the proposed method to analyze two real RNA sequencing datasets for identifying genes with length changes in their 3 0 UTRs. Finally, we conclude and discuss the results and methods.