Motivation: Gene activity is mediated by site-specific transcription factors (TFs). Their binding to defined regions in the genome determines the rate at which their target genes are transcribed. Results: We present a comprehensive computational model of the search process of TF for their genomic target site(s). The computational model considers: the DNA sequence, various TF species and the interaction of the individual molecules with the DNA or between themselves. We also demonstrate a systematic approach how to parametrize the system using available experimental data. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONOriginally, it was believed that transcription factors (TFs) find their target sites only through 3D diffusion and the association rate would follow the Smoluchowski limit.were the first to observe that the rate at which the lac repressor locates its target site is much faster than the rate predicted by the Smoluchowski limit and hypothesized that a different mechanism was involved in this process (). In their seminal work, von) thoroughly investigated this process from both a theoretical and experimental perspective and concluded that TF molecules use the facilitated diffusion mechanism to locate their target sites. This facilitated diffusion mechanism assumes a combination between 3D diffusion in the cytoplasm and an 1D random walk on the DNA. This leads to reduction of dimensionality in the search process and, consequently, speeds up the search. In addition, three main types of movements on the DNA were proposed:(i) sliding, (ii) hopping and (iii) jumping (). Sliding and hopping are both mechanisms of 1D random walk, but the difference between them is that during hopping the molecules lose contact with the DNA, whereas during sliding the molecules keep contact with the DNA. On the other hand, jumping is a mechanism which assumes that the molecules do not only lose contact with the DNA for a short time interval (as in the case of hopping), but they completely release into the cytoplasm where they spend a longer * To whom correspondence should be addressed. time until they bind to the DNA uncorrelated with respect to the unbinding position. The existence of the 1D random walk in vivo was recently confirmed by. The authors of that study used fluorescent lac repressor tetrameters and visualize their movement in a live Escherichia coli cell, confirming that the molecules spend 90% of the time bound to the DNA. There are still missing pieces in our understanding of the facilitated diffusion mechanism. One approach to address these questions consists of building a computational tool able to simulate the relevant molecules in a cell and the entire DNA sequence. This type of approach can address several questions, e.g. how crowding can influence the search process at genome-wide level, in a dynamical context () and not as static barriers (). In addition, one could investigate systems with real affinity landscapes, which is not possible through analytical tools (). In this article, we present a computational model for stochastic simulation of the search process of TFs for their target sites on the DNA. The model considers each TF molecule as an independent object, which can move freely in the bacterial cytoplasm, but which also can bind to the DNA and perform an 1D random walk. The DNA molecule is modelled as a string of nucleotides, which leads to specific affinity between a TF molecule and DNA at the position where the molecule is bound. We also go through the literature and systematically infer each microscopic parameter of the model from experimentally macroscopic measurements. Finally, we developed an implementation of the proposed model, which is available in Zabet and Adryan (2012).
DISCUSSIONPreviously, facilitated diffusion was modelled mainly analytically (e.g.). Although these types of models brought new insights into the mechanism, they mainly lack the capability to integrate real DNA sequence (a nonuiniform TF affinity 'landscape';) and/or dynamic crowding (mobile 'roadblocks';). Nevertheless, computational models are able to surpass these shortcomings. Stochastic simulations have revolutionized the way theoretical biologists can nowadays deal with problems that are not easily amenable to experimental measurements. TF target finding belongs to a class of spatio-temporal problems that, in a first approximation, may be addressed with tools that simulate 3D diffusion, e.g. Smoldyn