Motivation: Single nucleotide polymorphisms are the most common form of variation in human DNA, and are involved in many research fields, from molecular biology to medical therapy. The technological opportunity to deal with long DNA sequences using shotgun sequencing has raised the problem of fragment recombination. In this regard, Single Individual Haplotyping (SIH) problem has received considerable attention over the past few years. Results: In this article, we survey seven recent approaches to the SIH problem and evaluate them extensively using real human haplotype data from the HapMap project. We also implemented a data generator tailored to the current shotgun sequencing technology that uses haplotypes from the HapMap project. Availability: The data we used to compare the algorithms are available on demand, since we think they represent an important benchmark that can be used to easily compare novel algorithmic ideas with the state of the art. Moreover, we had to re-implement six of the algorithms surveyed because the original code was not available to us. Five of these algorithms and the data generator used in this article endowed with a Web interface are available at
INTRODUCTIONRecently, many researchers' focus has shifted from what individuals of a certain species have in common to their differences, and thus to DNA mutations. The single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP pronounced 'snip') is the most widespread form of variation in human DNA, and consists in the variation of the base present in a single fixed position of the DNA strand. The sequence of all SNPs in a given chromosome is called a haplotype. Humans are diploid organisms, this means that except for the sexual chromosomes of males, the chromosomes come in two copies: one inherited from the mother and one from the father. As a consequence, the haplotypes of a chromosome can be fully described by two sequences of SNPs: the mother's haplotype and the father's. Since haplotypes contain all the information about DNA variations, they play a crucial role in many studies about variations in gene expression and prediction of diseases. For this reason, several sequencing projects have been launched with the ultimate goal of building a complete map of the SNPs present in the human DNA (). At the moment, the HapMap Consortium has produced the most complete map of SNPs in human DNA, consisting of over 3.1 million SNPs () and has estimated that the overall number of SNPs in the human DNA is about 910 million. Single Individual Haplotype (SIH) reconstruction problem is one of the core problems in the reconstruction of whole genomes (). It consists in rebuilding the two haplotypes from a set of fragments obtained by the shotgun sequencing of the chromosomes. Current shotgun technology produces a very large set of fragments with lengths in the range of 200900 bases with a certain degree of overlap between them (). This technology does not allow keeping track of the association of a fragment with its haplotype. An important characteristic of this problem is that, unlike the fragment assembly problem, the position and orientation of the fragments is known a priori; this means that fragments can be arranged in a matrix called SNP Matrix. In the absence of errors, it is easy to find a bipartition of the SNP matrix such that the fragments belonging to each partition do not conflict (two fragments are said to be conflicting if for a certain position not gap they have different values). In the real-world application, this is not the case and errors affect the SNP matrix. Errors can originate from various sources. Reading errors are typically due to chemical/optical errors in reading the SNPs and as a result lead to the insertion of a wrong base in a certain position. Ambiguous readings occur when the signal strength of a SNP in not enough to establish its correct value with a high degree of confidence. The effect of ambiguous readings is typically the insertion of a gap in the sequence. The SIH problem has attracted considerable attention in the past few years and a large number of models and algorithms have been introduced in the literature. Many models have NP-hard solutions, thus heuristics are often used. However, a common framework to compare all those algorithms with each other is still lacking. We tested several algorithms for the SIH problem and from them, we selected the seven most effective heuristic algorithms. Moreover, we defined a common framework in which all the algorithms were evaluated. An exhaustive comparison of all the algorithms for the SIH problem is not feasible for many reasons. For example, many algorithms are designed for simplified models of the SNP matrix and are inadequate for the matrices generated according to the current shotgun sequencing technology. In this class of algorithms, there are those () that do not allow the insertion of gaps inside the fragments or the insertion of mate pair sequences. Another class of algorithms (as in) uses genotype information to solve the SIH problem. This information can improve the accuracy of the reconstructed haplotypes, but is not often available in practice.