Motivation: Small-induced subgraphs called graphlets are emerging as a possible tool for exploration of global and local structure of networks and for analysis of roles of individual nodes. One of the obstacles to their wider use is the computational complexity of algorithms for their discovery and counting. Results: We propose a new combinatorial method for counting graph-lets and orbit signatures of network nodes. The algorithm builds a system of equations that connect counts of orbits from graphlets with up to five nodes, which allows to compute all orbit counts by enumerating just a single one. This reduces its practical time complexity in sparse graphs by an order of magnitude as compared with the existing pure enumeration-based algorithms. Availability and implementation: Source code is available freely at
INTRODUCTIONFollowing the advent of high-throughput methods more than a decade ago, analysis of complex network data has assumed the central role among computational methods in bioinformatics. The huge size of such networks on one hand and the computational intractability of the related methods on the other have spawned a number of innovative analytic approaches. Przuljdescribed an approach focused on small induced subgraphs called graphlets. Owing to combinatorial explosion, such analysis is usually limited to the 30 graphlets with 25 nodes (). The number of appearances of graphlets in the network provides a description of the network's structural properties. On a local level, counting how many times a particular node participates in each kind of graphlet induced in the network gives a topological signature of the node's neighbourhood represented as a 30-dimensional vector. For a finer description, the nodes of every graphlet are partitioned into a set of automorphism groups called orbits (). Two nodes belong to the same orbit if they map to each other in some isomorphic projection of the graphlet onto itself. Nodes of graphlets on 25 points are grouped into 73 orbits shown by numbers and node colors in. For instance, the five nodes from G 14 belong to three different orbits, marked with different colors and numbers; the black (as well as the grey) nodes have symmetric positions in the graphlet and thus belong to the same orbit (31 for the black, 32 for the grey), and the white node belongs to the orbit 33. By counting the number of times a node of a graph appears in each orbit, the node can be described by a 73-dimensional vector of orbit counts, which reflects its position with respect to the local structure and gives insight into its role in the network. Existing methods for counting the graphlets and orbits are based on direct enumeration: to count them, they need to find all their embeddings in the network. We propose a new method, Orbit Counting Algorithm (Orca), which reduces the time complexity by an order of magnitude by computing the orbit counts using the relations between them and directly enumerating only smaller graphlets.
CONCLUSIONGraphlet-based network analysis is useful for various tasks in bioinformatics, such as alignment of PPI networks and prediction of protein functions based on topological similarities. Past studies used these approaches to, for instance, identify genes related to cancer () and aging (). We presented a new algorithm for counting graphlet orbits that is based on derived relations between orbit counts. To count the orbits for k-node graphlets, it enumerates k  1node graphlets and a single k-node graphlet. Empirical results confirm that this decreases the time complexity by an order of magnitude in comparison with other known methods. In practical terms, the algorithm counts orbits in large PPI networks 50100 times faster than other state-of-the-art algorithms.. Comparison of times needed for counting orbits in four-node graphlets in random networks. Graphs are cut off at one minute; results of experiments in which the methods were allowed to run for up to 1 h are available in the Supplementary Material