Motivation: The importance of RNA sequence analysis has been increasing since the discovery of various types of non-coding RNAs transcribed in animal cells. Conventional RNA sequence analyses have mainly focused on structured regions, which are stabilized by the stacking energies acting on adjacent base pairs. On the other hand, recent findings regarding the mechanisms of small interfering RNAs (siRNAs) and transcription regulation by microRNAs (miRNAs) indicate the importance of analyzing accessible regions where no base pairs exist. So far, relatively few studies have investigated the nature of such regions. Results: We have conducted a detailed investigation of accessibilities around the target sites of siRNAs and miRNAs. We have exhaustively calculated the correlations between the accessibilities around the target sites and the repression levels of the corresponding mRNAs. We have computed the accessibilities with an originally developed software package, called Raccess, which computes the accessibility of all the segments of a fixed length for a given RNA sequence when the maximal distance between base pairs is limited to a fixed size W. We show that the computed accessibilities are relatively insensitive to the choice of the maximal span W. We have found that the efficacy of siRNAs depends strongly on the accessibility of the very 3-end of their binding sites, which might reflect a target site recognition mechanism in the RNA-induced silencing complex. We also show that the efficacy of miRNAs has a similar dependence on the accessibilities, but some miRNAs also show positive correlations between the efficacy and the accessibilities in broad regions downstream of their putative binding sites, which might imply that the downstream regions of the target sites are bound by other proteins that allow the miRNAs to implement their functions. We have also investigated the off-target effects of an siRNA as a potential RNAi therapeutic. We show that the off-target effects of the siRNA have similar correlations to the miRNA repression, indicating that they are caused by the same mechanism. Availability: The C++ source code of the Raccess software is available at http://www.ncrna.org/software/Raccess/ The microarray
INTRODUCTIONThe energy scales of the secondary structure formations of RNA molecules are rather high compared with those of many biological interactions and processes. For example, the free energy of a single GC/CG stacking is 3.4 kcal/mol. This value is about half of the 7 kcal/mol of ATP hydrolysis ATPADP+PPi, which is the basic energy unit of most biological processes, such as transcription and translation. Therefore, the secondary structure can strongly influence biological processes involving RNA molecules. Recently, a few studies that measure the regulatory activities of miRNAs and siRNAs have revealed the importance of accessibility around the target regions to these functional RNAs (). An miRNA represses the expression of its target mRNAs by recognizing the 'seed' sequences in the target genes, which are about 7 bp in length and are complementary to the 5-end of the miRNA sequence. The repression will be inefficient if the seed sequences are buried within a strong secondary structure of the target mRNA so that the corresponding RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) cannot access them because of a high energy barrier (). An siRNA represses the expression of the target mRNA that has the sequence complementary to the antisense strand of the siRNA. The accessibility around the target sites has also been shown to influence the efficacy of siRNAs (). Despite the importance of the accessibility of interacting RNA molecules, there have been few studies investigating the regions of RNA sequences that do not form any base pairs (). In this article, we investigate the accessibilities around the (off-) target sites of siRNAs and miRNAs. We define the accessibility