Motivation: The position-weight matrix (PWM) is a useful representation of a transcription factor binding site (TFBS) sequence pattern because the PWM can be estimated from a small number of representative TFBS sequences. However, because the PWM probability model assumes independence between individual nucleotide positions, the PWMs for some TFs poorly discriminate binding sites from non-binding-sites that have similar sequence content. Since the local three-dimensional DNA structure (shape) is a determinant of TF binding specificity and since DNA shape has a significant sequence-dependence, we combined DNA shape-derived features into a TF-generalized regulatory score and tested whether the score could improve PWM-based discrimination of TFBS from non-binding-sites. Results: We compared a traditional PWM model to a model that combines the PWM with a DNA shape feature-based regulatory potential score, for accuracy in detecting binding sites for 75 vertebrate transcription factors. The PWM þ shape model was more accurate than the PWM-only model, for 45% of TFs tested, with no significant loss of accuracy for the remaining TFs. Availability and implementation: The shape-based model is available as an open-source R package at that is archived on the GitHub software repository at https://github.com/ramseylab/ regshape/.
IntroductionBinding of a transcription factor (TF) to its cognate binding site in DNA is a fundamental mechanism in gene regulation. Computational recognition of TF binding sites (TFBSs) within the noncoding genome is both a powerful source of mechanistic insights from gene expression data () and a central problem in bioinformatics. Experimentally, the binding sites for a TF can be mapped genome-wide using a ChIP-seq assay (), but applying ChIP-seq for each of the $2000 mammalian TFs or starting from rare cell populations is infeasible due to the need for high-affinity antibodies and/or due to the significant amount of chromatin required (). In comparison, in silico TFBS recognition is unmatched in terms of the breadth of potential TF regulators that can be simultaneously considered. A cornerstone of computational strategies for TFBS recognition is the encoding of a TF's binding site sequence pattern (learned from representative TFBS sequences) in a position-weight matrix (PWM) (). Uncharacterized noncoding DNA sequence is then scanned to identify high-scoring matches to the PWM, which are taken as probable TFBSs. The PWM is efficient for scanning, but as a standalone predictor it has high false-positive rates () because of the cell type-orcondition-dependent local epigenetic state (), limited representative binding sites for PWM estimation () and the fact that TFTFBS affinity can depend on combinations of nucleotides within the site (). Frameworks that are used to integrate such correlates include logistic regression (), the support vector machine (), Bayesian networks (), data fusion (), linear threshold model (), hidden Markov model () and Random Forest (). Extensions of PWM-based methods have been proposed that incorporate features that correlate with the probability that a basepair (bp) position coincides with a regulatory element (). Such correlates include phylogenetic conservation, (), TFBS co-localization (), nucleosome positioning (), histone acetylation (), motif conservation and TFBS co-localization () and chromatin signatures (). Methods that directly incorporate a PWM are valuable because for many TFs, a PWM is available but representative binding site sequences in the genome are not, such as for PWMs obtained from protein-binding arrays () or from structural modeling of the proteinDNA complex (). A new potential correlate, local DNA 'shape,' is suggested by the demonstration that TF binding site specificity depends on the sequence-dependent, three-dimensional shape of DNA (). Improvements in Monte Carlo-based modeling and in molecular dynamics-based modeling of DNA structure have enabled the development of DNAShape, a model that predicts local structural shape parameters for the DNA double helix (in a standardized reference frame and coordinate system;) from sliding pentamer DNA subsequences (). Here, we report the development of a classifier ('DNA shape classifier') for predicting whether a short (832 bp) DNA sequence from the noncoding genome is a TFBS for any TF, or whether it is a non-binding-site sequence. This generic classifier is based on a novel proceduredescribed hereinfor extracting sequence lengthindependent features from bp-level DNA shape parameters within the binding site. We then combined the DNA shape classifier score with the TF-specific PWM log-likelihood score () into an integrated model for TFBS prediction. Importantly, beyond the dependence of the PWM on representative binding site sequences, the model does not require any TF-specific training or parameter estimation. We compared the accuracy of the PWMshape model versus a PWM-only model for discriminating TF-specific binding sites within noncoding promoter model sequences, and we found that the shape classifier improved the positive predictive value (PPV) for TFBS recognition, for 34 out of the 75 TFs that we tested; for the remaining TFs, the PPV of the PWMshape model was not significantly lower than that of the PWM model.
DiscussionWe report the first implementation of a TF-generalized classifier based on local DNA shape parameters that improves PWM-based TFBS prediction. For both short sequences and in silico promoters, the proposed approach significantly improved the PPV for most TFs versus the traditional PWM method. This improvement was obtained with a simple shape score-based filtering criterion that did not require any training. Overall, filtering on DNA shape score decreased type I error by more than it increased type II error. It seems likely that TFBS recognition performance could be further improved by varying the voting fraction cutoff or by considering more sophisticated methods of combining features. General TFBS recognition performance by the shape-based classifier will likely be further improved as more TF ChIP-seq datasets are added to the training dataset, both by providing a more complete set of positive TFBS cases and by further eliminating false-negative cases from the NCTDTP sequences used in training the classifier. The use of TF-agnostic regulatory correlates, such as the novel shape score reported here, complement approaches that require TF-specific training using representative TFBS sequences (), with the two approaches addressing different problem domainsTFBS enrichment screening using the broadest collection of PWMs available, versus TF-specific TFBS recognition using a substantial set of representative training cases.