Motivation: Monoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are among the most powerful and important tools in biology and medicine. MAb development is of great significance to many research and clinical applications. Therefore, objective mAb classification is essential for categorizing and comparing mAb panels based on their reactivity patterns in different cellular species. However, typical flow cytometric mAb profiles present unique modeling challenges with their non-Gaussian features and intersample variations. It makes accurate mAb classification difficult to do with the currently used kernel-based or hierarchical clustering techniques. Results: To address these challenges, in the present study we developed a formal two-step framework called mAbprofiler for systematic, parametric characterization of mAb profiles. Further, we measured the reactivity of hundreds of new antibodies in diverse tissues using flow cytometry, which we successfully classified using mAbprofiler. First, mAbprofiler fits a mAbs flow cytometric histogram with a finite mixture model of skew t distributions that is robust against non-Gaussian features, and constructs a precise, smooth and mathematically rigorous profile. Then it performs novel curve clustering of the fitted mAb profiles using a skew t mixture of non-linear regression model that can handle intersample variation. Thus, mAbprofiler provides a new framework for identifying robust mAb classes, all well defined by distinct parametric templates, which can be used for classifying new mAb samples. We validated our classification results both computationally and empirically using mAb profiles of known classification.
INTRODUCTIONMonoclonal antibodies (mAbs) are among the most powerful, popular and important tools in a biomedical laboratory for probing different cellular types, states and functions. Research in the past decades has led to the development of large collections of mAb for specific binding to cell surface antigens, which facilitated purification and functional characterization of a variety of cell populations. It also unlocked the great potential of using mAb for therapy in many serious diseases such as cancer. Using platforms such as flow cytometry, one can measure quantitatively the binding of a mAb, in single cell resolution, to the corresponding antigen whose expression may serve as a marker of cellular characteristics for a given specimen, see. Therefore, it is important to characterize mAb reactivity patterns in different cell types and tissues with analytical precision and rigor so that both known and new mAb can be categorized and compared accurately and objectively. MAb classification is of great practical importance to many fields in biomedicine such as immunology, hematology, pathology and clinical immunotherapy. Large-scale attempts at analyzing mAb to identify new molecules were pioneered in the human leukocyte differentiation antigens (HLDAs) workshops [see review in Zola andwhere the reactivities of large panels of mAbs were measured against widely available cell lines. The reactivity was given a binary assignment compared with a negative controleither the antibody bound to its antigen on a given cell or it did notas measured by fluorescence intensity. The frequency with which this occurred over a cell population was then recorded, and hierarchical clustering was employed to group similar reactivity thus was born the 'Clusters of Differentiation' (CD) classes, widely used today to identify various cell populations (). In recent years, the workshop approach for identifying new molecules to define cell types has become less applicable due to the current capabilities of molecular identification at gene level (). An alternative approach for mAb characterization involves the use of primary cell populations that