Motivation: Motility is a fundamental cellular attribute, which plays a major part in processes ranging from embryonic development to metastasis. Traditionally, single cell motility is often studied by live cell imaging. Yet, such studies were so far limited to low throughput. To systematically study cell motility at a large scale, we need robust methods to quantify cell trajectories in live cell imaging data. Results: The primary contribution of this article is to present Motility study Integrated Workflow (MotIW), a generic workflow for the study of single cell motility in high-throughput time-lapse screening data. It is composed of cell tracking, cell trajectory mapping to an original feature space and hit detection according to a new statistical procedure. We show that this workflow is scalable and demonstrates its power by application to simulated data, as well as large-scale live cell imaging data. This application enables the identification of an ontology of cell motility patterns in a fully unsupervised manner. Availability and implementation
IntroductionHigh-throughput (HT) microscopy and high content screening (HCS) are state-of-the-art approaches to investigate many aspects of cellular organization and function, such as protein localization (), spatial transcriptomics () or drug screening (). In particular, when combined with a loss-of-function strategy, these approaches are now widely used to study the molecular basis of biological processes by monitoring the phenotypic consequences of downregulation or overexpression of genes of interest (). When performed at a large and ideally genome-wide scale, such screening approaches have become indispensable tools for functional genomics: they have the potential to provide us with a close to complete picture of the proteins involved in the process under study. Indeed, many large-scale phenotypic screens have been published previously, shedding light on the regulation of such diverse cellular processes as protein secretion (), endocytosis () or cell division (). Such screens do not only provide lists of candidate genes for further follow-up studies and for computational modeling approaches, they also generate large image databases. Those can turn out to be a precious scientific resourceas a collection of experimental data for punctual queries or as a basis for systematic and potentially integrative computational analysis. Although it has always been a strength in bioinformatics to rely on rich publicly available data sources, the use and re-use of image data is not straightforward. On the one hand, this is due to the lack of standardized data formats () and ontologies (). On the other hand, the computational tools which are necessary to perform such V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.
DiscussionThis article presents a generic methodological framework for studying single cell motility in a HT setup. It combines single cell tracking, newly designed trajectory features and an original statistical procedure. Furthermore, its output could be used to obtain an ontology of cell motility in an unsupervised manner: cell motion types were inferred from the data without using any prior knowledge. We found that clustering procedures might not scale in the presence of great biological variability, as is typically observed in HT datasets. We suspect that this is due to highly unbalanced classes and large biological variability. Taken together, those effects produce continuous looking datasets. However, applying hit detection with the described statistical procedure prior to clustering solved the problem for our trajectory analysis. It may be a promising procedure to apply to other clustering problems in HCS, such as clustering of nuclear or cellular morphologies. As cell population migration during metastasis are thought to be led by some leader cell, it is crucial to study single cell motility. The workflow we have presented in this article allows to quantify single cell trajectories. Therefore its application to large-scale datasets will provide useful insights into the molecular regulation of single cell motility, thereby complementing previous studies on collective cell migration. The application of this workflow is not limited to RNAi data. In a next step, we are going to apply this workflow to newly generatedEnvironmental Toxicology data in order to identify environmentally relevant chemicals which perturb cell motility.Studying single cell motility in HCS data i327