Motivation: Identifying piwi-interacting RNAs (piRNAs) of non-model organisms is a difficult and unsolved problem because piRNAs lack conservative secondary structure motifs and sequence homology in different species. Results: In this article, a k-mer scheme is proposed to identify piRNA sequences, relying on the training sets from non-piRNA and piRNA sequences of five model species sequenced: rat, mouse, human, fruit fly and nematode. Compared with the existing static scheme based on the position-specific base usage, our novel dynamic algorithm performs much better with a precision of over 90% and a sensitivity of over 60%, and the precision is verified by 5-fold cross-validation in these species. To test its validity, we use the algorithm to identify piRNAs of the migratory locust based on 603 607 deep-sequenced small RNA sequences. Totally, 87 536 piRNAs of the locust are predicted, and 4426 of them matched with existing locust transposons. The transcriptional difference between solitary and gregarious locusts was described. We also revisit the position-specific base usage of piRNAs and find the conservation in the end of piRNAs. Therefore, the method we developed can be used to identify piRNAs of non-model organisms without complete genome sequences. Availability: The web server for implementing the algorithm and the software code are freely available to the academic community at
INTRODUCTIONNon-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are functional RNA molecules that are not translated into proteins, including highly abundant and functionally important RNAs such as transfer RNA (tRNA) and ribosomal RNA (rRNA), as well as other RNAs such as snoRNAs, microRNAs, siRNAs and piRNAs and the long ncRNAs. Among them, the ones of typically 20 30 nt in length are called small RNA. Piwi-interacting RNA (piRNA) is the largest class of small * To whom correspondence should be addressed.RNA molecules expressed in animal cells, especially in germ cells, and 2532 nt long in general (). piRNAs form RNAprotein complexes through interactions with PIWI proteins, and has no clear secondary structure motifs (), and its length is slightly longer than miRNA. Compared with miRNAs, piRNA is lack of primary sequence conservation, and the presence of a 5 uridine is common in both vertebrates and invertebrates. piRNAs in the nematode have a 5 monophosphate and a 3 modification that block either 2 or 3 oxygen (), and are confirmed to exist in fruit fly (), zebrafish (), mice () and rats (). PIWI/ARGONAUTE (also known as PAZPIWI domain or PPD) protein family is evolutionarily conserved owing to its functional significance in stem cell self-renewal and germline development (). piRNA derives from the post-transcriptional amplification 'PingPong Model', and it may be involved in germ cell formation, germline stem cell maintenance, spermiogenesis and oogenesis (). Therefore, available piRNA data mainly come from model species with complete genome sequences. A general approach to detecting piRNA is based on the combination of immunoprecipitation and deep sequencing in model and sequenced organisms (). However, the lowly expressed or issue-specific piRNAs might be missed using this method. In addition, some of piRNAs are not produced by 'Ping-Pong Model' (). Thus, computational methods may provide an alternative approach to detect piRNAs, which can summarize general properties from known piRNAs and then train them to predict novel piRNAs.first use the position-specific usage of 10 upstream bases and 10 downstream bases of 5 U to construct a vector with 214 components, by which they characterized and identified mouse piRNAs with a precision of 6172%. They also found that mouse piRNAs have some position-special properties, such as G or A at +1 position, A at +4 position and a slight underrepresentation of G at 1 position. However, their method has limitations in predicting piRNAs from the organism without genome information (). Meanwhile, this method cannot efficiently detect those piRNAs derived from 3 UTR of mRNA, which are not produced by 'Ping-Pong Model' (). Furthermore, piRNA sequences are quite divergent among different species (Lakshmi and Agrawal,Page: 772 771776). Most general methods, such as BLAST and MEME, are inappropriate for piRNA prediction. For example, we cannot find any homologous piRNAs between fruit fly and other species with BLAST; and not any conserved motifs are found in piRNAs with MEME. Therefore, more efficient computational methods are urgently demanded. The k-mer scheme is widely used to characterize biosequences (), because patterns using k-mers have been found to be species or taxon special (). It is important to note that, the Solexa small RNA data may also include miRNA, piRNA, as well as some short fractions of snoRNA, snRNA, long ncRNA and un-annotated mRNAs, which have similar lengths to piRNA. In fact, NONCODE version 2.0 () has 9257/20 7765 = 4.46% ncRNAs shorter than 25 nt, suggesting that most ncRNA may produce a sequence fraction with similar length to piRNA. Moreover, possible background noise also exists, including the background information introduced by Solexa, the degraded RNA fragments in sample preparation and the noise caused by the random match of data with genome. Studies ofdemonstrated that there are about 3040% short sequences in 603 607 possible candidates of locust small RNAs are unannotated. On the other words, there are about 200 000 unannoted small RNAs in which there would be a huge number of piRNAs and other short sequences. Obviously, these remaining sequences could cover real piRNAs, the fractions of long ncRNAs, unannotated mRNAs and noise produced by Solexa. Therefore, piRNAs in Solexa small RNA data cannot be identified merely based on their lengths. In order to predict piRNAs, an efficient algorithm is required to distinguish the real piRNA from the sequences within similar range of length. Here, we used all the 1364 15 nt strings and an improved Fisher Discriminant algorithm to characterize piRNA sequences in five model species: rat, mouse, human, fruit fly and nematode. The novel algorithm reached a prediction precision of over 90% and a sensitivity of over 60% in these species. We applied this algorithm to the deep-sequenced small RNA data () of the migratory locust (Locusta migratoria), which is an important agricultural pest and model species for physiology, neuroscience and behavior. This method successfully identified 87 536 piRNAs of the locust with the same precision and sensitivity as the five model species. Therefore, the method proposed in this study can be used to predict piRNAs for both model and non-model organisms.
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we implemented a k-mer algorithm to predict piRNAs. Compared with previous approaches, the new method does not require a reference genome and gives a much better performance on piRNA prediction. We also improved the Fisher algorithm by setting different cutoffs and elevating the precision rate. The basic work is to obtain the Fisher vector w, the mean value m 2 and the SD N std of the negative samples. Then, a sequence represented by a 1364 D vector x can be regarded as a piRNA if its w  x is larger than m 2 +2N std. Using this new scheme, we obtained 87 536 putative piRNAs from the locust, which would be very helpful in studying the phase transition mechanism of insects, especially hemimetamorphosis insects. Moreover, the 84 locust piRNAs, which have the largest ratio of solitary to gregarious reads, and the 4426 locust piRNAs matched with existing transposons may provide excellent candidates Page: 776 771776for studying phase transition via locust transcriptome and RNAi experiments. On the other hand, the results provided important cues understanding the molecular mechanism of fecundity difference between solitary and gregarious locusts. Most notably different from other methods in literatures, the novel prediction approach is based on the general property of string usage in piRNAs, which is extracted from all available piRNAs. We believe that this method can be widely used to predict piRNAs from both model and non-model organisms.