Motivation: Recent advances of next-generation sequence technologies have made it possible to rapidly and inexpensively identify gene variations. Knowing the disease association of these gene variations is important for early intervention to treat deadly diseases and provide possible targets to cure these diseases. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified many individual genes associated with common diseases. To exploit the large amount of data obtained from GWAS studies and leverage our understanding of common as well as rare diseases, we have developed a knowledge-based approach to predict gene–disease associations. We first derive gene–gene mutual information by utilizing the cooccurrence of genes in known gene–disease association data. Subsequently, the mutual information is combined with known protein–protein interaction networks by a boosted tree regression method. Results: The method called Know-GENE is compared with the method of random walking on the heterogeneous network using the same input data. For a set of 960 diseases, using the same training data in testing in 3-fold cross-validation, the average recall rate within the top ranked 100 genes by Know-GENE is 65.0% compared with 37.9% by the state of the art random walking on heterogeneous network. This significant improvement is mostly due to the inclusion of knowledge-based mutual information. Availability and Implementation: Predictions for genes associated with the 960 diseases are available at
IntroductionComplex diseases such as Parkinson's Disease (PD) are attributed to both genetic and/or environmental causes (). Environmental toxins cause disease through their effects on genes (). Knowing the genes associated with a disease is useful for preventing and curing the disease. It is also fundamentally important for understanding the biological functions of genes. Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) posit that multiple, common small-risk variants interact to cause common diseases (). GWAS relies on testing several hundred thousand common genetic variants found throughout the human genome in large-control cohorts. Over the past few years, many gene loci have been implicated as associated with various human diseases by GWAS (www.genome.gov/gwastudies/) as well as linkage studies (). Despite the fruitful insights provided by GWAS, heritability estimates have shown that large proportions of genetic risk underlying complex disease have not yet been explained (). This is due to lack of the ability to detect 'common disease by rare variants' using a GWAS approach. The introduction of nextgeneration sequencing technologies allows cost-effective sequencing of entire genomes and has led to the discovery of numerous rare variants in the human genome. The disease associations of these rare variants cannot be inferred by GWAS for further experimental verification. Thus, alternative computational methods that predict the association of gene with a given disease have been developed V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com (). The general idea of prediction methods is the 'guilt by association' principle () with respect to a set of known genes related to the given disease. The most frequently used types of evidence for inference of association are (): (i) text mining of the biomedical literature; (ii) phenotype relationships such as diseasedisease similarity; (iii) proteinprotein interactions; (iv) regulatory information and (v) gene expression information. For example, Vanused a text-mining approach to associate genes with human phenotypes found in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (). K hler et al. found genedisease associations by using a global network distance measurea random walk analysisfor the definition of similarities in proteinprotein interaction networks (the 'interactome'). Encouragingly, they find that this approach significantly outperforms previous methods based on local distance measures in the interactome (). A slightly modified approach called 'network propagation' that differs from a random walk only in the normalization of the adjacency matrix W representing the interactome () has also been developed. The random walk method normalizes the adjacency matrix W by columns (the summation of each column equals to one), whereas the network propagation normalizes W by the diagonal matrix: W ij  W ij = ffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffiffi ffi D i; i  D j; j   p , where D i; k    P k W ik. An extension of the random walk approach is walking on a heterogeneous network that includes proteinprotein interaction, diseasedisease and genedisease networks (). Singhhave developed a truncated version of the random walking on a heterogeneous network by using a limited steps for the walks but it also includes phenotypes from multiple species. The method uses simple dampening coefficients for longer walks and learns the coefficients for longer walks using a support vector machine (SVM) (). Natarajan and Dhillon (2014)developed an inductive method that uses a machine learning approach to incorporate different biological sources of evidence such as microarray expression data, gene functional interaction data and disease-related textual data from human as well as other species. The best performing of the aforementioned methods for prioritizing genes associated with a given disease is the inductive matrix completion developed by Natarajan and Dhillon (2014). It has an average recall rate of 25% within the top 100 ranked genes. There are also many disease specific methods that focus on a single or group of diseases to prioritize genes for further experimental validation. For a survey of methods for predicting genedisease association, please see Piro and Di Cunto (2012). Here, we develop a new type of approach for prioritizing candidate genes associated with a given disease. Our approach applies the idea of word association in the context of texts () to genegene association in the context of diseases and then employs genegene association to infer genedisease association. This is a knowledge-based approach that learns genegene association propensity in diseases from known genedisease association. It is also analogous to methods of knowledge-based statistical potentials for protein structure prediction that learn residueresidue or atomatom pairwise interaction potentials from experimental protein structures (). Mutual information () is used to measure the strength of genegene association in a given disease. Owing to the increasing amount of data for known genedisease associations, the mutual information of genegene pairs can be derived from these known associations. Subsequently, mutual information is combined with the properties of the proteinprotein physical interaction network by means of boosted tree regression (). The resulting method called Know-GENE is then benchmarked in 3-fold crossvalidation (training on 2/3 of the known genedisease associations and testing on the remaining 1/3) and compared with network propagation, random walking on the interactome as well as on the heterogeneous network-based methods. For 960 diseases defined by the medical subject headings (MeSHs) ontology with at least two known seed genes associated with a given disease [as provided by the OMIM and GWAS databases (, using the same input evidence (known genedisease association and interactome), Know-GENE achieves a significantly better recall rate (65.0%) within the top 100 ranked of 15 948 total screened genes compared with the network propagation (19.2%), the random walk on interactome (18.1%) and the random walk on heterogeneous network (37.9%) methods. Thus, Know-GENE is a promising method for prioritizing candidate genes associated with a given disease. Then, we apply Know-GENE in prediction mode (training on all known genedisease associations) to predict and rank genes in the human exome for each of the 960 diseases. Likewise, our predictions can rank diseases for a given gene, a useful feature for diagnosing diseases in a given mutated gene. It is also useful for predicting and understanding possible side effects of drug targets. Predictions are available for academic users at http:// cssb2.biology.gatech.edu/knowgene.
DiscussionWe have developed a knowledge-based approach Know-GENE for prioritizing genes associated with given disease. Likewise, it can also prioritize diseases associated with a given gene. The novelty of Know-GENE is in the derivation of genegene mutual information from the cooccurrence frequency of pairs of genes in a large number of diseases with a known set of genedisease associations. With this novel technique, Know-GENE performs much better than the best existing method of walking on the heterogeneous network using exactly the same input information (recall rate within top 100 ranked genes: 65.0 versus 37.9%). Both Know-GENE and walking on the heterogeneous network utilize information from the known genedisease associations and perform much better than methods without using this information. For example, the network propagation method has a recall rate of 19.2%, which is about half that by the method of random walk on the heterogeneous network. All tested methods perform better for diseases having core genes than) THAP1_HUMAN 0.890 Support: THAP1 gene is part of a family of THAP proteins that bind specific DNA sequences and regulate cell proliferation through the pRB/E2F cell cycle target genes, a pathway recently proposed to be involved in cell death in PD (for those lacking core genes. When used for prioritizing diseases for a given gene, Know-GENE has an average recall rate of 77.1%. A disadvantage of Know-GENE as well as the method of walking on the heterogeneous network is that it does not perform well for genes that are not present in any of the diseases used in deriving the mutual information (test on singletons). In practice, for such genes, we can choose an alternative method such as KnowGENE without using mutual information or the network propagation method. Possible further improvement of Know-GENE could come from enriching more genes with more verified disease associations and including them in deriving mutual information. These could be fulfilled by literature searches for associations with high Know-GENE prediction scores and then using the supported associations in training. This process could be iterated. For those genes without any known disease associations, other sources for deriving their mutual information are sought. For example, one possibility is the covariation of gene expression data in individuals with a given disease. Cooccurrence of gene pairs in pathways is another possible source. These and other alternatives will be explored in future work.