Motivation: Computational modeling of protein–DNA complexes remains a challenging problem in structural bioinformatics. One of the key factors for a successful protein–DNA docking is a potential function that can accurately discriminate the near-native structures from decoy complexes and at the same time make conformational sampling more efficient. Here, we developed a novel orientation-dependent, knowledge-based, residue-level potential for improving transcription factor (TF)-DNA docking. Results: We demonstrated the performance of this new potential in TF–DNA binding affinity prediction, discrimination of native protein– DNA complex from decoy structures, and most importantly in rigid TF–DNA docking. The rigid TF–DNA docking with the new orientation potential, on a benchmark of 38 complexes, successfully predicts 42% of the cases with root mean square deviations lower than 1 A ˚ and 55% of the cases with root mean square deviations lower than 3 A ˚. The results suggest that docking with this new orientation-dependent, coarse-grained statistical potential can achieve high-docking accuracy and can serve as a crucial first step in multi-stage flexible protein–DNA docking. Availability and implementation: The new potential is available at
INTRODUCTIONProteinDNA interactions play crucial roles in many biological processes. Transcription factors (TFs), which bind to specific cis-regulatory elements on DNA and regulate gene expression, represent one of the largest groups of proteins in many genomes (). How TFs recognize and bind specifically to their DNA target sequences, despite of decades of efforts, is still not fully understood. Benefited from the technical advances in experimental structure determination, high-resolution structures of TFDNA complexes have provided a glimpse of TFDNA interaction in each complex. A collection of such views may offer valuable insights into the molecular mechanism of TFDNA recognition and the evolution of gene regulatory networks (). A TFDNA complex model is also a starting point for structure-based TF-binding site prediction, which has received much research attention recently (). Despite technical advances in experimental structure determination, only a small percentage of TFDNA complex structures have been solved and deposited in Protein Data Bank (PDB) (). Computational docking between a protein and DNA, on the other hand, has been considered as a cost-efficient alternative to the usually time-consuming experimental methods. Macromolecule docking relies on some sorts of energy functions for building complex models (). There are two major types of the potentials for studying protein DNA interactions: physics-based () and knowledge-based (). For example, van Dijk et al. applied a physics-based potential, originally developed for proteinprotein docking, to proteinDNA docking (van). Knowledge-based potentials, derived from experimental structures, are considered more attractive and have more practical value in structural bioinformatics studies owing to their relative simplicity (). These knowledgebased potentials generally vary in their resolutions, from residue-level to atom-level and in their distance scales, from distance-independent to distance-dependent (). Although high-resolution, atomic-level potentials can provide the details needed to accurately discriminate near-native structures from decoys, coarse-grained potentials can have a smooth and less-rugged energy landscape, making it less likely to get trapped in local minima during conformational search (). Another advantage of the coarse-grained potentials at residue-nucleotide level is their capability in addressing the dynamic nature of macromolecules, as they are less sensitive to small conformational changes (). To take advantage of both the coarse-level and the atomic-level potentials, multi-scale approaches are often adopted, in which near-native models are constructed first with a coarse-level potential followed by refinement with high-resolution potentials ().In this study, we focus on the development of a novel knowledge-based, residue-level potential for accurate docking between TFs and their DNA target sequences. Previous studies have revealed different interaction 'modes' between TFs and other major types of DNA-binding proteins, such as restriction enzymes and non-specific DNA-binding proteins (). In addition, the negatively charged residues, aspartate and glutamate, are overrepresented in restriction enzymes compared with other types of DNA-binding proteins (). As the major goal of this study is to develop a proteinDNA interaction potential for assessing TFDNA binding affinity in TFDNA docking, non-TF proteinDNA complexes including restriction enzymes and non-specific DNA-binding proteins are not included in the dataset for potential development. Liu et al. have previously developed a knowledge-based, residue-level potential based on statistical analysis of known TFDNA complex structures (). The potential uses DNA tri-nucleotides, called triplets, as an interaction unit to study the interactions between TF and DNA molecules. The triplets could be real nucleotides with explicit positions (native nucleotides) or pseudo-nucleotide placeholders that do not make any structural or energy contribution toward potential calculation. The triplet representation has the advantage of covering both the preference of individual bases and the local environment around the nucleotides. It has been shown that this multi-body potential performs well in assessing TFDNA interactions and in proteinDNA docking (). The binding specificity between a DNA and a protein is generally contributed by hydrogen bonds. It has been shown that two-thirds of the hydrogen bonds between amino acids and bases lead to specific complex interactions (). Kono and Sarai have previously studied the radial and angular distributions for hydrogen bonds and found that the angular distributions of protein atoms around potential hydrogen-bond forming atoms of bases have different patterns (). The strength of a hydrogen bond is usually defined by bond length(s) and angle(s) between a donor and an acceptor (;). Therefore, adding angular information to a statistical potential can be expected to improve the accuracy in assessing TFDNA binding affinity and specificity. In this article, we present an orientation-dependent, knowledge-based potential derived from a non-redundant set of TF DNA complex structures through converting the observed frequencies of base-residue pairs with respect to both distances and angles to a potential based on Boltzmann's principle. The performance of the new potential was assessed through binding affinity prediction and TFDNA rigid docking. The results show much better accuracy in TFDNA binding affinity prediction and rigid TFDNA docking with the new orientation potential when compared with the residue potential without angle information.