Motivation: Exploring the genetic basis of heritable traits remains one of the central challenges in biomedical research. In traits with simple Mendelian architectures, single polymorphic loci explain a significant fraction of the phenotypic variability. However, many traits of interest seem to be subject to multifactorial control by groups of genetic loci. Accurate detection of such multivariate associations is non-trivial and often compromised by limited statistical power. At the same time, confounding influences, such as population structure, cause spurious association signals that result in false-positive findings. Results: We propose linear mixed models LMM-Lasso, a mixed model that allows for both multi-locus mapping and correction for confounding effects. Our approach is simple and free of tuning parameters ; it effectively controls for population structure and scales to genome-wide datasets. LMM-Lasso simultaneously discovers likely causal variants and allows for multi-marker–based phenotype prediction from genotype. We demonstrate the practical use of LMM-Lasso in genome-wide association studies in Arabidopsis thaliana and linkage mapping in mouse, where our method achieves significantly more accurate phenotype prediction for 91% of the considered phenotypes. At the same time, our model dissects the phenotypic variability into components that result from individual single nucleotide polymorph-ism effects and population structure. Enrichment of known candidate genes suggests that the individual associations retrieved by LMM-Lasso are likely to be genuine.
INTRODUCTIONAlthough many quantitative traits in humans, plants and animals have been observed to be heritable, a comprehensive understanding of the underlying genetic architecture is still missing. In some cases, genome-wide association studies and linkage mapping have already revealed individual causal variants that control trait variability, for example, genetic mapping yielded insights into the genetic architecture of global-level traits in plants () and mouse (), as well as the risks for important human diseases, such as type 2 diabetes (). Nevertheless, the statistical analysis of these genetic data has proven to be challenging, not least because single-genetic variants rarely explain larger fractions of phenotype variability; hence, individual effect sizes are small (). An inherent limitation of power to map weak effects is because of confounding relatedness between samples. Population structure can induce false association patterns with large numbers of loci being correlated with the phenotype. To understand the true genetic architecture of complex traits, it is necessary to address both of these challenges, taking population structure into account and joint modelling of true multifactorial associations. If multiple variants contribute to phenotype variation in an additive fashion, simple methods that assess the significance of individual loci independently are likely to fall short: masking effects between causal single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can limit mapping power, with relevant loci not reaching genome-wide significance levels (). These shortcomings have been widely addressed in multivariate regression, explicitly modelling the additive effects of multiple SNPs. The corresponding methods either fit sparse predictors of all genome-wide SNPs, using a shrinkage prior or use stepwise forward selection (). Applying a Laplace prior leads to the Lasso (), and related priors have also been considered (). With the same ultimate goal to capture the genetic effects of groups of SNPs, variance component models have recently been proposed to quantify the heritable component of phenotype variation explainable by an excess of weak effects (). Population structure induces spurious correlations between genotype and phenotype, complicating the genetic analysis. A major source of these effects can be understood as deviation from the idealized assumption that the samples in the study population are unrelated. Instead, population structure in the sample is difficult to avoid, and even in a seemingly stratified sample, the extent of hidden structure cannot be ignored (). Models that account for the presence of such structure are routinely applied and have been shown to greatly reduce the impact of this confounding source of variability. For instance, EIGENSTRAT builds on the idea of extracting the major axes of population differentiation using a principal component analysis *To whom correspondence should be addressed. decomposition of the genotype data (), and subsequently including them into the model as additional covariates. Linear mixed models () provide for more fine-grained control by modelling the contribution of population structure as a random effect, providing for an effective correction of family structure and cryptic relatedness. Although both, correction for population structure and joint mapping of multiple weak effects, have been addressed in isolation, few existing approaches are capable of addressing both aspects jointly. In line with EIGENSTRAT,andadd principal components to the model to correct for population structure. In parallel to our work, Segura et al. (2012) have proposed a related multi-locus mixed model approach, however, using stepwise forward selection instead of using the Lasso. Here, we propose a novel analysis approach that combines multivariate association analysis with accurate correction for population structure. Our method allows for joint identification of sets of loci that individually have small effects and at the same time accounts for possible structure between samples. This joint modelling explains larger fractions of the total phenotype variability while dissecting it in variance components specific to individual SNP effects and population effects. Our approach bridges the advantages of linear mixed models with Lasso regression; hence, modelling complex genetic effects while controlling for relatedness in a comprehensive fashion. The proposed linear mixed models (LMM)-Lasso is conceptually simple, computationally efficient and scales to genome-wide settings. Experiments on semi-empirical data show that the rigorous combination of Lasso and mixed modelling approaches yields greater power to detect true causal effects in a large range of settings. In retrospective analyses of studies from Arabidopsis and mouse, we show that through joint modelling of population structure and individual SNP effects, LMM-Lasso results in superior models of the genotype to phenotype map. These yield better quantitative predictions of phenotypes while selecting only a moderate number of SNP with individual effects. Additional evidence of the effects uncovered by LMM-Lasso likely being real is given by an enrichment analysis, suggesting that the hits obtained are often in the vicinity of genes with known implication for the phenotype.