Motivation: Multiple sequence alignments can be constructed on the basis of pairwise local sequence similarities. This approach is rather flexible and can combine the advantages of global and local alignment methods. The restriction to pairwise alignments as building blocks, however, can lead to misalignments since weak homologies may be missed if only pairs of sequences are compared. Results: Herein, we propose a graph-theoretical approach to find local multiple sequence similarities. Starting with pairwise alignments produced by DIALIGN, we use a min-cut algorithm to find potential (partial) alignment columns that we use to construct a final multiple alignment. On real and simulated benchmark data, our approach consistently outperforms the standard version of DIALIGN where local pairwise alignments are greedily incorporated into a multiple alignment.
INTRODUCTIONMultiple sequence alignment (MSA) is a requisite for almost all aspects of computational sequence analysis, but it is a notoriously difficult task, seeor Kemena and Notredame (2009) for recent reviews. Traditionally, alignment methods have been characterized as either local () or global (). The idea of including local alignment information into global alignment tools was first implemented in DIALIGN () and is also used in more recent tools such as T-Coffee () or MAFFT (). Most approaches for MSA are based on well-defined objective functions and try to find optimal or near-optimal MSAs according to these functions. Traditional objective functions for pairwise alignment are defined by summing up individual substitution scores and gap penalties (); this can be extended to multiple alignment using a (weighted) sum-ofpairs (SPs) or tree-alignment approach. These objective functions * To whom correspondence should be addressed. have a probabilistic interpretation and can be formulated in a hidden Markov model (HMM) framework (). More recently, segment-based objective functions () and objective functions based on probabilistic consistency () have been proposed. A promising new approach is the use of conditional random fields for MSA as proposed by. Since the optimal multiple alignment problem is NP-hard under any reasonable objective function, virtually all MSA programs are based on heuristic optimization algorithms. Most of these heuristics work by integrating rather simple partial alignments into a final multiple alignment. For global alignment, paradigmatically represented by ClustalW (), this is usually done by progressive alignment. Here, single sequences and profiles of related sequences are aligned until all input sequences are included in a multiple alignment. In contrast, in the segment-based approach implemented in DIALIGN, local similarities are integrated sequentially under the constraints imposed by a certain consistency criterion. More recently, the progressive approach has also been applied to the segment-based alignment though (). Consistency is an order-theoretic condition that ensures the compatibility of the local similarities with the linear structure of a global alignment (). Shortly spoken, a set of (partial) alignments A 1 ,...,A k is called consistent, if an alignment A of the input sequences exists such that each of the alignments A i is represented in A. In the DIALIGN program, the raw material from which a multiple alignment is built is a set of pairwise gap-free local alignments. Such partial alignments are called fragment alignments or, shorter, fragments. Thus, a fragment is represented as a pair of segments of the same length from two of the input sequences. Each fragment is given a weight score based on the probability of its random occurrence, and the optimization task is to find a consistent set of fragments with maximum total weight. For pairwise alignment, a consistent set of fragments is a chain of fragments, i.e. a set of fragments where for any two fragments one of them is strictly to the left of the other one. An optimal alignment in this approach is, therefore, a chain of fragments with maximum total weight and can be found by dynamic programming, either using standard fragment-chaining algorithms (), or by a more space-efficient algorithm that is implemented in DIALIGN (). For multiple alignment, fragments from the respective optimal pairwise alignments are greedily included or discarded according to their consistency with each other.Page: 1016 10151021
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we introduced a new way of composing MSAs from local pairwise alignments. We first use DIALIGN to construct all optimal pairwise alignments in the sense of, i.e. for each sequence pair, we search for a chain of fragments with total maximum weight. Unlike DIALIGN, however, we do not include these fragments directly into a multiple alignment. Instead, we use a graph-theoretical approach to obtain potential (partial) alignment columns based on the DIALIGN fragments. To alignThese databases consist of simulated sequences with local homologies in otherwise unrelated sequences. Notation as in. the remainder of the sequences, we use these partial columns as anchor points in DIALIGN. Thus, the major difference between our approach and the original version of DIALIGN is the fact that we use local multiple sequence similarities rather than pairwise similarities as a basis for MSA. The restriction to local pairwise similarities as building blocks for multiple alignment is a major drawback of DIALIGN. DIALIGN is one of the best methods for local multiple alignment. It also produces good global alignments if sequences are related over their entire length. For sequences with weak global sequence similarity, however, DIALIGN is often outperformed by global alignment methods. With the new approach that we proposed, we focus on local similarities that span more than two sequences; this seems to be a promising way to overcome the current limitations of DIALIGN. Approaches to multiple alignment have two basic components: an objective function assigning quality scores to possible alignments and an optimization procedure for finding high-scoring alignments in the sense of the chosen objective function. Thus, the failure of an alignment program to produce reasonable alignments can have two reasons: the objective function may assign optimal scores to biologically wrong alignments, or the optimization algorithm may fail to find a (near-)optimal alignment. In, we compared the numerical scores of the improved alignments calculated with our new method to the scores of the standard DIALIGN alignments. In four out of six reference sets in BAliBASE, the DIALIGN alignments have on average higher numerical scores than the biologically superior alignments produced by our new approach. This clearly demonstrates that the objective function currently used in DIALIGN is flawed. Possible reasons for the shortcomings of this objective function are discussed in. Thus, it is unlikely that DIALIGN can be further improved by applying more efficient optimization algorithms on the basis of the current objective function. Instead, it seems worthwhile to investigate novel objective functions for the segment-based alignment problem. Probabilistic approaches may provide a way of optimising the weight parameters used by DIALIGN, for example, by using conditional random fields. Also, it seems worthwhile to use (partial) multiple local alignments instead of pairwise fragments as building blocks for MSA and to develop improved objective functions based on such partial multiple alignments.