Motivation: Similarity search is the foundation of bioinformatics. It plays a key role in establishing structural, functional and evolutionary relationships between biological sequences. Although the power of the similarity search has increased steadily in recent years, a high percentage of sequences remain uncharacterized in the protein universe. Thus, new similarity search strategies are needed to efficiently and reliably infer the structure and function of new sequences. The existing paradigm for studying protein sequence, structure, function and evolution has been established based on the assumption that the protein universe is discrete and hierarchical. Cumulative evidence suggests that the protein universe is continuous. As a result, conventional sequence homology search methods may be not able to detect novel structural, functional and evolutionary relationships between proteins from weak and noisy sequence signals. To overcome the limitations in existing similarity search methods, we propose a new algorithmic framework—Enrichment of Network Topological Similarity (ENTS)—to improve the performance of large scale similarity searches in bioinformatics. Results: We apply ENTS to a challenging unsolved problem: protein fold recognition. Our rigorous benchmark studies demonstrate that ENTS considerably outperforms state-of-the-art methods. As the concept of ENTS can be applied to any similarity metric, it may provide a general framework for similarity search on any set of biological entities, given their representation as a network. Availability and implementation: Source code freely available upon request Contact: lxie@iscb.org
IntroductionRecent advances in whole-genome sequencing and high-throughput techniques have generated a vast amount of sequence and omics data. One critical bottleneck in the post-genome era is the discernment of the biological meaning of uncharacterized sequences in the context of complex phenotypes. Similarity search, as the foundation of bioinformatics, plays a key role in establishing structural, functional and evolutionary relationships between biological sequences. In the case of protein function annotation and structure determination, although the power of the similarity search has increased steadily in recent years, the protein universe still contains a high percentage of 'dark matter', which consists of proteins that cannot be characterized by existing experimental or computational techniques (). Thus, new similarity search strategies are needed to identify homologs of new sequences efficiently and reliably and to infer their structures and functions in the context of biological systems via integrating heterogeneous omics data.An increasing body of evidence suggests that protein space is continuous in general, although there exist discrete islands (). It implies that two proteins could be related even if their pairwise similarity is undetectable. Thus, the protein universe is better represented as a graph, where each node is a protein. Two nodes are connected if there is a detectable relationship between them (). In this way, two remotely related proteins can be connected through a transitive path (). However, widely used sequence similarity search methods such as PSI-BLAST () and hidden Markov model (HMM,), and conventional protein sequence and structure classification schema such as Pfam (), structural classification of proteins (SCOP,) and CATH () are built on the assumption that protein space is discrete and hierarchical. As a result, novel structural and functional relationships can be missed if two sequences are very divergent. A network-based method, which connects all sequences into a graph model and exploits the global network structure of similarity relationships between proteins in a database, provides an alternative solution to explore the protein space in a continuous fashion (). Although it has demonstrated its potential in detecting novel relationships that could be missed by the pairwisebased method (), the existing network-based method has two fundamental limitations. First, it provides the ranking of similarities but gives no information on their reliabilities. A model that can assess the statistical significance of similarity is one of the key components in both pairwise-based and profile-based methods and is critical in distinguishing true and false positives and enhancing the sensitivity of a similarity search. Second, few network-based methods can combine sequence and structural similarity. The incorporation of structural similarity into sequence profile has been successfully applied to detecting novel sequencestructure relationships, as the structure is more conserved than the sequence (). In this article, we introduce a new similarity search method, Enrichment of Network Topological Similarity (ENTS), to address challenges in protein similarity search in terms of the continuous protein space. ENTS synthesizes several concepts: network inference to detect the global similarity of a protein, grouping of relevant proteins as a network profile, incorporation of structural information into the sequence search and an efficient statistics model to assess the reliability of the network topological similarity profile. We apply ENTS to a challenging unsolved problem: protein fold recognition. Our rigorous benchmark studies demonstrate that ENTS significantly outperforms state-of-the-art profile-and network-based methods for protein structure prediction. Moreover, ENTS can integrate different similarity measurements (e.g. sequence similarity and structure similarity) and biological classifications (e.g. SCOP) to infer novel protein structure and function. As the principal concept of ENTS can be applied to any similarity metric, ENTS provides a new general framework to boost the performance of the similarity search and may inspire novel methodologies in broad areas of bioinformatics, such as RNA structure prediction and disease gene identification.
ConclusionSimilarity is a fundamental concept in bioinformatics and the emerging discipline of data science, which seeks to harness big data to improve data-driven decision making. In this article, we propose a new method for computing statistically significant similarity via integrating similarity profiles, network topological similarity and set enrichment analysis. Because ENTS applies to any similarity metric, it is poised to make several contributions to bioinformatics. Individual predictive reliability is essential in risk-sensitive applications. ENTS is able to determine the statistical significance of any similarity metric and provides guidance for reliable discovery in large data sets. Robustness to noisy and incomplete data sets is important in bioinformatics applications. Many bioinformatics tasks need to handle data sets that are partially and/or positive-only labeled. ENTS provides a new approach to handling noisy and incomplete data. Thus, it is expected that ENTS has broad applications in bioinformatics.