Motivation: The discovery of new and unexpected biomarkers in cardiovascular disease is a highly data-driven process that requires the complementary power of modern metabolite profiling technologies, bioinformatics and biostatistics. Clinical biomarkers of early myocardial injury are lacking. A prospective biomarker cohort study was carried out to identify, categorize and profile kinetic patterns of early metabolic biomarkers of planned myocardial infarction (PMI) and spontaneous (SMI) myocardial infarction. We applied a targeted mass spectrometry (MS)-based metabolite profiling platform to serial blood samples drawn from carefully phenotyped patients undergoing alcohol septal ablation for hypertrophic obstructive cardiomyopathy serving as a human model of PMI. Patients with SMI and patients undergoing catheterization without induction of myocardial infarction served as positive and negative controls to assess generalizability of markers identified in PMI. Results: To identify metabolites of high predictive value in tandem mass spectrometry data, we introduced a new feature selection method for the categorization of metabolic signatures into three classes of weak, moderate and strong predictors, which can be easily applied to both paired and unpaired samples. Our paradigm outperformed standard null-hypothesis significance testing and other popular methods for feature selection in terms of the area under the receiver operating curve and the product of sensitivity and specificity. Our results emphasize that this new method was able to identify, classify and validate alterations of levels in multiple metabolites participating in pathways associated with myocardial injury as early as 10 min after PMI.
INTRODUCTIONDue to the rapid progress in mass spectrometry (MS) and in the development of related bioinformatics methods in recent years, novel biomarker discovery efforts for cardiovascular diseases are increasingly incorporating MS-based profiling of complex biological mixtures such as blood, urine or tissue (). Biomarkers have a substantial impact on the care of patients with cardiovascular disease. For example, troponin is an accepted diagnostic marker for myocardial infarction, and B-type naturetic peptide aids in diagnosis and prognostication in myocardial infarction and heart failure (). However, there are no sensitive and specific early biomarkers of myocardial injury, and therefore the complementary power of modern profiling techniques and emerging bioinformatics tools are being utilized for the discovery of new biomarkers. Modern metabolite profiling to analyze low-molecular weight analytes such as nucleotides, amino acids, organic acids, sugars or peptides is typically performed by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy or tandem mass spectrometry (MS/MS) technologies (). In particular, targeted MS-based platforms, using MS/MS coupled with liquid chromatography (LC), allow analysis of metabolites with high sensitivity and structural specificity, and thus minimize potentially confounding clinical variables. However, such platforms still preclude the analysis of large number of samples. From the clinical perspective, comparisons of metabolite profiles from quantitative targeted assays in disease versus non-disease states may bring forth novel biomarkers that have the potential to substantially improve cardiovascular diagnostics and support risk prediction of future life-threatening events ().