Motivation: Recent advances in high-throughput omics technologies have enabled biomedical researchers to collect large-scale genomic data. As a consequence, there has been growing interest in developing methods to integrate such data to obtain deeper insights regarding the underlying biological system. A key challenge for integrative studies is the heterogeneity present in the different omics data sources, which makes it difficult to discern the coordinated signal of interest from source-specific noise or extraneous effects. Results: We introduce a novel method of multi-modal data analysis that is designed for heterogeneous data based on non-negative matrix factorization. We provide an algorithm for jointly decomposing the data matrices involved that also includes a sparsity option for high-dimensional settings. The performance of the proposed method is evaluated on synthetic data and on real DNA methylation, gene expression and miRNA expression data from ovarian cancer samples obtained from The Cancer Genome Atlas. The results show the presence of common modules across patient samples linked to cancer-related pathways, as well as previously established ovarian cancer subtypes. Availability and implementation: The source code repository is publicly available at https://github. com/yangzi4/iNMF.
IntroductionTechnological advances allow biomedical researchers to collect a wide variety of omics data on a common set of samples. Data repositories such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) provide multiple types of omics data, thus enabling in-depth investigation of molecular events at different stages of biology and for different tumor types. However, the latter task requires developing methods for data integration, a topic that has received increased attention in the literature. In genomic studies, the integration of multifaceted data is becoming increasingly viable and insightful (). Cellular signals and processes depend on the coordinated interaction and communication among a wide variety of biomolecules including genes, proteins, metabolites and epigenetic regulators. There are multiple layers in which regulation takes place and therefore multiple vantage points from which to observe biological activity. A joint analysis of data on the same set of samples from multiple omics sources has potential to achieve more perceptive results over separate analyses, as well as provide a more comprehensive global view of the biological system. A key challenge for integration methods is dealing with heterogeneous data. Data from different sources are difficult to compare due to inherent discrepancies. Different genomic variables are measured and collected in different ways, and they are associated with different types of noise and confounding effects. Most importantly, they represent different aspects of the biological system. The discrepancy among data sources contributes to a useful multifaceted view of the system, but it also brings forth a new level of complexity that makes it hard to distinguish the coordinated signal. There are many integration techniques that deal with the complexity of multiple sources by relying on prior knowledge of the relationships that connect them. Some procedures seek to map different experimental data types, such as gene expression (GE), miRNA expression (ME) and copy number variation to a common space of known biological pathways or sets (and references therein). Others select features or assign weights to features based on prior knowledge, possibly using such information in a linear-based model () or in a framework for identifying modules (). All these approaches require the consultation of an external resource, such as signaling pathways or gene interaction networks. While this supervised approach is convenient (and sensible in certain respects), it relies heavily on the external information being valid and representative, which is not always guaranteed, even in the modern era of data availability. In addition, relating variables based on previously established findings can introduce an element of bias and subjectivity that hinders the discovery of new associations. In contrast to such supervised approaches, our objective is to develop an integration method that directly leverages the advantage of multiple data sources to deal with heterogeneity. In multiple datasets, the signal of interest is typically common among all sources (homogeneous), while extraneous effects tend to differ across sources (heterogeneous). The main principle of our approach is to separate the homogeneous and heterogeneous effects among the sources to extract the coordinated signal from extraneous noise. Many existing integration techniques similarly make the distinction between common and distinct effects across sources, such as those extending the Dirichlet mixture model () and principal component analysis (PCA,). Our proposed method extends an integrative non-negative matrix factorization (NMF) framework () via a partitioned factorization structure that captures homogeneous and heterogeneous effects. A novel tuning selection procedure allows the model to adapt to the level of heterogeneity among the datasets. We apply our approach to an integrated study of ovarian cancer involving three types of genomic variables and discover multi-dimensional modules exhibiting topological patterns of expression across known cancer-related pathways.
ConclusionAs data collection technologies improve and data repositories expand, the quality and accessibility of data from multiple biological sources will continue to grow. As a result, the combined perspectives from internal signatures (e.g. genes, proteins and metabolites) as well as external information (e.g. clinical status, patient history and environmental factors) are contributing to an increasingly rich and complex model of the biological system. However, the abundance and diversity of data is accompanied by the problem of heterogeneity, both in the nature of data sources and in the data collection processes. It is important for strategies of data integration to evolve alongside these new challenges. We have introduced a novel method of data integration based on a classical matrix decomposition technique. Our method was applied to an integrative study of ovarian cancer, in which we discovered multi-dimensional modules consistent with previously established variable-based subtypes as well as observational clusters. These modules express notable topological patterns among cancerrelated pathways, suggesting a connection with underlying biomarker signatures associated with disease subtypes. The key merits of our approach are as follows. As with jNMF, iNMF is able to detect coordinated signals across multiple datasets. However, iNMF is also equipped to deal with issues arising from heterogeneous data. With its more flexible factorization structure, iNMF is able to adapt to the level of disparity between the datasets, to extract the joint signal of interest from heterogeneous confounders. ToModules in heterogeneous multi-modal datadistinguish between common patterns spanning multiple sources and distinct patterns unique to individual sources is the first step for developing a proper integration procedure. The basic framework of iNMF leaves room for further regularization beyond sparsity. One possibility is to consider relationships between individual variables from the same data source (gene-gene interactions) or from different sources (miRNA-gene or DM-gene regulations) (). Another approach is to induce adherence to known biological networks or observational relations by means of network statistics. The main challenges are adapting the penalties to the NMF framework and finding effective strategies for tuning selection. Although our analysis examined several types of genomic variables, our results capture only a snapshot of cancer biology. For future investigations, it may be fruitful to explore more types of genomic data, such as DNA copy number variation and mutation status or even clinical information. It may also be worthwhile to expand the analysis to multiple types of cancers. With the right tools, having a wider selection of data sources will only help in understanding complex disease mechanisms.