Motivation: We have recently characterized an instance of alternative splicing that differs from the canonical gene transcript by deletion of a length of sequence not divisible by three, but where translation can be rescued by an alternative start codon. This results in a predicted protein in which the amino terminus differs markedly in sequence from the known protein product(s), as it is translated from an alternative reading frame. Automated pipelines have annotated thousands of splice variants but have overlooked these protein isoforms, leading to them being underrepresented in current databases. Results: Here we describe 1849 human and 733 mouse transcripts that can be transcribed from an alternate ATG. Of these, 480% have not been annotated previously. Those conserved between human and mouse genomes (and hence under likely evolutionary selection) are identified. We provide mass spectroscopy evidence for translation of selected transcripts. Of the described splice variants, only one has previously been studied in detail and converted the encoded protein from an activator of cell-function to a suppressor, demonstrating that these splice variants can result in profound functional change. We investigate the potential functional effects of this splicing using a variety of bioinformatic tools. The 2582 variants we describe are involved in a wide variety of biological processes, and therefore open many new avenues of research.
INTRODUCTIONAlternative splicing is one of the most significant contributors to proteome diversity (). Through the production of multiple mRNA transcripts, a single gene can encode multiple and functionally distinct protein isoforms. These isoforms can differ subtly, varying in only a single amino acid, or demonstrate drastic changes in their peptide sequences accompanied by equally significant changes in their function. Automated pipelines have been developed which can identify and annotate alternative splice events and their encoded proteins, primarily through the alignment of Expressed Sequence Tags (ESTs) (). We have previously characterized an alternative splice form of the mouse non-SMC condensin II complex, subunit H2 (Ncaph2) gene that was incorrectly annotated by these pipelines (). The gene can produce a transcript that lacks the last 17 bp of the first exon. While normally such a deletion would produce a frame-shift of the downstream sequence, translation at an alternate start codon rescues the reading frame of the sequence downstream from the splice event while shifting that of the upstream sequence. The result is a protein isoform that possesses a unique amino terminus, but in which the remainder of the protein is identical to the known isoform (). An exhaustive literature search revealed only three other proteins displaying similar alternative splicing; mouse Innositol polyphosphate-4-phosphatase, type II (Inpp4b), human Leishmanolysin-like (metallopeptidase M8 family) (LMLN) and Otubain-1 (OTUB1) (). All couple a frame-shifting splice event with an alternate start codon to change the readingframe of the amino terminus, and all have been overlooked by the genome annotation pipelines, leading us to question if the few documented instances of this splicing are a true representation of their prevalence. Here we report the genome-wide identification of new examples of this type of alternative splicing, using publically available EST data.
CONCLUSIONThe aim of this study was to investigate an unusual outcome of alternative splicing that results in the amino terminal exons of a gene being translated in two reading frames. Our pipelinepredicted a total of 2582 instances of this splicing in the mouse and human genomes, the majority of which have not been previously annotated. Previous large-scale studies have treated genes as possessing a single start codon, only considering alternate sites of translation initiation when a splice event removes the canonical start codon. A few studies have investigated the potential of alternate start codons, but these have focused on either downstream, in-frame, start codons that produce truncated versions of proteins (), or those that result in a frame shift of the entire transcript (). Our study is the first to investigate the prevalence of this unusual amino-terminus frame-shifting form of alternative splicing. Our search strategy identified three of the four published instances of this alternative splicing. Upon further inspection, it was found that Inpp4b was not detected due to low EST coverage. The Unigene database contained only 58 ESTs associated with Inpp4b, none of which encode the experimentally validated splice variant. The 2582 splice forms we have identified are therefore likely to be an underestimate of the true frequency of this splicing. Low EST coverage of genes hides instances of this splicing (as seen in Inpp4b) in addition, variants transcribed at low levels or under restrictive conditions (such as in specific cell subsets or under particular metabolic conditions) may not be represented in databases. Only one of the 2582 splice variants we have identified, otubain-1, has been previously functionally characterized and was found to have a dramatic effect on the function of the protein (). While the canonical form of the protein activated T-cells, the alternate form was found to promote Tcell anergy (turn off T-cells). The profound functional difference found in the only one of these genes studied, coupled with our predictions for alterations in domain composition and subcellular localization, highlights the potential importance of the novel proteins we have identified. In this study, we have identified 42000 novel protein isoforms in human and mouse genomes. These result from an unusual outcome of alternative splicing, combining frame-shifting splice variants with alternative start codons. This largely overlooked form of alternative splicing therefore contributes significantly to transcriptome diversity. In each case, the novel proteins differ from their known isoforms by their amino terminus being translated from an alternate reading frame; the remainder of the protein is identical in both isoforms. This can result in a profound change to protein function. The proteins we have identified are involved in a wide range of biological processes. Research into the biological functions of these novel proteins will therefore open new avenues of research into almost every facet of cell biology.