Motivation: Functional linkages implicate pairwise relationships between proteins that work together to implement biological tasks. During evolution, functionally linked proteins are likely to be preserved or eliminated across a range of genomes in a correlated fashion. Based on this hypothesis, phylogenetic profiling-based approaches try to detect pairs of protein families that show similar evolutionary patterns. Traditionally, the evolutionary pattern of a protein is encoded by either a binary profile of presence and absence of this protein across species or an occurrence profile that indicates the distribution of copies of this protein across species. Results: In our study, we characterize each protein by its enhanced phylogenetic tree, a novel graphical model of the evolution of a protein family with explicitly marked by speciation and duplication events. By topological comparison between enhanced phylogenetic trees, we are able to detect the functionally associated protein pairs. Because the enhanced phylogenetic trees contain more evolutionary information of proteins, our method shows greater performance and discovers functional linkages among proteins more reliably compared with the conventional approaches. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONA great number of cellular behaviors are mediated by proteins, which always carry out their functions by interacting with each other (). Proteins that participate in a common structural complex or pathway or biological process are defined as functionally linked. Defining functional linkages of proteins is one of the central goals in proteomics that will decipher the molecular mechanisms underlying the biological functions and, then, help to enhance approaches for drug discovery. The complete sequencing of multiple genomes from diverse species provides an excellent opportunity to develop comparative approaches for functional studies in proteomics. Biological interactions and functional linkages of proteins can be inferred via various patterns across many genomes. These include the co-localization of genes on chromosomes (), the genetical fusion of two distinct proteins from one organism into a * To whom correspondence should be addressed. single protein in another organism (), protein domain composition (;) and phylogenetic profiles (). Phylogeny-based methods for protein functional relationship prediction are broadly applicable due to a sufficiently large number of completely sequenced genomes. These methods are premised on the hypothesis that functionally linked proteins evolve in a correlated fashion, and therefore they have homologs in the same set of organisms (). The original approach uses the simplest form of phylogenetic profile of a protein, a binary string in which each bit indicates the presence or absence of a protein family in a different species (). This basic method, often referred to 'phylogenetic binary profiling', subsequently searches for matching pairs of profiles which differ from each other by less than three bits. In further steps, profiles can be compared by statistical correlation measures, such as cooccurrence probability (), the Pearson correlation coefficient (), Fisher's exact test () or mutual information (introduced phylogenetic occurrence profiling to detect the functionally related protein families in eukaryotic genomes. The phylogenetic occurrence profile of a protein family is a vector in which each element indicates the number of protein members of this family observed in one organism. Unlike prokaryotic genomes, where a high proportion of protein families have about one copy per species, eukaryotic genomes show a large number of multiprotein families having more than one member per species (). Phylogenetic occurrence profiling, therefore, is able to detect more evolutionary signals that could not be detected by phylogenetic binary profiling. However, binary and occurrence profiles cannot adequately describe the whole evolutionary history of proteins. Many methods characterize proteins by their reconstructed phylogenetic trees. These approaches, then, compare the phylogenetic trees by utilizing the parsimony principle (), maximum likelihood model (), a tree-kernel model () or the correlation between the distances matrices used to build the trees (). Evolutionary divergence, convergence and horizontal transfer events in multiprotein families are more complex than can be described by conventional phylogenetic profiles. In this work, we introduce a novel graphical model of the evolution of proteins, which enhances the information content of phylogenetic profiles