Motivation: DNA methylation analysis suffers from very long processing time, as the advent of Next-Generation Sequencers has shifted the bottleneck of genomic studies from the sequencers that obtain the DNA samples to the software that performs the analysis of these samples. The existing software for methylation analysis does not seem to scale efficiently neither with the size of the dataset nor with the length of the reads to be analyzed. As it is expected that the sequencers will provide longer and longer reads in the near future, efficient and scalable methylation software should be developed. Results: We present a new software tool, called HPG-Methyl, which efficiently maps bisulphite sequencing reads on DNA, analyzing DNA methylation. The strategy used by this software consists of leveraging the speed of the Burrows–Wheeler Transform to map a large number of DNA fragments (reads) rapidly, as well as the accuracy of the Smith–Waterman algorithm, which is exclusively employed to deal with the most ambiguous and shortest reads. Experimental results on platforms with Intel multicore processors show that HPG-Methyl significantly outperforms in both execution time and sensitivity state-of-the-art software such as Bismark, BS-Seeker or BSMAP, particularly for long bisulphite reads. Availability and implementation: Software in the form of C libraries and functions, together with instructions to compile and execute this software. Available by sftp to anonymous@clariano.uv.es (password anonymous).
IntroductionDNA methylation is an important mechanism of epigenetic regulation in development and disease. It is a heritable modifiable chemical process that affects gene transcription, and it is associated with other molecular markers (e.g. gene expression) and phenotypes (e.g. cancer or other diseases) (). Although many methods for DNA methylation profiling have been developed, only bisulphite sequencing gives rise to comprehensive DNA methylation maps at single-base pair resolution (). Bisulphite treatment converts unmethylated cytosines (Cs) into thymines, which gives rise to C-to-T polymorphisms after subsequent polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification, while leaving methylated cytosines unchanged. By aligning and comparing bisulphite sequencing reads to the genomic DNA sequence, it is possible to infer DNA methylation patterns at base pair-resolution. Moreover, the introduction of new DNA sequencing technology, known as Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS), now makes it possible to sequence the genomic DNA in a few days, as well as at a very low cost. Current NGS sequencers can sequence short DNA or RNA fragments of lengths usually between 50 and 400 nt, though new sequencers with longer fragment sizes are being developed. Primary data produced by NGS sequencers consist of hundreds of