Motivation: Sequence alignment is one of the most popular tools of modern biology. NCBIs PSI-BLAST utilizes iterative model building in order to better detect distant homologs with greater sensitivity than non-iterative BLAST. However, PSI-BLASTs performance is limited by the fact that it relies on deterministic alignments. Using a semi-probabilistic alignment scheme such as Hybrid alignment should allow for better informed model building and improved identification of homologous sequences, particularly remote homologs. Results: We have built a new version of the tool in which the Smith-Waterman alignment algorithm core is replaced by the hybrid alignment algorithm. The favorable statistical properties of the hybrid algorithm allow the introduction of position-specific gap penalties in Hybrid PSI-BLAST. This improves the position-specific modeling of protein families and results in an overall improvement of performance. Availability: Source code is freely available for download at
INTRODUCTIONSequence alignment is one of the most commonly used tools in modern biology. The BLAST () and PSI-BLAST () algorithms have become standard tools for homology detection. In particular, PSI-BLAST () iteratively refines models for a protein family of interest with the goal of working toward the detection of weaker or more distant homologs. The detection of deeper evolutionary relationships can impact many aspects of biology such as the broadness of evolutionary studies (), the quality of gene annotations (), protein structure/function predictions () and our understanding of genes found in metagenomic surveys (). Improving PSI-BLAST has the potential to affect a large number of users and scientific applications. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.The idea behind PSI-BLAST, or Position Specific Iterated Basic Local Alignment Search Tool, is to leverage information from identified homologs to create a position-specific substitution matrix that can then be used to detect even more distant homologs (). These searches take place in an iterative fashion by using homologs identified in the previous round for the model building phase where the position-specific substitution matrix is refined for the next round. While this method increases the sensitivity of the subsequent searches, the BLAST core imposes a severe limitationnamely, an inability to incorporate position-specific gap costs. This limitation stems from the inability to statistically assess the significance of alignment scores with position-specific gap costs on practical timescales. Here, we overcome this limitation by replacing the alignment core of PSI-BLAST by the semi-probabilistic hybrid alignment algorithm (). This algorithm's main advantage over the alignment core of NCBI PSI-BLAST is its statistical tractability, particularly with regards to position-specific gap costs (). In effect, Hybrid alignment introduces to PSI-BLAST one of the advantages usually reserved for profile Hidden Markov Models (). The Hybrid PSI-BLAST software, which we present here, incorporates the hybrid alignment algorithm for both homolog detection and model building, thus allowing the use of position-specific gap costs that were previously unfeasible. We show that Hybrid PSI-BLAST represents an improvement to the overall sensitivity and selectivity of homolog detection in comparison to NCBI PSI-BLAST.
DISCUSSIONThis work implements a version of PSI-BLAST that incorporates the semi-probabilistic hybrid alignment scheme. This alignment scheme allows for the use of position-specific gap costs and information from suboptimal alignments in the model building phase, resulting in overall more accurate homology searches than NCBI PSI-BLAST. The relevance of our result is that we have shown how to improve the very core of PSI-BLAST, i.e. the alignment engine, which was already backed by a long record of scientific scrutiny and sound theoretical foundations (). Our performance improvements are orthogonal, and therefore potentially cumulative, to those brought about by more recent advances on. Here, the optimal performance is given by round 4, two earlier rounds than for Hybrid PSI-BLAST with position-specific gap costs. Note that the coverage of the fixed gap cost Hybrid PSI-BLAST is more sensitive to model corruption than the full Hybrid PSI-BLAST algorithm, but less sensitive than NCBI PSI-BLAST. other parts of PSI-BLAST such as the homolog detection and model building ().