Motivation: To understand the evolution of molecular function within protein families, it is important to identify those amino acid residues responsible for functional divergence; i.e. those sites in a protein family that affect cofactor, protein or substrate binding preferences; affinity; catalysis; flexibility; or folding. Type I functional divergence (FD) results from changes in conservation (evolutionary rate) at a site between protein subfamilies, whereas type II FD occurs when there has been a shift in preferences for different amino acid chemical properties. A variety of methods have been developed for identifying both site types in protein subfamilies, both from phylogenetic and information-theoretic angles. However, evaluation of the performance of these methods has typically relied upon a handful of reasonably well-characterized biological datasets or analyses of a single biological example. While experimental validation of many truly functionally divergent sites (true positives) can be relatively straightforward, determining that particular sites do not contribute to functional divergence (i.e. false positives and true negatives) is much more difficult, resulting in noisy gold standard examples. Results: We describe a novel, phylogeny-based functional divergence classifier, FunDi. Unlike previous approaches, FunDi uses a unified mixture model-based approach to detect type I and type II FD. To assess FunDis overall classification performance relative to other methods, we introduce two methods for simulating functionally divergent datasets. We find that the FunDi method performs better than several other predictors over a wide variety of simulation conditions.
INTRODUCTIONFunctional divergence in proteins over evolutionary time includes the processes of sub-and neo-functionalization after gene duplication, as well as specialization or loss of functions of proteins in distinct organismal lineages (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Two main patterns of functional divergence (FD) at the amino acid residue level have been described in the literature and were classified by) as Type I and Type II. In the case of a protein family composed of two subgroups, Type I functional divergence is characterized by greater conservation at a site in one subfamily versus the other subfamily, indicating a difference in evolutionary rate between them due to fewer selective constraints in the more rapidly evolving group. For Type II, divergence sequence conservation at a site is observed in both subfamilies, but with a marked preference for different amino acids, generally with very different physicochemical properties in each group. Accurate prediction of (FD) residues, also known as 'specificity determining sites' in the case where divergence changes the substrate that is bound (), leads to an enhanced understanding of the mechanisms underlying functional diversification. Three main approaches have been used for the prediction of FD protein residues that, in broad terms, can be classified as primarily phylogenetic, information theoretic or biophysical. Phylogenetic approaches such as evolutionary trace (), DIVERGE () and various likelihood ratio test/rate shift based tests () explicitly take into account a phylogenetic tree that describes the evolutionary relationships among the sequences in the protein family under consideration. In general, phylogenetic methods for FD prediction correlate observed patterns of amino acid substitution at a site in a multiple sequence alignment across subgroups within a phylogenetic tree. Local conservation (i.e. within a subgroup on a phylogenetic tree) relative to other sequences reflect probable functional specificity of that subgroup if the degree of conservation is large relative to the overall divergences of the sequences within that subgroup. This general case can be extended to more rigorous statistical models of functional divergence such as the type I and type II specific prediction methods employed by DIVERGE (). In contrast, information-theoretic approaches do not generally explicitly consider the relationship between sequences, only the known or predicted divisions into functional subgroups and perhaps some weighting based on overall sequence distances as in GroupSim (). These approaches contrast informationtheoretic measures of variation of site profiles within a subgroup to those observed at a site across the whole multiple sequence alignment. These profiles may most commonly be represented by some information-theoretic measure of variability among residuesPage: 2656 26552663