Motivation: Animal models play a pivotal role in translation biomedical research. The scientific value of an animal model depends on how accurately it mimics the human disease. In principle, microarrays collect the necessary data to evaluate the transcriptomic fidelity of an animal model in terms of the similarity of expression with the human disease. However, statistical methods for this purpose are lacking. Results: We develop the agreement of differential expression (AGDEX) procedure to measure and determine the statistical significance of the similarity of the results of two experiments that measure differential expression across two groups. AGDEX defines a metric of agreement and determines statistical significance by permutation of each experiments group labels. Additionally, AGDEX performs a comprehensive permutation-based analysis of differential expression for each experiment, including gene-set analyses and meta-analytic integration of results across studies. As an example, we show how AGDEX was recently used to evaluate the similarity of the transcriptome of a novel model of the brain tumor ependymoma in mice to that of a subtype of the human disease. This result, combined with other observations, helped us to infer the cell of origin of this devastating human cancer.
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray technology has enabled researchers to simultaneously measure the expression of thousands of genes in a biological tissue specimen. These data are commonly used to compare gene expression among biological conditions within the same species. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.For example, the experiments may compare the transcriptomes of tumors and host normal tissue or between tumors arising in the same tissue. However, translating this wealth of data into other experimental systems has proven difficult because of limitations in comparing transcriptome data generated with different microarray platforms or from different species. Here, we present a statistically rigorous procedure (called AGDEX for agreement of differential expression) to combine transcriptome information across two experiments that compare expression across two biological conditions. Each experiment may utilize different microarray platforms or even study different species. The AGDEX procedure determines whether the differential expression profile of one experiment has statistically significant similarity to that of the other experiment. In our studies, we used AGDEX analysis results and other experimental data to validate a novel mouse model of a human brain tumor. We have successfully used AGDEX for this purpose in published studies of ependymoma () and medulloblastoma () to identify the cell of origin for each of these two brain cancers. We describe the method in detail and illustrate it with our analysis of the data from our ependymoma study.
DISCUSSIONWe have developed the agreement of differential expression (AGDEX) procedure to integrate differential expression analysis results across two experiments that may utilize different platforms or even different species. The AGDEX procedure can be used to examine the transcriptional fidelity of animal models of human disease by evaluating the similarities of transcriptome-wide differential expression profiles across species. AGDEX may also be used to integrate differential expression results that use different platforms for the same species. In our studies, the AGDEX procedure enabled us to confirm the transcriptomic fidelity of newly generated mouse models and thereby infer the cell of origin of two distinct human brain cancers (). The AGDEX procedure also performs a comprehensive and statistically rigorous permutation-based analysis to address other biologically important questions. For each experiment, the AGDEX procedure performs differential expression analysis at the probe-set and gene-set levels. Additionally, the AGDEX procedure metaanalytically integrates differential expression results at the probeset and gene-set levels to improve statistical power to identify genes or pathways that are important in one or both experiments. Finally, the AGDEX procedure also evaluates similarity of differential expression across the two experiments for predefined gene-sets. The AGDEX procedure computes P-values by permuting assignments of group labels within each experiment. Permutation is computationally demanding but yet is critical to obtain an accurate measure of statistical significance, especially for identifying differentially expressed gene-sets and evaluating the agreement of differential expression. Some computationally simple approaches for gene-set analyses utilize statistical models of chance that inappropriately use final results for genes as the unit of analysis. For example, in our setting, one might use the binomial distribution to model the number of ortholog pairs that have the same sign for differential expression analysis in both experiments. Such an approach grossly exaggerates statistical significant by inappropriately using the number of ortholog pairs as the " sample size " and ignoring the correlation among genes. Permutation of group labels preserves correlation among genes by keeping gene expression values for each subject together during the random reassignment, is explicitly linked to the experimental design and uses the correct sample size by retaining the correct number of group labels and expression data vectors (). Nevertheless, the AGDEX procedure is computationally feasible. Our example analysis was completed on a desktop computer in 2.5 h. The sample size and number of genes and gene-sets are similar to those of other contemporary applications. Additionally, utilization of adaptive permutation will help reduce computational burden by performing fewer permutations for gene-sets with insignificant results (). This may be especially useful if the more statistically robust and computationally demanding distancebased statistic offor differential expression analysis of gene-sets is incorporated into later versions of AGDEX. The example analysis also shows that the AGDEX procedure and our previously published results are robust against the strategy used to select the ortholog pairs that are included in the analysis. In our previously published study, the expression data were used to select which ortholog pairs from the Affymetrix best match definitions were retained for the AGDEX analysis. In this work, no such filtering was applied. The results of the analyses based on the cosine statistic are qualitatively similar to the previously published findings. The robustness of AGDEX results against filtering of ortholog pairs is Page: 2103 20982103