Motivation: Nucleo-cytoplasmic trafficking of proteins is a core regulatory process that sustains the integrity of the nuclear space of eukaryotic cells via an interplay between numerous factors. Despite progress on experimentally characterizing a number of nuclear localization signals, their presence alone remains an unreliable indicator of actual translocation. Results: This article introduces a probabilistic model that explicitly recognizes a variety of nuclear localization signals, and integrates relevant amino acid sequence and interaction data for any candidate nuclear protein. In particular, we develop and incorporate scoring functions based on distinct classes of classical nuclear localization signals. Our empirical results show that the model accurately predicts whether a protein is imported into the nucleus, surpassing the classification accuracy of similar predictors when evaluated on the mouse and yeast proteomes (area under the receiver operator characteristic curve of 0.84 and 0.80, respectively). The model also predicts the sequence position of a nuclear localization signal and whether it interacts with importin-α.
INTRODUCTIONNucleo-cytoplasmic trafficking of proteins is a core regulatory process that involves traversing large membrane structures termed nuclear pore complexes (NPCs) (). The translocation of cargo macromolecules through the pore is facilitated by a number of nuclear transport factors, termed karyopherins. To shed light on the mechanisms that are employed by individual nuclear proteins, this article proposes a probabilistic model of nuclear import that leverages recent experimental results to accurately and transparently recognize biologically relevant features. The main determinant of nuclear localization of proteins is the nuclear localization signal (NLS). The best-characterized NLS is the classical nuclear localization sequence (cNLS), which is recognized * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by the carrier protein importin- (karyopherin-). Importin- acts as an adaptor protein, binding in turn to importin- (karyopherin-1), which docks the trimeric complex to the nuclear pore complex for further transport into the nucleus (). The cNLS contains one (mono-partite) or two (bi-partite) clusters of basic amino acids (). Structural studies have shown that peptides bind along a groove in importin-, with charged amino acids at 'minor' and 'major' binding sites along this groove (). A recent study subdivided cNLSs further into six groups (). In addition to the classical nuclear import pathway, several alternative import pathways have been characterized. Features of the targeting signal have been identified in the case of the proline tyrosine (PY)-NLS pathway, which employs the carrier karyopherin2 (). At present, the definition of an NLS common to different cargoes used by a single carrier has only been possible for the classical and karyopherin-2-mediated pathways. Many nuclear proteins do not contain any known NLS (). Many predictors identify homologs of a query protein and assign their subcellular location to it without explicitly considering if a localization signal is present. As a consequence, such predictors fail to provide both mechanistic explanations of predicted translocation and reliable output in the absence of well-characterized homologs (). Predicting which proteins are imported on the basis of targeting signals without resorting to homology is a major challenge. Simple sequence matching using known NLS patterns renders many false positives and negatives (). To explain why import sometimes goes awry in biological terms, we require models that transparently capture and appropriately weigh in relevant aspects of nuclear import (e.g. interaction with karyopherins and cNLS recognition). A number of predictors are available to identify novel nuclear proteins from known localization features, against which new models should be benchmarked. For reasons explained below, we use NLStradamus () and cNLS Mapper () as representatives for the current state of the art on technical and biological grounds, respectively. PredictNLS () explicitly matches a protein sequence against entries in the NLSdb database (). NucPred also uses sequence matching () complemented by 'genetic programming' to recognize new putative NLSs. According to its authors, NucPred is more accurate than PredictNLS, LOCtree () and BaCelLo ().evaluated the performance of localization signal predictors, finding that they do not perform well on truly novel examples which suggests that current methods are unable to identify the features relevant to import. They developed NLStradamus () in response to this observation. NLStradamus is a hidden Markov model that predicts localization signal sites more accurately than those benchmarked against in their study. Its high accuracy is potentially due to the flexibility in signal recognition afforded by the probabilistic model. It is trained on alignments of yeast NLSs but extends well to other species ().generated and experimentally screened random peptide libraries to identify importin- binding sequences. Using yeast, plant (rice) and mammalian (human) importin- proteins, six different groups of mono-and bi-partite cNLSs were identified by cluster analyses of the sequences of the bound (and imported) peptides. The authors developed a computational method, cNLS Mapper, that incorporates a sequence scoring matrix based directly on the statistics gathered from the collected peptides (). cNLS Mapper is more accurate than PSORT II () and PredictNLS () on several yeast positive-only datasets (). cNLS Mapper identified 406 mono-partite, and 306 bi-partite cNLSs in the yeast proteome. The yeastGFP fusion localization database byidentifies 447 of these as nuclear. YeastGFP records nuclear import status confirmed by microscopy for yeast strains tagged with green fluorescent protein (GFP).experimentally demonstrated that 29 out of 30 false 'monopartite' positives indeed exhibited NLS activity, attesting to the high specificity of their predictor. NLSs appear to operate similarly across species. Indeed, only one group in Kosugi and colleagues' study was deemed specific to a single species (rice). It is, thus, of general interest to gauge the ability of nuclear import models to deal with not only yeast but also a mammalian system. We note that NucProt () offers a complementary resource for developing and evaluating models of nuclear import. NucProt maps the mouse nuclear proteome, identified primarily from experimental assays, enriched using computational methods. To enhance a model's ability to recognize species-specific targeting signals in sequence data, we develop probabilistic scoring functions from experimentally determined sequence patterns matched to actual sequences from the proteome under consideration. As a result, these functions accurately reflect the proteome-specific distributions. We use data from the studies byto develop and evaluate our model. Protein interaction data offer a complementary view of how cargoes interface with the import machinery. Thus, to improve further on their recognition, we extract data indicating interaction with importin-/ and the GTP-binding protein Ranall of which are essential for the translocation of proteins through the NPC. Finally, to increase the sensitivity to non-classical import signals, we incorporate matching of all patterns stored in NLSdb. We also use a support vector machine (SVM) to detect more subtle sequence similarities. We develop a model that recognizes NLSs, links interactions to localization signals and incorporates sequence similarity. We demonstrate that the model predicts the protein import into the nucleus more accurately than both NLStradamus and cNLS Mapper. It identifies interactions with core NPC members, and correctly identifies cNLSs for novel proteins in both mouse and yeast. Our probabilistic model is transparent and provides biologically meaningful explanations for predictions.
CONCLUSIONWe present a model that incorporates three different types of features to predict nuclear localization and responsible localization signals and interactions. The model predicts whether a protein is imported into the nucleus with an accuracy surpassing that of comparable predictors on the mouse and yeast proteomes. The MCC is 0.57 and 0.44 for mouse and yeast, respectively, and the AUC is 0.84 and 0.80. To understand the importance of explicitly recognizing NLSs for nuclear import prediction, we compare our approach with localization predictors that do not incorporate such features directly. Nucleo has previously been shown to outperform six different predictors in terms of classifying import status of proteins () and falls predominately into this category. By re-using the independent dataset developed for evaluating Nucleo, we are able to show that our Bayesian network model outperforms the other predictors (MCC is 0.39 on the species-combined data), with Nucleo as a clear second. The explicit recognition of NLS is thus not critical for predicting import accuratelyat least when limited to the dominant but far-from-exclusive classical NLSs. By testing our model on a dataset with low sequence redundancy, we show that the generalization performance of our model is not the simple result of matching homology. A key benefit of our model (in relation to most models including Nucleo) is that it transparently indicates the influence of relevant variables. Thereby, it allows biologists to dissect predictions to find which features are responsible for importing each individual protein. We illustrate this principle by also using the model to predict the most probable cNLS for the mouse and yeast nuclear proteomes. We establish on a smaller dataset that the model accurately recognizes NLSs and interactions with the import machinery. We verify that the predicted NLSs match 68 and 51% of known independent yeast and mouse NLSs, respectively. Additionally, by hiding functional NLSs from the model and observing a significant decrease in support, we confirm that the model is sensitive to this biologically essential feature. Our Bayesian network-based model can thus enable biologists to identify the nuclear localization signals responsible for binding with karyopherins. By integrating proteinprotein interaction data, biologists are able to tap into an emerging data source. It is clear from our tests that interaction data contributes to prediction accuracy. In the absence of reliable interaction data, the model is flexible enough to operate with these variables unspecified, and to predict several novel importin interactors. We validate our top predictions using the literature and argue that the model assists in identifying novel importin- interactions. Anecdotal evidence offers additional support for 16 of our top 20 importin- interaction predictions. Considering the sparsity of training and test interaction data, we find the accuracy of predicting importin- interactions encouraging (AUC is 0.64 and 0.67 for mouse and yeast, respectively). The current model is easy to extend with recently discovered localization signals, for example the PY-NLS. Cross-referenced with the appropriate data, we believe that predicted NLSs can be used to further characterize proteome-specific NLSs, both structurally and functionally.