Motivation: Predicting protein interactions involving peptide recognition domains is essential for understanding the many important biological processes they mediate. It is important to consider the binding strength of these interactions to help us construct more biologically relevant protein interaction networks that consider cellular context and competition between potential binders. Results: We developed a novel regression framework that considers both positive (quantitative) and negative (qualitative) interaction data available for mouse PDZ domains to quantitatively predict interactions between PDZ domains, a large peptide recognition domain family, and their peptide ligands using primary sequence information. First, we show that it is possible to learn from existing quantitative and negative interaction data to infer the relative binding strength of interactions involving previously unseen PDZ domains and/or peptides given their primary sequence. Performance was measured using cross-validated hold out testing and testing with previously unseen PDZ domain–peptide interactions. Second, we find that incorporating negative data improves quantitative interaction prediction. Third, we show that sequence similarity is an important prediction performance determinant, which suggests that experimentally collecting additional quantitative interaction data for underrepresented PDZ domain subfamilies will improve prediction. Availability and Implementation: The Matlab code for our SemiSVR predictor and all data used here are available at http://baderlab.org/Data/PDZAffinity.
INTRODUCTIONModular domains are the major building blocks of eukaryotic proteins and interaction networks (). These domains usually fold independently and are present in various combinations within a single protein to create a rich repertoire of functionally diverse proteins from a more limited domain set (). An important subclass of these domains, peptide recognition modules (PRMs), bind to short extended and linear peptide segments in target proteins to mediate proteinprotein interactions in eukaryotic cell signaling systems (). Characterizing the interactions of these peptide recognition modules will help us map and understand the many biological processes they mediate. PRMs generally bind their peptide ligands in the weak (10 M) affinity (binding strength) range (), and sensitive in vitro experimental techniques like phage display () and peptide/protein microarrays () have been used to map the binding specificities and protein interactions of large sets of SH3 (), SH2 (), WW () and PDZ () domains. However, these experimental techniques are resource intensive, and cannot be readily applied to new members and alleles of PRMs that are increasingly being collected by genome sequencing projects and population-based genetic variation studies (The International). Ideally, a computational model could be developed to predict whether a PRM will bind to a peptide given their primary sequences. Such a model could be used to predict protein interactions from newly sequenced genomes and the effect of mutations on known PRM-mediated protein interactions to guide subsequent experimental characterization. Computational domainpeptide interaction prediction has been studied for multiple PRMs, such as SH3 (), SH2 (), PDZ (), WW () and MHC domains () (which are a special case of peptide binding domains that do not mediate proteinprotein interactions). These approaches, except for
DISCUSSIONInferring the relative strength of proteinpeptide interactions mediated by peptide recognition modules (PRMs) will lead to better understanding of cellular processes. Here, we show that it is possible to predict affinity of PDZ domainpeptide interactions based on primary sequence information. We also show that incorporating both positive and negative interaction data using a novel SemiSVR approach improves prediction. This approach is also successful at predicting which PDZ domainpeptide pairs are likely to interact (binary prediction). Based on the experimental data, a threshold of 100 M separates quantitative 'positive' data from qualitative 'negative' data. Changing this threshold to more stringent values (i.e. 20 and 10 M) did not change our results (Supplementary). Although our method is mainly based on sequence similarity, it is interesting to analyze how much physicochemical factors contribute to our prediction performance. To investigate this, we assessed how well each of 11 properties from the '11-factor' encoding () can be used individually for quantitative prediction of PDZpeptide interactions using SemiSVR. We found that isoelectric point, hydrophilicity scale, polarity, average accessible surface area, van der Waals parameter epsilon and steric parameter are most important for performance, in decreasing order, suggesting they are the physicochemical factors that mostly modulate the binding strength of PDZpeptide interactions (Supplementary). Given that physical forces between the domain and the peptide 3D structures determine affinity, and our observation that SemiSVR performance correlates with sequence similarity between PDZ domains in testing and training sets, we postulate that natural PDZ domains with similar sequences have similar 3D structures that determine affinity in similar ways. This is supported by the observation that PDZ specificities are found conserved from worm to human (). It has been shown that it is easy to mutate PDZ domains to bind non-natural ligands; however, we only see a limited set of PDZ domain specificities in nature (). These observations are consistent with a constrained model of PDZ specificity evolution where a set of initial PDZ domain specificities evolved, and that these were then expanded to form a finite number of subfamilies, each functionally similar down to the level of affinity determination. This model predicts that each subfamily has a characteristic structure and mode of determining binding affinity with a ligand. Regardless, we find that information useful for prediction is taken from the entire PDZ domain family and this improves prediction performance compared with using a nave nearest neighbor-based predictor. As our method is trained on interaction data of natural PDZ domains, it may not do well at quantitative interaction prediction involving synthetic PDZ domains that have multiple mutations not found in our training data. We have noticed, in other work, that synthetic mutations may cause large changes in specificity, and presumably affinity (). This may occur by drastically changing the binding mode, for instance, by causing the peptide to rotate. We do not notice these types of large specificity changes arising from small sequence differences in natural PDZ domains, possibly because they disrupt normal PDZ function. The reduced predictive ability on synthetic PDZ domains, at least for specificity, has also been recently noticed (). However, we were not able to test this due to lack of sufficient affinity data on synthetic PDZ domains. We observed that some PDZ domains share identical subsequences in the 10 and 16 binding positions but bind the same peptides with different affinity. For example, both Dvl1 (1/1) and Dvl3 (1/1) share identical subsequences in their 16 binding positions yet bind to peptide Caspr4 with 79.298 M and 30.756 M Kd, respectively. Assuming the affinities are measured accurately suggests that additional sequence positions are modulating the binding strength of PDZpeptide interactions. This is supported by previous work showing that sets of non-binding positions coupled with a binding site contribute to the binding energy (). It has also been found that mutations in these sites may affect the structure of the binding site and thus alter binding affinity (). Although our best predictor was obtained using the full PDZ sequence, the performance was only somewhat improved on average compared with using either 10 or 16 binding positions. This may be due to the limitation of our sequence-based approach that fails to capture structural features of PDZ domains and their ligands that are important for binding. Additional experimental data about how structural variation in the binding site combined with affinity data would be useful in the future to further address the importance of non-binding site positions on affinity. The binding strength of domainpeptide interactions may also be affected by the presence of other partners bound. It will be interesting to examine the potential competition of PDZ binding sites bound by multiple PDZ domains expressed at different concentrations using our method. It will also be important to extend our method in the future to consider co-operativity (). The performance of the SemiSVR depends on sequence similarity of test PDZ domains to those in the training set with sufficient binding peptides. The human Scribble PDZ domain we tested is fairly close to domains in the training set (94% similar), and thus is a good test of our approach. Because of this, we expect our method is immediately applicable to PDZ domains in multiple species that are close to the domains in our training set. We thus used our method to predict relative affinities for a set of reasonably close mouse and human PDZ domains (60% domain sequence identity) to putative mouse and human PDZ ligands and included it as a convenient starting set (see Supplementary Tables S7 and S8), which is useful for prioritizing future experiments. Our results highlight the need to collect experimental domainpeptide binding data covering PDZ sequence space to improve prediction methods. This means we need to measure Page: 390 383390