Motivation: One of the most widely used models to analyse genotype-by-environment data is the additive main effects and multiplicative interaction (AMMI) model. Genotype-by-environment data resulting from multi-location trials are usually organized in two-way tables with genotypes in the rows and environments (location-year combinations) in the columns. The AMMI model applies singular value decomposition (SVD) to the residuals of a specific linear model, to decompose the genotype-by-environment interaction (GEI) into a sum of multiplicative terms. However, SVD, being a least squares method, is highly sensitive to contamination and the presence of even a single outlier, if extreme, may draw the leading principal component towards itself resulting in possible misinterpretations and in turn lead to bad practical decisions. Since, as in many other real-life studies the distribution of these data is usually not normal due to the presence of outlying observations , either resulting from measurement errors or sometimes from individual intrinsic characteristics , robust SVD methods have been suggested to help overcome this handicap. Results: We propose a robust generalization of the AMMI model (the R-AMMI model) that overcomes the fragility of its classical version when the data are contaminated. Here, robust statistical methods replace the classic ones to model, structure and analyse GEI. The performance of the robust extensions of the AMMI model is assessed through a Monte Carlo simulation study where several contamination schemes are considered. Applications to two real plant datasets are also presented to illustrate the benefits of the proposed methodology, which can be broadened to both animal and human genetics studies. Availability and implementation: Source code implemented in R is available in the supplementary material under the function r-AMMI. Contact:
IntroductionMulti-environment trials (MET), which comprise experiments across multiple locations, are important tools for testing both broad and narrow genotype adaptation. Here, when two different genotypes show a differential response to a prototypic trait (e.g. yield) across environments, it is said that genotype-by-environment interaction (GEI) is present. Data from MET are often summarized in two-way tables of means with genotypes in the rows (columns) and environments (location-year combinations) in the columns (rows). The additive main effects and multiplicative interaction (AMMI) model () is one of the most widely used tools to analyse and structure GEI. This model works under a fixed-model framework and is fit in two stages. First, the main effects of the model are estimated using the additive two-way analysis of variance(ANOVA) by least squares. Then, the singular value decomposition (SVD) is applied to the residuals from the ANOVA, i.e. to the interaction, to obtain the estimates for the multiplicative terms of the AMMI model. The AMMI model, in its standard form, implicitly assumes equal weights for all entries of the two-way dataset and that no outliers (leverage points) are present in the data.proposed a weighted AMMI algorithm where different weights to columns and/or rows and or particular cells of the twoway data table are given, and used this generalization to study GEI and quantitative trait loci (QTL)-by-environment interactions. However, their approach does not fully solve the problem that arises from contaminated dataa problem that is common in field data such as data resulting from METbecause of the difficulty in defining the weights associated with possible outlying observations. As a consequence, the results from the analysis using standard methods may be biased leading to possible misinterpretations, which in turn may result in bad practical decisions. Since the reason behind these biases lies on the fact that: (i) leastsquares regression/ANOVA method does not perform well in the presence of outlying observations, which often tend to pull the regression line towards them and consequently compromise inference results; (ii) SVD is a technique essentially based on the computation of eigenvalues and eigenvectors of the sample covariance/correlation matrix, and is thus highly sensitive to the presence of atypical observations; it seems natural that an upgrade of this method may be achieved by improving the performance of the intermediate ANOVA and SVD steps. Robust statistical methods are designed to overcome the handicaps of traditional methods that are felt when one or more assumptions of the model of analysis are not fulfilled. These violations often translate in biased parameter estimation, underpowered association tests, unreliable confidence intervals and so forth (). Therefore, and since data contamination is more a rule than an exception when real-life data are considered, there has been growing interest in the use of these statistical methodologies which allow for valid results even if model assumptions are violated (). Interest that is also explained by the fact that throughout the years the associated computational burden has been substantially reduced. To overcome the problem of analysing two-way contaminated data and to better understand GEI, we introduce in this study a robust AMMI model where the linear fit, underlying the ANOVA method, is replaced by a robust fit (M-regression;) and the use of the standard SVD by a robust SVD approach (see a review in). We underline that in the AMMI model the main effects are considered to be fixed and the errors normally distributed, although other extensions have already been proposed in the literature (). Hadi (2011) also proposed an alternative procedure of handling outliers in two-way tables by using robust alternating regression, based on factor analytic ANOVA models and robust projection pursuit principal component analysis, to 'robustify' the AMMI model. However, instead of dealing with a two-stage model (first fitting the additive part of the AMMI model and then the multiplicative),estimates the additive and multiplicative terms simultaneously. The performance of the proposed robust extensions of the AMMI model is assessed through Monte Carlo simulations where several contamination schemes are considered. The methods are also compared with the results obtained via the classical AMMI model according to several criteria. Here, the good features of the R-AMMI model are displayed. An application of the methodology to two real datasets is also presented to illustrate the benefits of this approach. We highlight that the range of possible applications of a robust AMMI model is wide, spanning from plant genetics such as QTL detection and QTL-by-environment interaction studies (), to microarray experiments (), ribosomal DNA studies (), plant and microbial populations' growth across several environmental conditions (), animal sciences () and human genetics ().
DiscussionThis study outlines the fragility of the classical AMMI model when the two-way data table is contaminated, which often is the case inexample of the usefulness of the preliminary descriptive analysis, one can think of the case where a regional trial has both irrigated and no-irrigated plots, which can result in wide yield differences within an environment. In this case it might be more appropriate to analyse such a yield trial as two separate subsets instead of combining all data in one single analysis. The proposed robust R-AMMI model may also be useful in other studies where data contamination is inevitable, e.g. in QTL detection and QTL-by-environment interaction studies. In that case, the robust AMMI model may be used, instead of its classical counterpart, to calculate more accurate predicted values when fitting the model which can then be subject to a QTL analysis in a two-stage procedure, similar to the ones described in, Gauch et al. (2011) and Rodrigues et al. (2014). Further comparisons in terms of QTL detection and QTL-by-environment interaction, between standard (), weighted () and robust AMMI models, should be done in future work to reinforce the usefulness of the robust AMMI model. Also, the ideas behind this robust approach may also be incorporated in the genotype main effects and genotype-by-environment interaction effects (GGE) model, which, as the AMMI model, is also very popular in MET studies (). The main difference between the two is that in the GGE model SVD is performed on the matrix of residuals from a one-way ANOVA with fixed effects for environments only instead of a two-way ANOVA with fixed effects of genotypes and environments. Further extensions and applications of the proposed methodology can be done, not only for animal and human genetics applications, but also in other fields as the AMMI model is also known in the literature as double-centered principal component analysis. The use of this robust version of the AMMI model, and others that have shown preliminary good performances () or that may subsequently follow [e.g. based on the methods of Jung (2010) and], will allow practitioners to make better strategic decisions. Therefore, this discussion is another step forward in the direction of the development and use of more robust and thus more accurate methods, not only in this field of application but in all others where data fail to comply with classical model assumptions.