Motivation: Uridine diphosphate glucunosyltransferases (UGTs) metabolize 15% of FDA approved drugs. Lead optimization efforts benefit from knowing how candidate drugs are metabolized by UGTs. This paper describes a computational method for predicting sites of UGT-mediated metabolism on drug-like molecules. Results: XenoSite correctly predicts test molecules sites of glucoronidation in the Top-1 or Top-2 predictions at a rate of 86 and 97%, respectively. In addition to predicting common sites of UGT conjugation, like hydroxyl groups, it can also accurately predict the glucoronidation of atypical sites, such as carbons. We also describe a simple heuristic model for predicting UGT-mediated sites of metabolism that performs nearly as well (with, respectively, 80 and 91% Top-1 and Top-2 accuracy), and can identify the most challenging molecules to predict on which to assess more complex models. Compared with prior studies, this model is more generally applicable, more accurate and simpler (not requiring expensive quantum modeling). Availability and implementation: The UGT metabolism predictor developed in this study is available at
IntroductionUridine diphosphate glucuronosyltransferases (UGTs) are an important family of proteins that metabolize 15% of FDA-approved drugs (). UGTs conjugate glucuronic acid to a diverse range of molecules, rendering them more hydrophilic and more easily eliminated. Specifically, the glucuronic acid can conjugate to oxygens, nitrogens, sulfurs or carbons, in order of decreasing likelihood (). Understanding and modeling UGT metabolism is important because conjugation can affect the safety and efficacy of drugs. For example, a genetic polymorphism that inactivates a specific UGT significantly increases the bone marrow toxicity of irinotecan, by preventing its primary route of elimination (). Similarily, genetic polymorphisms that increase expression of a specific UGT reduce the efficacy of atorvastatin, a commonly used HMG CoA reductase inhibitor (). More commonly, drug candidates are optimized to ensure that they are metabolically stable and, therefore, not too rapidly eliminated (). Identifying the specific atoms of a candidate drug that are glucoronidated during UGT-mediated metabolismits sites of metabolism (SOMs)is valuable to lead optimization efforts. Knowing the SOMs of a candidate drug allows medicinal chemists to design new compounds with improved bioavailability. Computational methods that predict UGT-mediated SOMs for drug-like molecules are just now beginning to appear. So far, the literature reports two approaches to predicting UGT SOMs (). Both methods use machine learning to encode the chemical and biological rules represented in a set of reactions extracted from the Accelrys Metabolite Database (AMD). Here, we present two models to predict UGT metabolism. First, we propose a simple heuristic model (based on global statistics) to predict UGT metabolism. This simple model correctly predicts the site of UGT conjugation in 80% of molecules. This heuristic model provides both a baseline of performance against which other methods can be compared, and also a method for identifying specific molecules in the dataset that are difficult to predict without modeling. Second, we introduce XenoSite UGT, an adaptation of an algorithm previously developed by our group to predict drug metabolism by cytochrome P450s (). The XenoSite UGT model uses a similar approach as existing methods, by learning rules from a training dataset derived from the AMD. We built the XenoSite model using 2898 unique substrates containing 4557 glucoronidation reactions, 3.2 times more reactions than used in previous models. XenoSite improves on existing approaches, including the simple heuristic model, in several ways. First, it improves on the SOM-UGT model described by, who used support vector machines to build four independent classification models to differentiate between observed and non-observed SOMs for common substructures vulnerable to UGT-mediated metabolismaromatic and aliphatic hydroxyls, carboxylic acids and nitrogen containing groups. Unlike XenoSite, SOM-UGT cannot predict glucuronidation of less common or atypical substructures, such as ketones, thiols, or amides. Moreover,do not describe or test any strategies for combining the predictions of their four independent models into a single set of predictions for a given molecule. This is a critical shortcoming, because in practice individual molecules are being evaluated for metabolic soft spots, and there is no way to know the performance of SOM-UGT at correctly identifying these soft spots on a per-molecule basis. In contrast, XenoSite is a single model that produces predictions for all atoms in molecule, and can even identify atypical sites of conjugation accurately. Second, XenoSite improves on the Site of Metabolism Prediction (SOMP) model described by (), which uses fingerprint descriptors in a navenave Bayes classifier to rank all atoms in a molecule by their likelihood of being conjugated by UGTs. However, SOMP was only tested on small, uncharged molecules, and was not evaluated on difficult to predict molecules. On these challenging molecules, XenoSite was significantly more accurate than SOMP, SOM-UGT and the heuristic model.
ConclusionThis study introduces two approaches to predicting UGT SOMs: (i) a statistics-based heuristic model and (ii) XenoSite, a neural network trained on a large database of UGT metabolism. XenoSite accurately predicts observed SOMs of known substrates 86% of the time, and outperforms existing methods, including the heuristic model, on difficult molecules. XenoSite might be most useful in contexts where atypical sites of UGT metabolism are important and, therefore, the heuristic model is less accurate.