Motivation: It has been claimed in the literature that pooling DNA samples is efficient in estimating haplotype frequencies. There is, however, no theoretical justification based on calculation of statistical efficiency. In fact, the limited evidence given so far is based on simulation studies with small numbers of loci. With rapid advance in technology, it is of interest to see if pooling is still efficient when the number of loci increases. Methods: Instead of resorting to simulation studies, we make use of asymptotic statistical theory to perform exact calculation of the efficiency of pooling relative to no pooling in the estimation of haplotype frequencies. As an intermediate step, we use the log-linear formulation of the haplotype probabilities and derive the asymptotic variance–covariance matrix of the maximum likelihood estimators of the canonical parameters of the log-linear model. Results: Based on our calculations under linkage equilibrium, pooling can suffer huge loss in efficiency relative to no pooling when there are more than three independent loci and the alleles are not rare. Pooling works better for rare alleles. In particular, if all the minor allele frequencies are 0.05, pooling maintains an advantage over no pooling until the number of independent loci reaches 6. High linkage disequilibrium effectively reduces the number of independent loci by ruling out certain haplotypes from occurring. Similar calculations of efficiency for the case of no pooling justify the common belief that it is not worthwhile to use molecular methods to resolve the phase ambiguity of individual genotype data.
INTRODUCTIONPooling DNA samples is a common cost-effective practice in genetic association studies, especially for the purpose of initial screening (). Large pools of DNA samples also come up in forensic studies (). To facilitate haplotype-based association analysis, it is necessary to estimate haplotype frequencies from pooled DNA data, and many algorithms, mainly the expectation maximization (EM) algorithm and its variants (To whom correspondence should be addressed.2003;), have been proposed in the literature. However, the emphasis of these papers is very much algorithmic and numerical, focusing on computing speed and numerical convergence, rather than on the statistical property and efficiency of the estimates being computed. This is unfortunate, because even if the best available algorithm is used to compute, say, the maximum likelihood estimate (MLE), it will be of no use if the estimator itself does not possess good statistical property. What we meant by the statistical property of an estimator is its performance under repeated sampling from the postulated model. Thus, we are concerned about quantities such as bias, variance and also coverage in the case of interval estimation. To compute the estimation efficiency of one estimator relative to another, we adopt the usual definition of taking the ratio of the variance (or mean squared error for biased estimators) of estimator 2 to that of estimator 1. In this article, estimator 1 is the MLE based on pooled genotype data, and estimator 2 is the MLE based on individual genotype data. The number of pools used in estimator 1 and the number of individuals used in estimator 2 are kept equal so that the genotyping costs of the two estimators are the same. Given the large body of work on haplotype estimation based on pooled data, it will be important for practitioners to know when to pool and when not to pool.believed that pooling DNA samples is efficient in estimating haplotype frequencies. In particular, they demonstrated that although pooling K individuals increases ambiguities, the uncertainty of ML estimation increases less than K times that of unpooled DNA, at least for small pool sizes and small number of loci. Thus, for the same genotyping cost, the pooled data MLE will be more efficient than the MLE computed from individual genotype data. Their comparison was limited to the case of small number of loci. Due to rapid advance in technology, huge numbers of SNPs are genotyped routinely, and it would be interesting to find out what happens when the number of loci increases. Our study differs fromin that our reported efficiencies are based on theoretical calculations using asymptotic variance formulae rather than based on simulations. By carrying out theoretical calculations, we avoid some of the shortcomings of simulation studies and can handle more loci. Our findings, for the case of linkage equilibrium and non-rare allele, suggest that pooling begins to lose estimation efficiency (relative to no pooling at the same genotyping cost) when the number of loci is larger than 3. Other factors affecting the efficiency of pooling that have been mentioned in the literature include sparsity (), linkage disequilibrium (LD) and allele frequencies ().commented that it is not necessarily the case that pooling will lead to loss of haplotypePage: 2557 25562563
DISCUSSIONWe have shown in this article that contrary to the findings of, pooling loses efficiency relative to no pooling in the estimation of haplotype frequencies when the number of independent loci is more than 3 and the alleles are not rare. Rare alleles cause sparsity which favors pooling. When the minor allele frequency is 0.05, pooling is more efficient than no pooling until the number of independent loci reaches 6 or 7. Rarer alleles will favor pooling even more. The effect of high LD is also to cause sparsity which allows pooling to maintain an advantage over no pooling for a larger number of loci than is possible under linkage equilibrium. To apply the guidelines derived under the assumption of linkage equilibrium, we find it useful to think in terms of the effective number of independent loci. For example, for model 2222, the effective number of independent loci is 8 when D = 0 and 4 when D = 0.99. By interpolation, it seems reasonable to treat the cases D = 0.25,0.5,0.75 like there are 7, 6 and 5 independent loci, respectively, and this is substantiated by comparing Table 2 with. To summarize, the main finding of this article is that for non-rare alleles and for the same genotyping cost, pooling loses efficiency relative to no pooling in the estimation of haplotype frequencies when the number of independent loci is more than 3. The critical number will increase for rare alleles, for example, to 6 when the minor allele frequency is 0.05. Our findings do not mean that pooling should not be applied in practice. There are circumstances under which pooling is more efficient than no pooling, namely, in situations when only a small number of haplotypes can occur with appreciable frequency () which can be caused by high LD, or rare alleles, or both. Thus, pooling is potentially useful in studies which employ dense sets of markers such as in the genome-wide context.suggests that genotyping error does not have a prominent effect on our findings. Ideally, one could incorporate genotyping error into the modeling and estimation procedure but this is beyond the scope of the present article. To compare haplotype frequencies in casecontrol studies, we must first estimate the frequencies separately for the cases and the controls and so our findings are still relevant. Note that when we say no pooling in this article, we actually mean that we are not pooling individuals (i.e. pool size is 1). As commented by, even when the pool size is 1, the data collected for each individual is typically genotype data which is a pool of two chromosomes or haplotypes. There will be information loss due to phase ambiguity. The ARE of haplotype estimation from individual genotype data without phase information relative to genotype data with phase information (which is much more expensive to get; easily 10 times more according to our colleagues who collect such data) can also be calculated using the results of this article for the asymptotic variance of the unphased data MLE and the multinomial variance formula for the phased data MLE. Assuming again that the minor allele frequencies are equally spaced between 0.1 and 0.3, the asymptotic efficiencies of the estimator based on unphased data relative to that based on phased data are 0.874,0.717, ,0.101,0.078 for the case of 212 Page: 2562 25562563