Motivation: Within bioinformatics, the textual alignment of amino acid sequences has long dominated the determination of similarity between proteins, with all that implies for shared structure, function and evolutionary descent. Despite the relative success of modern-day sequence alignment algorithms, so-called alignment-free approaches offer a complementary means of determining and expressing similarity, with potential benefits in certain key applications, such as regression analysis of protein structure-function studies, where alignment-base similarity has performed poorly. Results: Here, we offer a fresh, statistical physics-based perspective focusing on the question of alignment-free comparison, in the process adapting results from first passage probability distribu-tion to summarize statistics of ensemble averaged amino acid propensity values. In this article, we introduce and elaborate this approach.
IntroductionDetermining the similarity between macromolecules is central to bioinformatics. While comparison of 3-dimensional macromolecular structures remains an active area, most work focuses on macromolecular sequences. From sequence similarity devolves much of our understanding of evolutionary homology and probable structural and functional relatedness, allowing sequences to be grouped in a meaningful way. It is the basis of inherited or inferred functional annotation, allowing us to deduce the broad function of proteins in newly sequenced genomes. Similarity is determined, almost exclusively, through the alignment of sequences as text. Textual sequence similarity is taken as a surrogate for common ancestry and, by extension, functional and structural similarity. Most approaches to protein sequence similarity use models of sequence evolution and compare amino-acid strings, searching for linear conservation of sequence. Sequence alignment, where equivalent or near-equivalent symbols are brought into register, has been investigated intensely for many decades (), and thus an enormous associated literature has accumulated. Typically, substitution matrices specify a score for aligning pairs of nucleotides or amino acids; in such matrices different amino acids or nucleotides score differently according to the potential likelihood that one will replace the other in a sequence. For amino acids, many matrices have been published, based on many rationales (), including the genetic code and amino acid physicochemical properties. Most commonly-used matrices are typically derived empirically from exhaustive comparison of known sequences or structures. The log-odds matrices () derived from the PAM model of protein evolution (was, for many years, the most widely used. Statistical results indicate such matrices adopt an implicit 'log-odds' form, with a specific target distribution for aligned residue pairs. The sensitivity of protein sequence searching depends on the selection of appropriate substitution matrices (). BLOSUM, and other commonly-used matrices, constructed from particular sets of related proteins, are tailored to target frequencies reflecting implied standard background amino acid compositions.
DiscussionThe analysis of sequence similarity is the cornerstone upon which much of bioinformatics is built. Hitherto, alignment-based approaches have completely dominated work in this area, while other approaches, of which there are several (), have been examined with much less thoroughness. Yet the need for effective approaches, able to transcend the limitations of text matching, is clear, if not widely appreciated. The protocol described here takes propensity plots produced from the 544 scales in AAindex (), averages them, and generates a single value characteristic of a whole sequence. Our implementation is, in essence, an out-of-the-box application of existing results, with immense potential for future refinement. We have applied here a well-understood statistical method from stochastic mathematics, using it to interpret and identify independent clusters in protein sequence data. Our approach introduces a fundamentally new way to represent sequences which is nonetheless founded on the long-standing concept of propensity scales, and, capitalizing on features of this representation, we have used it to power a novel approach to clustering. This method is able to capture much of the overall structure of a propensity plot in a single but discriminatory and self-consistent value. Many properties of a protein are encoded within its sequence in a subtle and recondite manner not amendable to direct identification through sequence alignment or the recognition of characteristic sequence motifs. Likewise, the discovery of functionally-similar but sequence-distinct proteins may be frustrated by a lack of ostensive similarity to proteins of known provenance. In such a situation, alignment-dependent approaches may produce ambiguous results or fail completely. There are many examples where structural or functional similarities are readily apparent experimentally, yet are difficultif not impossibleto detect from textual sequence alignment. Perhaps the most obvious are the so-called twilight and midnight zones (). Most protein sequences will fold into unique 3-dimensional structures, and similar sequences will typically have similar structures. Sequence alignments can routinely distinguish between sequence pairs known to have similar or non-similar structures when the sequence identity is greater than 40%. This unequivocal signal becomes lost at 2035% sequence identity: the so-called twilight zone. Alignment-methods often fail to align paired amino-acids correctly even with 2030% identity. Structural alignment has revealed many, many examples of so-called structural superfamilies, where proteins with less than 10% identity nonetheless retain structural propinquity (). The average identity between all sequence pairs of related structures is 810%, and this marks the midnight zone, which is predominantly populated by protein structures that have become similar by convergent evolution. Thus, we need to apply our approach to a variety of both solved and unsolved problems to explore its value. Solved problems include searching within and beyond the twilight zone, and to classify and identify structural and functional relationships within it effectively, it is imperative to explore alternative approaches to pairwise similarity and BLAST statistics (). Unsolved problems include clustering whole genomes where the result is unknown, and is complicated by the presence of multi domain proteins, internal repeats, etc.; the development of regression models using our order parameter values as descriptors; and a surrogate of sequence searching using order values to define similarity measures. In protein design there is a need to move beyond making piecemeal changes to extant sequences to identify wholly new sequences with new functions and structures. Effective alignment free approaches should allow us to address such issues, particularly through the development of properly grounded regression approaches to protein sequence analysis. There are many examples of such approaches: the proteochemometric analysis of protein sequences (van), the prediction of candidate vaccines (,b), and the successful assignment of bacterial proteins to various subcellular locations (). Regression approaches typically require three viable components: an induction engine (based on multivariate statistics, such as PLS, or a machine learning algorithm), data to be modeled (which can be quantitative or categorical in nature), and an appropriate data representation. Data modeling methods have reached sufficient maturity, and data quality is constrained by its availability on a case-by-case basis, so increasingly it is the choice of data representation that is the crucial arbiter of success. This is especially true for protein regression, which lags far behind equivalent work for small molecules. Alignment-independent similarity measures, such as our representation, offer an interesting and seemingly productive avenue for achieving progress in this endeavor. To go beyond sequence motifs and profiles, HMMs and like methodologyand thus identify common function, structure, and evolutionnew, distinct, yet complimentary, methods must be devised: alignment-free methods that can work with textual alignment to identity similarity manifest as shared structure and function. In this article, we have used results from statistical physics to address alignment-free comparison, adapting results from 'first passage probability distribution' to derive a single summary value able to differentiate sequence groups with high accuracy at several levels of granularity. This approach is potential highly robust being largely independent of fluctuation in the tunable parameters. We anticipate that this approach will ultimately take its place alongside textual alignment as a strongly complimentary method for sequence analysis, with many advantages compared to conventional techniques.