Motivation: The use of dense single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data in genetic linkage analysis of large pedigrees is impeded by significant technical, methodological and computational challenges. Here we describe Superlink-Online SNP, a new powerful online system that streamlines the linkage analysis of SNP data. It features a fully integrated flexible processing workflow comprising both well-known and novel data analysis tools, including SNP clustering, erroneous data filtering, exact and approximate LOD calculations and maximum-likelihood haplotyping. The system draws its power from thousands of CPUs, performing data analysis tasks orders of magnitude faster than a single computer. By providing an intuitive interface to sophisticated state-of-the-art analysis tools coupled with high computing capacity, Superlink-Online SNP helps geneticists unleash the potential of SNP data for detecting disease genes. Results: Computations performed by Superlink-Online SNP are automatically parallelized using novel paradigms, and executed on unlimited number of private or public CPUs. One novel service is large-scale approximate Markov Chain–Monte Carlo (MCMC) analysis. The accuracy of the results is reliably estimated by running the same computation on multiple CPUs and evaluating the Gelman–Rubin Score to set aside unreliable results. Another service within the workflow is a novel parallelized exact algorithm for inferring maximum-likelihood haplotyp-ing. The reported system enables genetic analyses that were previously infeasible. We demonstrate the system capabilities through a study of a large complex pedigree affected with metabolic syndrome. Availability: Superlink-Online SNP is freely available for researchers at
INTRODUCTIONGenetic linkage analysis is a statistical method for locating disease-susceptibility genes by finding patterns of excess co-segregation between a genetic marker and a phenotype of interest in a pedigree (). This method is recently gaining newfound interest, thanks to the rapidly growing availability of high-throughput sequencing data (Bailey). Namely, linkage analysis of large pedigrees can be better powered and more cost-effective than genome-wide association studies for discovering rare variants (). It has recently been shown that genetic linkage analysis can be performed using single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotypes extracted from sequencing data (), demonstrating the necessity of efficient tools capable of analysing SNP data in large pedigrees. Existing packages that perform exact linkage analysis, such as LIPED (), LINKAGE (), MENDEL (), FASTLINK (), GENEHUNTER (), VITESSE (O'), Superlink (), Merlin () and Allegro (), use either the ElstonStewart algorithm (), the LanderGreen algorithm () or a combination thereof. While these packages have been successfully used for exact genetic linkage analysis of moderately sized families, they are not suitable for analysing dense SNP data in large pedigrees owing to the high computational complexity of the aforementioned algorithms. Several approaches have been proposed to circumvent the high complexity of linkage analysis in large pedigrees. One approach is to split a large pedigree into several smaller easier to analyse pedigrees (), but this can result in significant power loss (). Another wellestablished approach is the approximate analysis of large *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com pedigrees through Markov ChainMonte Carlo (MCMC), available in packages such as Loki (), MORGAN () and SimWalk2 (). The main drawback of MCMC methods is the lack of a reliable accuracy measure, for which there is no general analytical analysis. Other approaches include estimating identical by descent regions heuristically or by observing each marker separately (), but an exact method for analysing dense SNP data in large pedigrees, using the full pedigree information, is still lacking. The analysis of dense SNP data in large pedigrees also necessitates suitable interoperable software tools for manipulating bulky raw SNP data. While several SNP data manipulation packages have been developed in recent years [e.g. SNP HiTLink (), easyLINKAGE-Plus (), IGG (), Mega2 () and SNPP (, none is tightly integrated with a software package capable of parallelizing linkage analysis tasks across a multitude of CPUs. Superlink-Online SNP provides a comprehensive and easy-to-use solution for both computational and technical challenges posed by linkage analysis of SNP data in large pedigrees. First, the system makes extensive use of modern distributed computing technologies, which provide both performance and functional improvements impossible otherwise. The exact linkage analysis is sped up by using thousands of CPUs in parallel. Superlink-Online SNP uses novel methodologies to reduce the amount of computations required for a single analysis by up to a 100-fold () and uses a computer grid 10 times larger than we reported before (), resulting in up to three orders of magnitude faster analyses. Superlink-Online SNP also parallelizes the approximate linkage analysis of an arbitrary number of markers and pedigree members using the MORGAN software. Importantly, the parallel infrastructure enables us to improve the practical utility of this analysis by providing a reliable accuracy estimate through the well-established GelmanRubin (GR) statistic (). Finally, the system uses DAOOPT, a novel parallel algorithm for maximum-likelihood haplotyping analysis, yielding two orders of magnitude faster analysis than previously reported for demanding pedigrees (). Second, the system presents a simple, intuitive and secure web interface, fully integrating these powerful data analysis services with a set of pre-and post-processing tools for preparation and filtering of SNP data, and presentation of the results. All the tools are designed to be used in succession, where one may invoke each tool on the output received from another tool. Notably, the system records the full history of every data artifact it produces, thus enabling users to reconstruct all the processing steps that led to a given result, and easily reproduce the results when necessary. All the input data as well as the analysis results can be readily downloaded and entirely removed from the Superlink-Online SNP web site. By providing an intuitive interface to sophisticated state-ofthe-art tools executed on thousands of CPUs, Superlink-Online SNP enables the computation of a variety of analyses that were infeasible before, and helps geneticists exploit the full potential of SNP data for detecting disease genes.