Motivation: Despite the widespread popularity of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) for genetic mapping of complex traits, most existing GWAS methodologies are still limited to the use of static phenotypes measured at a single time point. In this work, we propose a new method for association mapping that considers dynamic phenotypes measured at a sequence of time points. Our approach relies on the use of Time-Varying Group Sparse Additive Models (TV-GroupSpAM) for high-dimensional, functional regression. Results: This new model detects a sparse set of genomic loci that are associated with trait dynamics , and demonstrates increased statistical power over existing methods. We evaluate our method via experiments on synthetic data and perform a proof-of-concept analysis for detecting single nucleotide polymorphisms associated with two phenotypes used to assess asthma severity: forced vital capacity, a sensitive measure of airway obstruction and bronchodilator response, which measures lung response to bronchodilator drugs. Availability and Implementation: Source code for TV-GroupSpAM freely available for download at
IntroductionThe goal of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) is to analyze a large set of genetic markers that span the entire genome in order to identify loci that are associated with a phenotype of interest. Over the past decade, GWAS has been used to successfully identify genetic variants that are associated with numerous diseases and complex traits, ranging from breast cancer to blood pressure (). However, a significant challenge in performing GWAS is that the studies are often vastly under-powered due to the high dimensionality of the feature set relative to the small number of human samples available. Traditional GWAS methodologies test each variant independently for association with the phenotype, and use a stringent significance threshold to adjust for multiple hypothesis testing (). Although this approach works well for traits that depend on strong effects from a few loci, it is less suitable for complex, polygenic traits that are influenced by weak effects from many different genetic variants. More recently, a significant body of work has emerged on penalized regression approaches for GWAS that capture the joint effects of all markers (). The majority of these methods model the phenotype as a weighted sum of the genotype values at each locus, and use a regularization penalty such as the ' 1 norm to identify a sparse set of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are predictive of the trait. Although this technique helps to reduce overfitting and detect fewer spurious SNP-trait associations, the lack of statistical power to identify true associations persists. Here we aim to further boost the statistical power of GWAS by proposing a new model that leverages dynamic trait data, in which a particular trait is measured in each individual repeatedly over time, as depicted in. Such datasets are often generated by longitudinal studies that follow participants over the course of months, years, or even decades. Though broadly available, dynamic trait datasets are frequently underutilized by practitioners who ignore the temporal information. We believe that leveraging time-sequential trait measurements in GWAS can lead to greater statistical power for association mapping. To illustrate this concept, consider the hypothetical patterns of SNP influence on the phenotype shown in. As in traditional GWAS, an association between a SNP and the phenotype exists if the three SNP genotypes (which we denote AA, Aa and aa) have differential effects on the trait. In the first example, the effects of the three SNP genotypes only differ in the t 2 0:5; 1 time interval. A static method that uses data from an arbitrarily chosen time point or simply treats the time series as i.i.d. samples could easily miss this association, whereas a dynamic method that considers the entire dataset would detect it. The second example shows a SNP in which the difference between the effects of the three genotypes is small but consistent over time. Although this signal could be too weak to be interpreted as a significant association in the static case, it gets much stronger once evidence from the entire time series is considered. The longitudinal data setting is challenging because traits are measured at irregularly spaced time points over subject-specific intervals. One approach that has been proposed for performing GWAS of dynamic traits, called functional GWAS, or fGWAS (), constructs a separate model to estimate the smooth, time-varying influence of each SNP on the phenotype. Once the mean effects have been estimated for each genotype at each time point, a hypothesis test is performed to determine whether the SNP has any additive or dominant effect on the trait. Although the use of dynamic trait data gives fGWAS more statistical power than a standard hypothesis test on static data, the principal drawback of this method is that it is inappropriate for modeling complex traits that arise from interactions between genetic effects at different loci. A related approach extends the fGWAS framework to model multiple SNPs at once using a Bayesian group lasso framework (). Although this approach seems promising, it is severely limited by its very slow MCMC inference procedure. There are a number of other methods that have been developed for dynamic trait GWAS, including, and Li and Sillanp a a (2013). However, the majority of them either perform single-locus analysis (as in fGWAS) or fail to learn an explicit, interpretable representation of the dynamic effects of the genetic variants at each locus. The notable exception to this is fGWAS with Bayesian group lasso, which we directly compare to our approach in a later section. In this work, we introduce a new penalized multivariate regression approach for GWAS of dynamic quantitative traits, in which the phenotype is modeled as a sum of nonparametric, time-varying SNP effects. We call this Time-Varying Group Sparse Additive Models, or TV-GroupSpAM. Our method is based on GroupSpAM (), a non-parametric regression model with a groupstructured penalty over the input features, which we extend to capture the dynamic effects of SNPs. This model has three major advantages over existing approaches: (i) we leverage dynamic trait data; (ii) we model the contribution of each SNP to the phenotype as a smooth function of time, and explicitly learn these influence patterns; (iii) we model the combined effects of multiple SNPs on the phenotype and select a sparse subset that participate in the model, thereby identifying meaningful SNP-trait associations. We show that TV-GroupSpAM exhibits desirable empirical advantages over baseline methods on both simulated and real datasets.
DiscussionIn this work, we propose a new approach to GWAS that bridges the gap between existing penalized regression methods, such as the lasso and group lasso, and dynamic trait methods, such as fGWAS. Our approach uses penalized regression to identify a sparse set of SNPs that jointly influence a dynamic trait. This is a challenging task for several reasons: first, we must contend with high-dimensional data, which necessitates that we regularize the model to perform variable selection; second, we do not know the true underlying model by which each SNP acts on the phenotype, and therefore we must avoid making parametric assumptions about these patterns; third, we assume that SNP effects vary smoothly over time, which means that we cannot apply a standard multi-task regression model that treats the time series as a set of unordered traits. Although TV-GroupSpAM achieves significantly better performance on synthetic data than existing methods, there are still certain challenging aspects of genome-wide association mapping that are not addressed by this approach. One of these is the task of rare variant detection. Although our method is robust to detecting spurious effects from rare variants, we are also not able to detect true effects from rare variants with high power. This is due to the lack of data available for the aa genotype in SNPs with very low minor allelegrowth factor b1; has pro-inflammatory as well as anti-inflammatory properties, and has been linked to asthma and airway remodeling () CYP2A6, CYP2A7, RAB4B, MIA, EGLNDgenes located in a known COPD locus (A time-varying group sparse additive model for GWASfrequency; because we estimate a separate effect function for each SNP genotype, we are unable to accurately estimate f aa when there are very few data points corresponding to this genotype. Modifying TV-GroupSpAM to more accurately detect the effects of rare variants would be an interesting direction for future work.