Motivation: Protein sequences are often composed of regions that have distinct evolutionary histories as a consequence of domain shuffling, recombination or gene conversion. New approaches are required to discover, visualize and analyze these sequence regions and thus enable a better understanding of protein evolution. Results: Here, we have developed an alignment-free and visual approach to analyze sequence relationships. We use the number of shared n-grams between sequences as a measure of sequence similarity and rearrange the resulting affinity matrix applying a spectral technique. Heat maps of the affinity matrix are employed to identify and visualize clusters of related sequences or outliers, while n-gram-based dot plots and conservation profiles allow detailed analysis of similarities among selected sequences. Using this approach, we have identified signatures of domain shuffling in an otherwise poorly characterized family, and homology clusters in another. We conclude that this approach may be generally useful as a framework to analyze related, but highly divergent protein sequences. It is particularly useful as a fast method to study sequence relationships prior to much more time-consuming multiple sequence alignment and phylogenetic analysis. Availability: A software implementation (MOSAIC) of the framework described here can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONEukaryotic proteins often evolve in a modular fashion, acquiring protein domains from related or unrelated sequences via domain shuffling and non-homologous recombination (). In this way, protein families can gain or lose protein domains over time. Domain shuffling is a prominent feature of eukaryotic genomes
DISCUSSIONWe present here a framework to analyze sequence relationships that consists of three basic elements: n-gram-based sequence similarity measurement, spectral decomposition and affinity matrix reordering. These elements in combination yield distinctive advantages for identifying composite evolutionary histories in protein sequences in comparison to traditional methods, such as hierarchical clustering based on BLAST scores.
CONCLUSIONWe have presented a framework that can be applied to a broad range of sequence data types and that consistently utilizes n-grams instead of alignment-based methods for the visual analysis of sequence relationships, consisting of n-gram-based dot plots, conservation profiles and sequence similarity heat maps. We provide the software application mosaic, an implementation of this framework, that allows to interactively navigate and study sequence relationships. Although the mosaic software makes no quantitative statements, we found it to be very useful for the qualitative analysis of protein families. Applying our approach to three families, which present severe challenges to traditional phylogenetic analysis, we identified signatures of domain shuffling in one of the families and delineated 'homology clusters' in the other family, while we were able to recapitulate known cases of gene conversion in the third. While understanding sequence relationships is useful in its own right, it also forms the basis for more-informed phylogenetic analysis. For example, in the presence of domain shuffling, sequences can be split into relevant subsequences before phylogenetic analysis. Similarly, exclusion of outlying or non-homologous sequences will avoid problems with erroneous inference of multiple sequence alignments. More generally, gene conversion, non-allelic homologous recombination, domain shuffling and other reticulate events are increasingly recognized as having shaped the evolution of many protein families, and there is hence a need to develop new frameworks for analyzing and visualizing the relationships between sequences in such families. The method presented here provides a general framework for exploring sequence relationships and can be easily extended or adjusted for application to specific types of sequence comparisons.