Sequencing reads generated by RNA-sequencing (RNA-seq) must first be mapped back to the genome through alignment before they can be further analyzed. Current fast and memory-saving short-read mappers could give us a quick view of the transcriptome. However, they are neither designed for reads that span across splice junctions nor for repetitive reads, which can be mapped to multiple locations in the genome (multi-reads). Here, we describe a new software package: ABMapper, which is specifically designed for exploring all putative locations of reads that are mapped to splice junctions or repetitive in nature. Availability and Implementation: The software is freely available at: http://abmapper.sourceforge.net/. The software is written in C++ and PERL. It runs on all major platforms and operating systems including Windows, Mac OS X and LINUX.
INTRODUCTIONThe advent of RNA-seq technology has dramatically transformed transcriptomics within just a few years (). The next-generation sequencing platform can generate far more data per experiment than traditional sequencing technology. Millions of short, sometimes paired-end reads have brought about new challenges: to map them back onto the genome for determining gene expression level and for detecting splicing events. Two groups, Li et al. and Langmead et al. have developed shortread alignment tools based on the BurrowWheeler transformation algorithm (), which runs fast and with low memory requirement (). A major drawback of these fast aligners is that they require reads to map to contiguous genomic sequence, and thus are not appropriate for reads spanning splice junctions. SplitSeek (), TopHat () and SpliceMap () are three widely known software packages written to make up for the lack of ability of these short-read aligners for splice site identification. However, these tools have to rely on output from existing aligners: TopHat requires bowtie; SpliceMap requires ELAND or bowtie; and SplitSeek depends on the SOLiD Whole Transcriptome analysis pipeline and is therefore restricted only to SOLiD dataset. In this work, we present ABMapper, which has been developed as a stand-alone tool for ab initio mapping of sequencing reads that span across splicing junctions or reads that have multiple putative locations within the genome. It adopts a fast suffix-array algorithm and a dual-seed strategy to find all putative locations of reads.