Motivation: We study microRNA (miRNA) bindings to metastable RNA secondary structures close to minimum free energy conformations in the context of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and messenger RNA (mRNA) concentration levels, i.e. whether features of miRNA bindings to metastable conformations could provide additional information supporting the differences in expression levels of the two sequences defined by a SNP. In our study, the instances [mRNA/3 0 UTR; SNP; miRNA] were selected based on strong expression level analyses, SNP locations within binding regions and the computationally feasible identification of metastable conformations. Results: We identified 14 basic cases [mRNA; SNP; miRNA] of 3 0 UTR-lengths ranging from 124 up to 1078 nt reported in recent literature , and we analyzed the number, structure and miRNA binding to metastable conformations within an energy offset E above mfe conformations. For each of the 14 instances, the miRNA binding characteristics are determined by the corresponding STarMir output. Among the different parameters we introduced and analyzed, we found that three of them, related to the average depth and average opening energy of metastable conformations, may provide supporting information for a stronger separation between miRNA bindings to the two alleles defined by a given SNP. Availability and implementation: At http://kks.inf.kcl.ac.uk/MSbind. html the MSbind tool is available for calculating features of metastable conformations determined by putative miRNA binding sites.
INTRODUCTIONWithin the past few years, analyzing concentration levels of microRNAs (miRNAs) and their putative messenger RNA (mRNA) targets has become a major topic in miRNA research.experimentally evaluated a parameterized analytical expression that estimates the number of genes g having t transcripts present in a single cell. The parameters are adjusted based on microarray data for a large number of genes extracted from single embryonic mouse neural stem cells, where the actual aim is the comparison of transcript numbers in phenotypically identical cells. The authors conclude from observed data for $13 000 genes that the typical number of gene copies lies between 520, with 85% of genes having 5100 copies in a single cell. Although the analysis is carried out for a specific cell type, the authors expect similar distribution results for a wide range of cell types.provide experimental evidence that short RNAs (miRNAs and siRNAs) having a higher number of target transcripts within a single cell will downregulate each individual target gene to a lesser extent than those with a lower number of targets, which implies that the competition between target genes for a limited number of small RNAs may determine the degree of downregulation; see alsofor the concept of competing mRNAs associated with the number and distribution of multiple binding sites.provide data supporting the assumption that endogenous miRNAs preferentially target mRNAs with long 3 0 UTRs. The authors also discussamong other featuresthe interaction between exogenous and endogenous miRNAs and critically assess the value of microarray data in the context of miRNA target prediction. The sequencing method developed bysupports the assertion that only the most abundant miRNAs mediate target suppression. For example, deep sequencing of monocyte cells revealed the presence of $310 miRNAs, with only $40% of the miRNAs showing suppressing activity. For 480% of the targets, the corresponding miRNA was expressed 4100 reads/million. For the miRNA target prediction tool TargetScan,demonstrate how predictions may improve if target abundance is accounted for in binding scores. The impact of the life cycle of mRNAs on siRNA and miRNA efficacy is studied in. The authors draw the conclusion that miRNA target prediction could be improved if data about mRNA turnover rates are incorporated into prediction tools. Althoughwhere X m and X s are the mRNA and siRNA concentrations, k m is the mRNA transcription rate, d m the basal mRNA degradation rate and X m , X s  is the siRNA-induced mRNA degradation rate. The models differ in the assumption about X m , X s  and are fitted to experimental data obtained for a single siRNA targeting the coding region of the EGFP mRNA. The authors obtain the best fit for X m , X s   pX m X h s =q h  X h s  with h $ 4:5, P $ 0:008=min and q $ 0:1 pmol. Within a similar *To whom correspondence should be addressed. framework,study the so-called miRNAmediated feedforward loop in which a master transcription factor regulates an miRNA together with a set of target genes, and the mathematical models studied byadditionally account for the concentration level of the argonaute protein complex.study analytically the impact of multiple small non-coding RNAs on the regulation of a single target mRNA and subsequently the dynamics of protein production.combine the concept of miRNA binding site accessibility with miRNA and mRNA concentration levels. For, [T] anddenoting the equilibrium (final) concentrations of the miRNA, target mRNA and of the hybridized structure, respectively, the authors use the equilibrium condition ST=ST  expG=c, where G is the energy score that accounts for making the binding site accessible and the free energy of the hybridized structure (the constant c stands for the product of the gas constant and the temperature). Combining the equilibrium condition with conservation of mass equations (for initial concentrations S 0  and T 0 ) eventually leads to an analytical expression forin terms of S 0 , T 0  and G, where the latter is calculated for a particular binding site. Marin and Vanio ek (2012) introduce a new accessibility-based algorithm that uses a statistical analysis of all putative binding sites for a given miRNA-3 0 UTR pair. Among the top 100 target predictions for 153 fruit fly miRNAs, the algorithm finds more than twice as many validated targets compared with other accessibility-based target prediction methods. Reviews of existing miRNA target prediction tools and information about latest developments can be found in. The target prediction tool CoMeTa designed byoperates on the assumption that targets of a given miRNA are coexpressed with each other. The target prediction score is based on the evaluation of thousands of publicly available microarray data. For the 675 human miRNAs analyzed in the study, 490% of the validated targets fall within the first 50% of predicted targets (which, however, could be a large number). In a similar way, the tool miRror designed bycombines scores produced by an ensemble of established miRNA target prediction tools with rankings obtained from gene expression and HITS-CLIP data.consider the problem of selecting an antisense sequence that is able to effectively bind to a target mRNA and block protein synthesis. One of the key features of the authors' method is the presuppositions that mRNA secondary structures are in a constant state of flux and are assuming different suboptimal states, which also determines the approach taken in the present article. Johnson and Srivastava (2013) designed a tool that generates and compares suboptimal secondary structures of a given mRNA sequence. The comparison aims at identifying regions that are least similar among the set of folded structures, which indicates volatility in intramolecular hydrogen bonding. Such regions are seen as candidates for antisense binding. The method is evaluated on six mRNA sequences and compared with results produced by the Soligo application of Sfold (). In our article, we study miRNA bindings to sets of metastable secondary structures induced by 3 0 UTRs and their mutated counterparts, where the single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are located within the miRNA binding site.briefly mention the analysis of miRNA bindings to metastable conformations. The authors compare the prediction performance over samples of 1000 secondary structures without constraints to samples of 100 metastable conformations. They report the sample of 1000 conformations is more favourable. In our approach, we discriminate between metastable conformations with regard to depth and average opening energies. The impact of SNPs on minimum free energy mRNA conformations has been comprehensively studied in. The authors analyzed a total number of 34 557 SNPs in 12 450 genes. The minimum free energy conformations were calculated by using RNAfold (). The authors provide a great variety of data about the distribution of SNPs within mRNA transcripts and their effect on minimum free energy values of secondary structures as well as on the profile of the ensemble of suboptimal structures and structures with highin the 5 0 UTR of the human FTL gene in conjunction with associated SNPs that restore the overall wild-type ensemble of secondary structures, thus leading to the notion of structure-stabilizing haplotypes. The authors also analyzed the stabilizing effect of multiple structure-stabilizing haplotypes on binding sites of miRNAs and RNA binding proteins (nine cases of 3 0 UTRs and one case of 5 0 UTR). As pointed out by the authors, the findings suggest that certain SNP pairs are conserved in the human population because they stabilize ensembles of mRNA conformations. Recently, databases have become available that report SNP data in the context of miRNA bindings, for example, miRdSNP (), PolymiRTS (), MicroSNiPer () and the related tool RNAsnp (). Sethupathy and Collins (2008) critically assess several genetic association studies related miRNA bindings and the potential impact of SNPs in bindings regions. The authors highlight the importance of follow-up functional experiments for a deeper understanding of the real effect miRNA target site variations may have on the development of various human diseases. Consequently, we researched for our analysis the recent literature for studies on the impact of SNPs on miRNA bindings meeting the following four conditions: (i) the expression levels of both alleles involved are analyzed experimentally by SNP genotyping (for some instances, a combination of clinical association studies and strong in silico results) or related methods involving PCR experiments, (ii) the underlying allele information can be extracted as consistent data from the NCBI database, the dbSNP database and the Ensembl database (3 0 UTR transcripts), (iii) the miRNA bindings are predicted by the latest version of STarMir () at least for the allele with the stronger inhibitory effect with the SNP position being inside the binding region and (iv) identifying all metastable conformations within an energy offset E above mfe conformations is computationally feasible (3 0 UTR length  1000 nt). Meeting all four conditions at least to a certain extent reduced the number of case studies we found to a small set of 14 RNA instances.
CONCLUSIONOf the 14 instances we analyzed, 13 instances are sensitive to the parameters G ind , G asc:N , R N and D N open we introduced in Equation (1) until Equations (5). For RAP1A (L  1078), slightly larger values of E did not create differences between basic parameters for both alleles and eventually led to an unmanageable size of data for standard desktop computer configurations. The absence of experimental data about copy numbers of mRNA transcripts considered in the present study prevents the selection of a particular value of D N open (or of the other two highlighted parameters), which is why we considered three representative values of N  simultaneously, without calculating P-values. The upper bound of N  100 is motivated by the data provided in, seethere. The data provided inindicate that G mfe , G tot , G N not necessarily contribute to a deeper insight into miRNA binding patterns to different alleles, see also the discussion of instances in Section 3.3. In particular, G tot and G N are related only to free energy values of metastable structures, which is why a further discrimination by the depth of metastable conformations and the opening energy of binding regions was introduced. Consequently, we focus in the summary of findings presented inon the values calculated for G asc:N , R N and D N open. In, the row 'StarMirtotal' indicates by '' that the G total score (see) supports the allele with the stronger miRNA binding stated in the underlying literature; '/' indicates 05G s total 5G w total. As aforementioned, data about estimations of copy numbers are not available for the mRNA transcripts we consider in the present study. To avoid the inclusion of irrelevant data (by averaging or thresholding), we consider a 'best case scenario' for each instance: We select a value of N in such a way that the support of the miRNA binding to the allele identified in the underlying literature source (s-case) is maximized. In case of multiple N values (for 11 instances same pattern as infor at least two N), the smallest N is selected and named inin the row 'N selection'. For the selected N, theentry is labelled as positive '', if G asc:N and D N open are positive, respectively, or R N 51:00. If the data are inconclusive (equal or close to 0.00 or 1.00), we use '/'. For example, for HLA-G we select