Motivation: Similarity searching and clustering of chemical compounds by structural similarities are important computational approaches for identifying drug-like small molecules. Most algorithms available for these tasks are limited by their speed and scalability, and cannot handle todays large compound databases with several million entries. Results: In this article, we introduce a new algorithm for accelerated similarity searching and clustering of very large compound sets using embedding and indexing (EI) techniques. First, we present EI-Search as a general purpose similarity search method for finding objects with similar features in large databases and apply it here to searching and clustering of large compound sets. The method embeds the compounds in a high-dimensional Euclidean space and searches this space using an efficient index-aware nearest neighbor search method based on locality sensitive hashing (LSH). Second, to cluster large compound sets, we introduce the EI-Clustering algorithm that combines the EI-Search method with Jarvis–Patrick clustering. Both methods were tested on three large datasets with sizes ranging from about 260 000 to over 19 million compounds. In comparison to sequential search methods, the EI-Search method was 40–200 times faster, while maintaining comparable recall rates. The EI-Clustering method allowed us to significantly reduce the CPU time required to cluster these large compound libraries from several months to only a few days. Availability: Software implementations and online services have been developed based on the methods introduced in this study. The online services provide access to the generated clustering results and ultra-fast similarity searching of the PubChem Compound database with subsecond response time.
INTRODUCTIONSoftware tools for mining the available small molecule space play an important role in many bioscience and biomedical areas. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.They are ranging from drug discovery, chemical biology and chemical genomics to medicinal chemistry (). Currently, the structures of over 20 million distinct small molecules are available in open access databases, like PubChem (), ChemBank (), NCI (), ChemMine (), ChemDB () and ZINC (). To analyze these important data resources, efficient structure similarity search tools are essential for retrieving chemical and bioactivity information from databases (;). In addition, they are often useful for predicting bioactive small molecules (). A variety of structure similarity search methods are available (reviewed by). Unfortunately, they are often not fast enough for systematic analyses of very large compound collections with millions of compounds. This is because most of these methods sequentially compare a query structure against all entries in the database and then rank the results by a chosen scoring system, and thus the cost to perform similarity searches grows linearly with the size of the compound database. Therefore, more efficient and sophisticated search methods need to be developed to utilize the available chemical space efficiently. Clustering of compound sets is essential on practically all stages of the discovery process of bioactive compounds (reviewed by). Commonly, structure similarity-based clustering utilizes the pairwise similarity measures generated by the above compound search methods to partition the data into discrete groups of similar compounds. An example is JarvisPatrick clustering, which is among the most widely used clustering methods in cheminformatics (). Alternatively, they can be used to build hierarchical trees that represent the similarity relationships among all items in a compound dataset. One of the main challenges in this area is the difficulty to cluster the millions of compound structures that are currently available in the public domain. This is because many cluster analysis approaches multiply the complexity of a chosen similarity search method by the number of compounds in the dataset. They often require the calculation of all-againstall similarities for the compounds under investigation and the computational cost grows quadratically with the size of the dataset. Therefore, novel clustering methods need to be developed for exploring this vast chemical space efficiently.Page: 954 953959