ClusPro is a heavily used protein–protein docking server based on the fast Fourier transform (FFT) correlation approach. While FFT enables global docking, accounting for pairwise distance restraints using penalty terms in the scoring function is computationally expensive. We use a different approach and directly select low energy solutions that also satisfy the given restraints. As expected, accounting for restraints generally improves the rank of near native predictions, while retaining or even improving the numerical efficiency of FFT based docking. Availability and Implementation: The software is freely available as part of the ClusPro web-based server at http://cluspro.org/
IntroductionThe fast Fourier transform (FFT) correlation approach has proved to be very useful for macromolecular docking. The major advantage of the method is the extremely fast evaluation of scoring functions, enabling global systematic sampling of the entire conformational space defined by the relative orientations of two molecules. Although the scoring function must be expressed as a sum of correlation functions (), it is possible to represent complex energy functions, based on molecular mechanics and including solvation terms, in a form suitable for FFT. FFT-based methods such as ZDOCK (), GRAMM (), PIPER (), DOT () and DOCK/PIERR () consistently perform well both as protocols of individual groups and as automatic servers. In particular, during the latest rounds of the blind protein docking experiment CAPRI (), performance of our docking server ClusPro (), based on the PIPER program, was comparable with top human predictor groups (). The server is heavily used: by December 2015 the Cluspro 2.0 website registered over 15 000 unique user IPs, and completed almost 150 000 docking calculations, currently adding about 5000 per month. Models built by the server have been reported in over 400 publications. In spite of the significant progress, docking generally needs to be complemented by experimental validation. The main reason is that the current scoring functions are not accurate enough for finding the best models among the ones generated by the sampling. Thus, additional information can be very useful for improving the reliability of structure determination. Accordingly, ClusPro has the option to apply extra attraction terms to residues that are a priori known to be in the interface. Conversely, repulsion terms are applied to residues that are not expected to be in the interface. However, what ClusPro was lacking so far was the ability to define distance restraints between pairs of atoms or residues. Such restraints can be derived, e.g. from NMR Nuclear Overhauser Effect (NOE) experiments or by chemical crosslinking. The use of restraints is central to the popular High Ambiguity Driven biomolecular DOCKing (HADDOCK) server (), which incorporates the interaction restraints into the scoring function to guide the search toward regions of the conformational space in which the restraints are satisfied. While the extra terms in the scoring function due to the restraints do not significantly increase the computational burden if the sampling is based on Monte Carlo or molecular dynamics algorithms, a similar approach is very costly when used with FFT based sampling. The problem is that each pairwise restraint in the scoring function requires a new correlation function term, and thus an additional Fourier transform, thereby reducing the numerical efficiency of the method. Thus, it is not surprising that none of the successful FFTbased docking programs has the option of accounting for pairwise restraints. However, since FFT performs global sampling, there is no need for guiding the search toward feasible regions. Based on this observation, we solve the problem by directly selecting low energy solutions that also satisfy the restraints. As will be shown, this implies that frequently only portions of conformational space needs to be examined, and hence the computational efforts can actually be reduced. A further advantage is that the scoring function is not affected, and thus we retain the favorable properties of the ClusPro server, validated in many rounds of the CAPRI docking experiment. We demonstrate the method using both simulated and experimentally determined distance restraints.