As one of the most important reversible types of post-translational modification, protein methyla-tion catalyzed by methyltransferases carries many pivotal biological functions as well as many essential biological processes. Identification of methylation sites is prerequisite for decoding methy-lation regulatory networks in living cells and understanding their physiological roles. Experimental methods are limitations of labor-intensive and time-consuming. While in silicon approaches are cost-effective and high-throughput manner to predict potential methylation sites, but those previous predictors only have a mixed model and their prediction performances are not fully satisfactory now. Recently, with increasing availability of quantitative methylation datasets in diverse species (especially in eukaryotes), there is a growing need to develop a species-specific predictor. Here, we designed a tool named PSSMe based on information gain (IG) feature optimization method for species-specific methylation site prediction. The IG method was adopted to analyze the importance and contribution of each feature, then select the valuable dimension feature vectors to reconstitute a new orderly feature, which was applied to build the finally prediction model. Finally, our method improves prediction performance of accuracy about 15% comparing with single features. Furthermore, our species-specific model significantly improves the predictive performance compare with other general methylation prediction tools. Hence, our prediction results serve as useful resources to elucidate the mechanism of arginine or lysine methylation and facilitate hypothesis-driven experimental design and validation. Availability and Implementation: The tool online service is implemented by C# language and freely available at http://bioinfo.
IntroductionMany post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins provide the proteome with structural and functional diversity, and regulate cellular plasticity and dynamics (). Protein methylation is considered one of the most common and reversible PTMs (), which is an important element in many significant biological functions (). Meanwhile, researchers and clinicians have proved that protein methylation and their regulatory enzymes are involved in the process of a variety of human diseases such as cancer (), cardiovascular disease (), multiple sclerosis (), rheumatoid arthritis (), as well as neuroses generative disorders (). Therefore, annotation of methylation in proteomes would certainly provide very useful information or clues for drug discovery to study and analyze the mechanisms that govern these basic epigenetic phenomena. Identification of methylated sites is the first step towards to understanding molecular mechanism of protein methylation. Although there have many conventional experimental methods to identify protein methylation sites, such as Chip-Chip (), mass spectrometry (MS) () and methylation-specific antibodies (), these experimental approaches are limited to labor-intensive and timeconsuming. While in silicon prediction of methylation sites is much more desirable for its convenience and fast speed, and there have been several tools published for prediction protein methylated sites. Recently, our lab () have systematically summarized current of computational prediction methylation sites method of the past ten years. Furthermore, we have also summarized characteristic of differences among several typical tools (the detailed information in Supplementary), including MeMo (), BPB-PPMS (), MASA (), PMeS (), PLMLA (), MethK (), iMethyl-PseAAC () and GPS-MSP (). For instance,designed the first methylation sites predictor within their AutoMotif Server using regular expression technique. Subsequently,combined Bi-profile Bayes feature extraction with support vector machine (SVM) to predict arginine and lysine methylation. Based on an enhanced feature encoding scheme (composed of the sparse property coding, normalized van der Waals volume, position weight amino and accessible surface area), our lab developed a tool PMeS () to predict arginine and lysine methylation. Meanwhileincorporated protein sequence information, secondary structure and amino acid properties to identify methylation and acetylation of lysine residues in whole protein sequences.used amino acid composition (AAC) and accessible surface area (ASA) coalition SVM to identify lysinemethylated sites on histones and non-histone proteins. Most recently,adopted GPS 3.0 algorithm and built GPS-MSP (Methyl-group Specific Predictor) for the prediction of general or type-specific methyllysine and methylarginine residues in proteins. Although each of the aforementioned methods possesses its own merit and did play roles in stimulating the development of this area, they still have limitations when applied to whole proteomes and need improvement from one or more of the following aspects: (i) The benchmark dataset used by the previous investigators needs to updated by incorporating new experiment-confirmed data, because methylation data updated very quickly in recent years. For example,created MethK model just with 1306 methyllysine sites at 2013, whereas our work have found 3180 lysine methylation sites in total. (ii) The features used by the previous models were single and simple, which it is casing the performance of the several aforementioned predictors not fully satisfactory, so there is still room to improve the predictive accuracy (the detailed information see comparison with other general prediction tools in results and discussion). (iii) The third limitation is that the methylation specific classification (species or methyltransferase family) was not discussed in previous methods. The majority of existing studies except GPS-MSP disregarded the differences of species and considered all species methylation sites as generic sites to build a mixed model. However, sequences or structural patterns around the methylation sites may significantly differ in different organisms, so it highlighting necessity to develop species-specific predictors. (iv) Furthermore, some of these tools were only published as a method and did not provide a user-friendly web service or the web server does not work (). The tools with web services are useful for user to predict methylation sites when they want to experimental design and verify whether sequence is methylated, especially for large-scale predictions. Protein methylation site prediction has not been as widely studied as other types of PTM (such as phosphorylation and acetylation) due to lack of methylation data. With techniques rapidly increasing in the past few years, the growing number of methylation datasets was found in diverse species (especially in eukaryotes). For example, Lott et al. (2014) found over 800 arginine methylated proteins in an early-branching eukaryote Trypanosoma brucei.collected 6449 methylation sites with species information in 3237 experimentally validated methylated proteins in SysPTM 2.0. Protein methylation has attracted more and more attentions, there is a growing need to develop a species-specific predictor. In this work, we developed a new tool named PSSMe (prediction species-specific methylation sites) to overcome above limitations of the existing methods, which is specifically designed to predict both speciesspecific and general methylation sites. Reliable and large-scale experimental methylation sites data from multiple species were collected from several sources which used to train for building the species-specific models. In particular, our model first used a wellestablished feature selection method IG () coupled with a two stage to distinguish the importance and valuable dimension feature vector, which it is more simple and convenient comparison with other selection and optimization methods (such as the maximum relevance minimum redundancy (mRMR) method) (), The first-stage selects five features, including amino acid compositions (AAC), K-spaced amino acid pair composition, amino acids binary encoding (BE), K Nearest Neighbors features (KNN) and amino acid physicochemical property (PSP) features. The second-stage incorporates five features and finds most valuable dimension features based on information gain (IG) method, and then reconstitute a new orderly features to build the model for methylation sites prediction. After prediction of independent test dataset, the result showed that our prediction performance overall significantly enhance than other tools. Furthermore, we discussed the model of methylation in different species; the analysis result shows the following: (i) the methylation patterns are significantly different in different species. (ii) IG method can effectively select valuable dimension features and reduce redundant features for improving the prediction performance. (iii) Based on IG score, it suggests that KNN feature is important and makes a great contribution for prediction methylation sites. (iv) Finally, the web service of PSSMe supports continuous stringency adjustment to meet the various confidence requirements of user's cross-validation tests and provides better probability information for prediction results by comparison with other prediction tools.