Motivation: Several software tools specialize in the alignment of short next-generation sequencing reads to a reference sequence. Some of these tools report a mapping quality score for each alignment—in principle, this quality score tells researchers the likelihood that the alignment is correct. However, the reported mapping quality often correlates weakly with actual accuracy and the qualities of many mappings are underestimated, encouraging the researchers to discard correct mappings. Further, these low-quality mappings tend to correlate with variations in the genome (both single nucleotide and structural), and such mappings are important in accurately identifying genomic variants. Approach: We develop a machine learning tool, LoQuM (LOgistic regression tool for calibrating the Quality of short read mappings, to assign reliable mapping quality scores to mappings of Illumina reads returned by any alignment tool. LoQuM uses statistics on the read (base quality scores reported by the sequencer) and the alignment (number of matches, mismatches and deletions, mapping quality score returned by the alignment tool, if available, and number of mappings) as features for classification and uses simulated reads to learn a logistic regression model that relates these features to actual mapping quality. Results: We test the predictions of LoQuM on an independent dataset generated by the ART short read simulation software and observe that LoQuM can resurrect many mappings that are assigned zero quality scores by the alignment tools and are therefore likely to be discarded by researchers. We also observe that the recalibration of mapping quality scores greatly enhances the precision of called single nucleotide polymorphisms. Availability: LoQuM is available as open source at
INTRODUCTIONNext-generation genome sequencing (NGS) has quickly become very popular in life sciences because of its utility in efficiently generating high-quality sequence data (). Applications of NGS include analysis of gene expression and alternative splicing (RNA-seq) (), DNA protein interactions (chromatin immunoprecipitation sequencing) (), d e novo genome sequencing (), metagenomics and identification of genetic variants within and across populations (). Many computational methods are already available for analyzing genetic * To whom correspondence should be addressed. variants using NGS data. These variants include single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and structural variants such as copy numbers, insertions, deletions, tandem duplications, inversions and translocations. Characterization of such variants is useful in many applications, including genome-wide association studies (), identification of driver mutations in cancer () and comparative genomics (Hudson, 2008).
DISCUSSION
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we show that a machine learning framework that uses a combination of read and alignment statistics as classification features and simulated reads as training data to predict mapping accuracy can improve on mapping quality scores reported by available tools. These improved mapping quality scores might be particularly useful in improving the identification of genomic variants, since they can 'save' potentially informative mappings that would be conservatively assigned low-quality scores by the assignment tools. Additionally, LoQuM's recalibrated mapping quality scores can reduce false-positive variant calls due to overestimated mapping accuracy. Assessment of the effect of mapping quality scores on identification of more genomic variants remains an important and interesting problem for future studies.