Motivation: Experimentally determined gene regulatory networks can be enriched by computational inference from high-throughput expression profiles. However, the prediction of regulatory interactions is severely impaired by indirect and spurious effects, particularly for eukaryotes. Recently, published methods report improved predictions by exploiting the a priori known targets of a regulator (its local topology) in addition to expression profiles. Results: We find that methods exploiting known targets show an unexpectedly high rate of false discoveries. This leads to inflated performance estimates and the prediction of an excessive number of new interactions for regulators with many known targets. These issues are hidden from common evaluation and cross-validation setups, which is due to Simpsons paradox. We suggest a confidence score recalibration method (CoRe) that reduces the false discovery rate and enables a reliable performance estimation. Conclusions: CoRe considerably improves the results of network inference methods that exploit known targets. Predictions then display the biological process specificity of regulators more correctly and enable the inference of accurate genome-wide regulatory networks in eukaryotes. For yeast, we propose a network with more than 22 000 confident interactions. We point out that machine learning approaches outside of the area of network inference may be affected as well. Availability and implementation: Results, executable code and networks are available via our website
IntroductionGene regulatory networks (GRNs) consist of interactions of regulators such as transcription factors (TFs) that physically bind to specific nucleotide sequences to regulate the expression of target genes. GRNs can be experimentally derived from TF-binding studies () such as Chromatin Immuno-Precipitationor DNase footprinting (). A large fraction of the interactions reported by these approaches are not associated with changes in target expression (). On the other hand, expression changes in potential TF targets can be detected from TF-knockout profiles (). This approach, however, is prone to indirect or spurious effects (). Although the number of conducted TF-binding and TF-knockout studies is growing () the discovery of novel regulations detected with each additional study decreases.Thus, a combination of experimental results and computational inference approaches is likely to provide more comprehensive networks. Many inference methods use expression data exclusively. An interaction is predicted if a TF and its putative target are coexpressed. Such expression-based approaches infer prokaryotic networks successfully (). However, they perform hardly better than random for inference of eukaryotic networks (), although they can achieve useful results in special cases [e.g. for respiratory genes,. Interactions in eukaryotes are difficult to infer as observable dependencies between the expression of regulator and target are weaker and context-dependent. One reason is the increased level of complexity and the combinatorial nature of the eukaryotic regulation of transcription (). The prediction of novel interactions can be improved for prokaryotic and in silico data by exploiting a priori known interactions [local topology priors,. This allows to determine whether a given TF is active based on the expression of its known targets () enabling a more reliable prediction of novel targets (De). See Supplementary, Section S5 for an overview on related methods. Here, we investigate whether eukaryotic networks are accurately inferred by methods exploiting topology priors. First, we demonstrate that many existing performance evaluations are misleading. They are not adequate for local topology methods and overestimate network quality substantially. This effect is due to Simpson's Paradox, well-known in causal theory (). Second, this also strongly influences the quality and composition of inferred networks. We develop a simple recalibration strategy and demonstrate how it can be applied for the inference of a confident genome-scale regulatory network in yeast.
DiscussionGRNs are crucial to understand how regulators like TFs affect their target genes on the expression level. Experimentally derived networks are typically incomplete as the number of available experiments is limited. To complement them, computational inference of networks has been introduced. We revealed critical aspects but also demonstrated that inference is necessary and feasible in eukaryotes. Even in well-studied eukaryotes such as yeast, where $900 publications on experimental TF-binding studies are available, current networks are far from complete and benefit from computational predictions. We found that only about half of all regulations that induce detectable expression changes ('active' interactions) are currently known. In addition, experimental techniques are prone to discover regulations without effect on the expression level. We applied computational inference both for the detection of novel active and the pruning of inactive regulations. We reported three crucial findings based on the analysis of a wide spectrum of data-driven inference methods (for reviews see De). First, we demonstrated that methods incorporating experimentally derived interactions as topology priors possess sufficient predictive power for the inference of eukaryotic networks. Methods using expression data alone fail here (). We also showed that topology priors lead to Simpson's paradox () distorting prediction and assessment of regulatory interactions. Finally, we showed how to avoid the occurrence of the paradox. Generally, network inference methods that exploit the local topology assign an excessive number of predictions to TFs with many known targets (), and it has been doubted whether a correction is possible or sensible (). Our analysis revealed that the number of known targets for a regulator is a confounder of regulator-target predictions. This effect is not detected by commonAddressing false discoveries in network inferencecross-validation routines: surprisingly, the same performance reported for published network inference approaches can be achieved by guessing random regulations. We developed a CoRe approach wrapping existing methods and showed that it corrected for both the over-estimation of performance and the distortion of the topology toward TFs with many known targets (HDP). We conducted a comprehensive assessment of methods integrating topology priors and identified methods suitable to derive a corrected, accurate yeast regulatory network of active regulations. We describe disadvantages of several methods, which we excluded due to prediction performance, or the inadequate scale-up for large expression datasets. Our evaluation suggested that the selected methods detect several types of interactions successfully that are difficult to predict. For instance, auto-regulatory interactions and the assignment of directions are handled accurately, and immediate and indirect interactions could be distinguished. We then integrated the predictions from the selected methods to construct a network consisting of half novel and half experimentally determined regulations. This choice was based on our extrapolation of the size of the complete yeast network. Our final yeast network (see availability) contains 153 TFs that regulate 3747 target genes via 22 231 interactions. These include many novel and confident hypotheses of regulatory relationships, while we expect less than 150 false positives in total. At the same time, we reject more than half of the experimentally determined interactions as they appear to be without observable regulatory effect. To gain an overview of the network, we derived modules of target genes that were jointly regulated by sets of TFs. The resulting modular structure was strikingly simple featuring 13 metaregulations that represent an index for inspecting the expression effects of interactions. A thorough literature review confirmed that the modules and their expression patterns correspond well to biological processes such as respiration, sulfate/energy metabolism, transport, stress response and cell division. We conclude that methods integrating local topology can extend known networks substantially and at a high reliability, even in well-studied model organisms. These methods, in contrast to those using expression data alone, are well-suited for the prediction of interactions in yeast and presumably other eukaryotes. Due to Simpson's paradox, however, their application was more difficult than previously acknowledged and required a correction approach. We emphasize that topology, structural priors and parameterized models are widely applied beyond network inference (Supplementary, Section S5 for an overview) and encourage a review of fields that may benefit from confidence recalibration strategies such as CoRe.