Accurate identification of significant aberrations in cancers (AISAIC) is a systematic effort to discover potential cancer-driving genes such as oncogenes and tumor suppressors. Two major confounding factors against this goal are the normal cell contamination and random background aberrations in tumor samples. We describe a Java AISAIC package that provides comprehensive analytic functions and graphic user interface for integrating two statistically principled in silico approaches to address the aforementioned challenges in DNA copy number analyses. In addition, the package provides a command line interface for users with scripting and programming needs to incorporate or extend AISAIC to their customized analysis pipelines. This open-source multiplatform software offers several attractive features: (i) it implements a user friendly complete pipeline from processing raw data to reporting analytic results; (ii) it detects deletion types directly from copy number signals using a Bayes hypothesis test; (iii) it estimates the fraction of normal contamination for each sample; (iv) it produces unbiased null distribution of random background alterations by iterative aberration-exclusive permutations; and (v) it identifies significant consensus regions and the percentage of homozygous/ hemizygous deletions across multiple samples. AISAIC also provides users with a parallel computing option to leverage ubiquitous multicore machines. Availability and implementation: AISAIC is available as a Java application, with a users guide and source code, at https://code.
DESCRIPTION
DISCUSSIONAISAIC presents a comprehensive and unsupervised approach to analyze DNA copy number aberrations in the cancer genome. AISAIC is supported by a well-grounded statistical framework and can detect homo/hemi-deletion types and rates, estimate and correct normal cell contamination, and identify significant consensus CNA regions. Tested on both simulations and TCGA datasets, AISAIC is effective at revealing novel consensus regions that harbor potential cancer 'driver' genes and enhancers. We expect that, with further development, AISAIC's methodology can be applied to other forms of genomic and epigenetic data such as DNA methylations ().