Motivation: Rapid methods for protein structure search enable biological discoveries based on flexibly defined structural similarity, unleashing the power of the ever greater number of solved protein structures. Projection methods show promise for the development of fast structural database search solutions. Projection methods map a structure to a point in a high-dimensional space and compare two structures by measuring distance between their projected points. These methods offer a tremendous increase in speed over residue-level structural alignment methods. However, current projection methods are not practical, partly because they are unable to identify local similarities. Results: We propose a new projection-based approach that can rapidly detect global as well as local structural similarities. Local structural search is enabled by a topology-inspired writhe decomposition protocol that produces a small number of fragments while ensuring that similar structures are cut in a similar manner. In benchmark tests, we show that our method, writher, improves accuracy over existing projection methods in terms of recognizing scop domains out of multi-domain proteins, while maintaining accuracy comparable with existing projection methods in a standard single-domain benchmark test. Availability: The source code is available at the following website:
INTRODUCTIONIn the era of structural genomics, comparing a large number of structures can be a dauntingly time-consuming task. Therefore, a number of databases store precomputed structural similarities to accelerate structural comparison queries (). However, such approaches have several limitations. First, these databases are not always updated in a timely fashion due to the sheer burden of computational requirements. Even if one applies a program that can compare two structures in 1 s, it would take more than 1 year to perform all-versus-all comparisons of 7897 proteins from the 40% non-redundant protein set of Astral 1.71 (), which is only a subset of over 50 000 solved protein structures in the PDB (). The second drawback of existing structural similarity databases is that they offer a rigid classification of structural relationships according to some predefined set of parameters. This precludes production of alternate classifications, such as building phylogenies for a particular subset of proteins while applying different scoring functions. In addition, analysis of a large number of artificial structures, such as clustering of models generated by structure prediction efforts, demands ultrafast structure comparison. Therefore, there is an increasingly compelling need for tools that can rapidly compare a large set of structures. Similarity of protein structures is typically measured via structural alignment, whose goal is to find a three-dimensional (3D) transformation that brings into correspondence the largest number of atoms between two structures. The quality of a 3D superposition is often measured by the number of matched C  atoms and the distances between the matched atoms. The exact solution for the pairwise structural alignment is computationally expensive (). Therefore, heuristic approaches have been developed to find good solutions with remarkable efficiency (for a review see,). Even so, typical superpositionbased heuristic programs are still too slow for many purposes: they take hours to perform a one-versus-all structural query. For example, running combinatorical extension (CE;) for one protein structure against 2930 non-redundant structures would take about 1 h on a modern desktop computer () and thus several CPU-months to complete an all-versus-all comparison. A major speed increase for structural comparison was achieved by considering schemes of reduced representation of protein structures, instead of their full 3D coordinates of atoms. The most popular scheme for reduced structure representation is the secondary structure element (SSE), and a number of structure matching methods based on SSEs have been developed since the 1990s (). Since the 1980s, ideas from differential geometry and topology have been explored to encode 3D structures into 1D representations (). Like a comparison of protein amino acid sequences, a 1D representation allows much faster structure comparison than a full 3D alignment. More recently, several groups developed alternative 1D methods using innovative shape descriptors, such as discrete torsion angles (), turning angles between smoothed backbone segments with