Motivation: Over the recent years, the vision that RNA simply serves as information transfer molecule has dramatically changed. The study of the sequence/structure/function relationships in RNA is becoming more important. As a direct consequence, the total number of experimentally solved RNA structures has dramatically increased and new computer tools for predicting RNA structure from sequence are rapidly emerging. Therefore, new and accurate methods for assessing the accuracy of RNA structure models are clearly needed. Results: Here, we introduce an all-atom knowledge-based potential for the assessment of RNA three-dimensional (3D) structures. We have benchmarked our new potential, called Ribonucleic Acids Statistical Potential (RASP), with two different decoy datasets composed of near-native RNA structures. In one of the benchmark sets, RASP was able to rank the closest model to the X-ray structure as the best and within the top 10 models for ∼93 and ∼95% of decoys, respectively. The average correlation coefficient between model accuracy, calculated as the root mean square deviation and global distance test-total score (GDT-TS) measures of C3 atoms, and the RASP score was 0.85 and 0.89, respectively. Based on a recently released benchmark dataset that contains hundreds of 3D models for 32 RNA motifs with non-canonical base pairs, RASP scoring function compared favorably to ROSETTA FARFAR force field in the selection of accurate models. Finally, using the self-splicing group I intron and the stem-loop IIIc from hepatitis C virus internal ribosome entry site as test cases, we show that RASP is able to discriminate between known structure-destabilizing mutations and compensatory mutations. Availability: RASP can be readily applied to assess all-atom or coarse-grained RNA structures and thus should be of interest to both developers and end-users of RNA structure prediction methods. The computer software and knowledge-based potentials are freely available at
INTRODUCTIONOver the recent years, the vision that RNA molecules only serve as a genetic information carrier has dramatically changed. Today, it is widely accepted that most of the genome is actively transcribed () and that non-coding RNA molecules would have key functional roles in several fundamental cell processes such as cell division, growing and differentiation (). Indeed, RNA molecules are now known to carry diverse functions, such as catalysis (), transcription regulation () and chromosome repair (), among others. In this context, experimental determination of RNA threedimensional (3D) structures has become an essential tool for characterizing the functional activity of new RNA molecules. As a direct consequence of this, the number of RNA structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) has rapidly increased over the past few years, reaching now over 1800 structures (). Additionally, new computational tools for the assessment, prediction and comparison of RNA structures have been recently developed (). Therefore, the total number of RNA structureseither solved by experiment or predicted by computer-based methodsis expected to continue to increase at a high rate (). This fact poses the urgent need for developing accurate RNA structure assessment methods and tools. The development of new methods for assessing the accuracy of RNA structure models can benefit from previous experience gathered in the field of protein structure prediction and assessment. One of the most popular approaches to assess the quality of 3D protein structures has been the use of knowledge-based or statistical potentials (). However, a drawback of this methodology is that it ideally requires a non-redundant set with several dozens to hundreds of experimentally solved structures (), which in the case of RNA may be difficult to obtain because most of the known RNA molecules available in the PDB are highly redundant at the sequence level. Despite this, a recent publication has reported the first calculation of a knowledge-based potential for RNA structure prediction and assessment (). This new knowledge-based scoring function for RNA structures, named NAST, relies on a coarse-grained representation (i.e. C3 atoms only) of RNA geometrical features (i.e. distances, angles and dihedral angles) and it has been derived by calculating statistics from only three experimental structures of large ribosomal units. The NAST scoring function was used for successfully predicting coarsegrained 3D structures of RNA sequences of varying length. NAST was able to build RNA structure models averaging 8.0 and 16.3  root mean square deviation (RMSD) for the yeast phenylalanine tRNA and the P4P6 domain of the Tetrahymena thermophila group I intron, respectively (). More recently, a fullatom potential available within the ROSETTA suite was successfully used for the de novo prediction and design of non-canonical RNA 3D structures (). This new full-atom potential contains weak carbon hydrogen bonding and solvation terms, as well as a complete description for potential hydrogen bonds between bases and backbone oxygen atoms. Here we introduce the description and development of a new knowledge-based or statistical potential for RNA structure prediction and assessment called Ribonucleic Acids Statistical Potential (RASP), which has the following features: (i) it has been derived from a non-redundant set of 85 RNA structures; (ii) it has geometrical descriptors that explicitly account for base pairing and base stacking interactions, both being important features that contribute to the thermodynamic stability of native RNA structures; (iii) it is a detailed full-atom potential that includes a representation for local and non-local interactions in RNA structures; and (iv) some of its key parameters have been optimized by calculating information theory measures in the same set of native structures used to derive the potential and not from a specific benchmark that may introduce some bias in the optimization process (). Moreover, we have built a new and independent set of RNA structures, which was used to benchmark the performance of RASP through the use of a jackknife procedure. Our full-atom RASP potential was validated against other simpler and coarse-grained RASP potentials, which were derived by using common parameters, optimized with the same set of RNA structures and tested in the same benchmarks. Finally, the RASP potentials were also compared against the NAST and ROSSETTA potentials, as well as the AMBER99 force field. We begin this article by describing a new benchmark set of RNA structures that was used by us to test the RASP, as well as to optimize its parameters. We continue by showing the results of the optimized potential scores in model ranking and accuracy correlation tests. Next, we illustrate some energy score functions of the RASP potential accounting for base pairing and base stacking interactions. We continue by describing the results of RASP at selecting near native models in a real RNA modeling scenario, by assessing its performance at selecting accurate models in a dataset of hundreds of 3D models of 32 RNA motifs with non-canonical base pairs. Finally, we apply RASP to study the effects of mutations (including compensatory mutations) in the self-splicing group I intron of Azoarcus pre-tRNAIle and in the stem-loop IIIc of an internal ribosome entry site (IRES) element from the hepatitis C virus (HCV).
DISCUSSIONTo date, few computational tools have been developed and are freely available to assess the accuracy of RNA structures. Among those, the NAST () and ROSETTA () tools were recently developed and have proven to be useful in the assessment and prediction of RNA 3D structures. In this work we have developed a new knowledge-based potential by using a list of 85 non-redundant experimental RNA structures. Despite the limited number and size of currently known experimental RNA structures, our potential called RASP was able to accurately discriminate between near-native and misfolded RNA structures. RASP has several unique features that can render it as a complementary tool to the existing ones. RASP has been optimized by means of information product maximization, a single measure that has strong support from the field of information theory. As it has been previously demonstrated, this strategy allows for an elegant and unbiased optimization of knowledge-based potentials (). RASP inherits key parameters that have proven to be successful in the related field of protein structure assessment and prediction (). These parameters are the distance-dependent geometrical descriptions for atom pairs in a molecule (), the topological factor or sequence separation to split local from non-local interactions () and the use of properly defined atom types to reduce the matrix size and avoid sparse data (). In addition to this, RASP has been calculated from a dataset of experimental structures that is larger and more diverse than those used in previous efforts. Our RNA structure dataset is representative of the currently known RNA structural space, as highly redundant structures have been removed from the final dataset. RASP describes the geometrical restraints that naturally arise in base pair formation through hydrogen bonding and base stacking through  interactions (). More importantly, RASP not only describes the canonical WatsonCrick base pairs, but also the non-canonical pairs that are highly abundant in native RNA structures (). Moreover, the RASP scores were highly correlated with the structural deviation from native conformations. It is expected that as more non-redundant RNA structures become available, the accuracy and performance of a potential such as RASP will improve. Meanwhile, RASP can assist the accuracy evaluation of predicted RNA structure models by computer-based techniques as well as in assessing the quality of experimental RNA structures, as demonstrated by the three real-case examples analyzed here. Despite of the important features described above, the current version of RASP has limitations that need further improvements. For example, the incorporation of a solvation term would allow for a more accurate description of the energy in highly unfolded and non-compact RNA conformations. In the case of proteins, this term clearly contributes to improve the performance of knowledgebased potentials in the assessment and prediction of 3D structures (, b). Additionally, deriving RASP from a larger and more diverse set of RNA structures would likely result in a more accurate knowledge-based potential, as it has also been demonstrated for proteins (). Unfortunately, experimental difficulties for working with RNA using either X-Ray crystallography or nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy have resulted so far in a limited number of determined structures. Although with outlined limitations, the results obtained here using two different benchmarks demonstrate that RASP still is a competitive potential when compared to NAST, ROSETTA and AMBER force fields. Future improvements of RASP will certainly attempt to overcome the two drawbacks mentioned above, as well as the ability to perform energy score minimizations with this potential Page: 1092 10861093