Motivation: Allergenicity, like antigenicity and immunogenicity, is a property encoded linearly and non-linearly, and therefore the alignment based approaches are not able to identify this property unam-biguously. A novel alignment-free descriptor-based fingerprint approach is presented here and applied to identify allergens and non-allergens. The approach was implemented into a four step algorithm. Initially, the protein sequences are described by amino acid principal properties as hydrophobicity, size, relative abundance, helix and-strand forming propensities. Then, the generated strings of different length are converted into vectors with equal length by auto-and cross-covariance (ACC). The vectors were transformed into binary fingerprints and compared in terms of Tanimoto coefficient. Results: The approach was applied to a set of 2427 known allergens and 2427 non-allergens and identified correctly 88% of them with Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.759. The descriptor fingerprint approach presented here is universal. It could be applied for any classification problem in computational biology. The set of E-descriptors is able to capture the main structural and physicochemical properties of amino acids building the proteins. The ACC transformation overcomes the main problem in the alignment-based comparative studies arising from the different length of the aligned protein sequences. The conversion of protein ACC values into binary descriptor fingerprints allows similarity search and classification. Availability and implementation: The algorithm described in the present study was implemented in a specially designed Web site, named AllergenFP (FP stands for FingerPrint). AllergenFP is written in Python, with GIU in HTML. It is freely accessible at http://ddg-pharmfac.net/Allergen FP.
INTRODUCTIONAllergy is a growing health problem of modern life. The prevalence of allergic diseases worldwide is rising dramatically in both developed and developing countries (). Allergy involves a complex series of reactions to external and internal factors, called allergens, which contribute to the development of diseases like rhinitis, asthma, atopic dermatitis and skin sensitization. Severe reactions as acute and fatal anaphylactic shock also may occur. An allergic reaction occurs when a susceptible organism is re-exposed to a specific allergen. The allergen-specific Th2 cells the surface. This finding is consistent with the fact that the innate immune system is able to detect hydrophobic parts of immunogenic proteins containing aliphatic or aromatic amino acids (). Obviously, allergenicity, like antigenicity and immunogenicity, is a property encoded linearly and non-linearly, and therefore the alignment-based approaches are not able to identify this property unambiguously. In the present study, we describe an alignmentfree method for allergenicity prediction based on amino acid E-descriptors () and auto-and cross-covariance (ACC) transformation of protein sequences into uniform equal-length vectors (). ACC was used for quantitative structureactivity relationship (QSAR) studies of peptides (), protein classification () and immunogenicity prediction (). Recently, we applied this method in combination with k nearest neighbors method to predict allergenicity (). Here, we improve the method by using a new set of amino acid descriptors and a novel descriptor fingerprint approach based on Tanimoto coefficient similarity search (). The E-descriptors for the 20 naturally occurring amino acids, defined by, were derived by principal component analysis of a data matrix consisting of 237 physicochemical properties. The first principal component (E1) reflects the hydrophobicity of amino acids; the second (E2) their size; the third (E3)their helix-forming propensity; the forth (E4) correlates with the relative abundance of amino acids; and the fifth (E5) is dominated by the-strand forming propensity. In the present study, the five E-descriptors were used to describe the protein sequences. The fingerprints in chemoinformatics are developed to describe the 2D chemical structures (). They are generated in two ways. In the most popular way, the structure of a compound is divided into substructural fragments and assembled into a binary stringif the fragment exists in the structure the corresponding string element takes 1, otherwise, it takes 0. Binary structural fingerprints are especially useful, as there are highly efficient in computer algorithms working with binary strings. Daylight has developed another approach (http://www. daylight.com/dayhtml/doc/theory/theory.finger.html). The Daylight fingerprints are generated as patterns from the environment of each atom (up to seven atoms away). Each pattern serves as a seed to a pseudo-random number generator (it is 'hashed'), the output of which is a set of bits (typically 4 or 5 bits per pattern); the set of bits is added (with a logical OR) to the fingerprint. Here, we present a novel descriptor-based fingerprint approach. The fingerprint consists of descriptors instead of structural fragments. This enlarges the area of fingerprint application outside the chemical structure description, even outside chemistry. Moreover, it allows physical and/or biological information to be included in the similarity search process. Obviously, the basic problem here is, as in other quantitative structureactivity relationship methods, the selection of proper descriptors. They could be discrete, i.e. Boolean values, e.g. the presence or absence of given physical, chemical and/or biological features. The fingerprint is binary codedwhen the given feature presents, the fingerprint takes 1 at the proper position, otherwise, it equals 0. Many descriptors have continuous values, e.g. a nuclear magnetic resonance or infrared spectra, logP, quantum chemistry-based descriptors and so forth. These descriptors also could be converted into discrete values by scaling and dividing into intervals with regular size. If a descriptor value falls within an interval, the corresponding fingerprint element takes 1; otherwise, it takes 0. Obviously, the length of the fingerprint depends on the number of intervals: as many they are, as longer is the fingerprint. The longer fingerprints are able to capture more molecular features than the shorter ones but in the same time are redundant in information. A balance between fingerprint length and information content should be found in any particular study.Allergome database (http://www.allergome.org/). The allergen proteins were searched in Swiss-Prot database (http://www. uniprot.org) and only sequences with 'evidence for the existence of protein-evidence at protein level' were selected. Duplicates were removed. The final set of allergens contained 2427 proteins. 2.1.2 Non-allergens A set of proteins from species Solanum lycopersicum (tomato), Capsicum annuum (pepper), Solanum tuberosum (potato), Triticum aestivum (bread wheat) and Oryza sativa (Asian rice) and Oryza glaberrima (African rice) was collected after search in Swiss-Prot for proteins with 'evidence for the existence of protein-evidence at protein level' and exclusion of proteins containing the key word 'allergen' in their description. The resulting set consisted of 950 non-allergens. Additionally, a set of non-allergens was collected from SwissProt to include proteins from Homo sapiens species with 'evidence for the existence of protein-evidence at protein level'. The proteins with key words 'allergen' and 'cancer' in their description as well as proteins with unidentified amino acids in their sequences were excluded. The final set of non-allergens contained 2427 proteins. The set of allergens and non-allergens used in the present study is freely accessible from AllergenFP Web site. This set could be used as a uniform reference set in future studies on allergenicity prediction as it is manually curated and contains known allergens with evidence at protein level.
DISCUSSIONAllergenicity of food proteins is a crucial problem associated with the widespread usage of new foods, supplements and herbs, many of them having known or unknown genetically modified origin. Allergenicity is a subtle nonlinearly-coded property. Most of the existing methods for allergenicity prediction are based on structural similarity of novel proteins to known allergens. Thus, the identification of a novel structurally diverse allergen could not be predicted by these methods. In the present study, we propose an alignment-free method for allergenicity prediction, based on amino acid principal properties as hydrophobicity, size, relative abundance, helix and-strand forming propensities. Proteins are transformed into descriptorbased fingerprints and compared by Tanimoto coefficient. The algorithm was optimized in terms of lag length and resolution step and cross-validated by a set of 2427 known allergens and 2427 non-allergens. It recognized 87% of the allergens and 89% of the non-allergens. The algorithm and the set of proteins used in the study were implemented in a specially designed Web site, named AllergenFP and freely accessible at http://ddg-pharmfac. net/AllergenFP. AllergenFP was compared with five freely available web servers for allergenicity prediction and showed the highest predictive ability. For example, recently Liao et al. (2013) identified a novel allergenic protein Tyr p 8 from Tyrophagus putrescentiae that cross-reacts with Der p 8 from Dermatophagoides pteronyssinus. Both proteins are not available in our database. AllergenFP identifies them as allergens with T  0.84. The descriptor fingerprint approach based on Tanimoto coefficient similarity search used in the present study to discriminate between allergens and non-allergens is universal. It could be applied for any classification problem in computational biology. The set of E-descriptors is able to capture the main structural and physicochemical properties of amino acids. The ACC transformation overcomes the main problem in the alignment-based comparative studies arising from the different length of the aligned protein sequences. The conversion of protein ACC values into a binary descriptor fingerprint is a computational novelty, described here for the first time.