Motivation: The current generation of DNA sequencing technologies produce a large amount of data quickly. All of these data need to pass some form of quality control (QC) processing and checking before they can be used for any analysis. The large number of samples that are run through Illumina sequencing machines makes the process of QC an onerous and time-consuming task that requires multiple pieces of information from several sources. Results: AlmostSignificant is an open-source platform for aggregating multiple sources of quality metrics as well as run and sample meta-data associated with DNA sequencing runs from Illumina sequencing machines. AlmostSignificant is a graphical platform to streamline the QC of DNA se-quencing data, to store these data for future reference together with extra meta-data associated with the sequencing runs not typically retained. This simplifies the challenge of monitoring the volume of data produced by Illumina sequencers. AlmostSignificant has been used to track the quality of over 80 sequencing runs covering over 2500 samples produced over the last three years. Availability: The code and documentation for AlmostSignificant is freely available at https://github.com/bartongroup/AlmostSignificant. Contact
IntroductionThe current generation of high-throughput, short-read DNA sequencing technologies quickly generate large datasets, but all sequencing technologies produce errors, whether systematic, technical, or simple human mistakes. Tracking the quality of the sequence data is critical to a successful experiment, but can become time consuming for all but the smallest projects. Monitoring the success of a sequencing run requires dedicated software located on the sequencing machine or standalone software provided by its manufacturer. These are often used in conjunction with tools such as FastQC (www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastqc) for assessing the quality of the output fastq files and FastQScreen (www.bioinformatics.babraham.ac.uk/projects/fastq_screen) to check for contaminating DNA. Although these tools are simple to use and interpret for a handful of samples or a single project, this is difficult for sequencing facilities that handle many sequencing runs simultaneously. AlmostSignificant is open-source software designed to simplify the aggregation of quality statistics for sequencing runs from Illumina MiSeq, NextSeq and HiSeq machines. The single, consistent interface for viewing these data helps to quickly and efficiently identify potential issues with sequencing runs, lanes within the run, or with the original samples. Aggregating information into a single system has the added bonus of allowing extraneous meta-data to be gathered automatically and the overall quality trends in sequencing runs to be viewed. Thus, the data production and run-protocol for each machine can be tracked over time and so guide lab-side decision making and problem solving. In contrast to services such as Illumina's BaseSpace, AlmostSignificant uses local resources, is open-source, and all data remains local. While there are tools with some similarity to AlmostSignificant (e.g. StatsDB;), there are distinguishing differ