Motivation: The laws of thermodynamics describe a direct, quantitative relationship between metabolite concentrations and reaction directionality. Despite great efforts, thermodynamic data suffer from limited coverage, scattered accessibility and non-standard annotations. We present a framework for unifying thermodynamic data from multiple sources and demonstrate two new techniques for extrapolating the Gibbs energies of unmeasured reactions and conditions. Results: Both methods account for changes in cellular conditions (pH, ionic strength, etc.) by using linear regression over the G • of pseudoisomers and reactions. The Pseudoisomeric Reactant Contribution method systematically infers compound formation energies using measured K and pK a data. The Pseudoisomeric Group Contribution method extends the group contribution method and achieves a high coverage of unmeasured reactions. We define a continuous index that predicts the reversibility of a reaction under a given physiological concentration range. In the characteristic physiological range 3μM –3mM, we find that roughly half of the reactions in Escherichia colis metabolism are reversible. These new tools can increase the accuracy of thermodynamic-based models, especially in non-standard pH and ionic strengths. The reversibility index can help modelers decide which reactions are reversible in physiological conditions. Availability: Freely available on the web at: http://equilibrator.weizmann.ac.il. Website implemented in Python, MySQL, Apache and Django, with all major browsers supported. The framework is open-source (code.google.com
INTRODUCTIONThe study of metabolism has recently regained its central role in diverse areas of cell biology, physiology, medicine and systems biology. The study of metabolic pathways and networks () aims to better understand the complex behaviour of living organisms as well as their manipulation for human needs (). The thermodynamics of biochemical reactions () is of special interest in the analysis and design of metabolic pathways. The change in the Gibbs free energy (G) characterizes the thermodynamic balance of biochemical reactions and dictates the direction of net flux (the difference between forward and backward fluxes) in a reaction. It is thus useful for the study of a single enzymatic reaction, for analyzing entire metabolic pathways (VojinovicVojinovic and von), and for the large-scale modeling of whole-cell metabolic networks (). A reaction at equilibrium carries no net flux. At equilibrium in a specific pH, the apparent reaction quotient Q the ratio of product to substrate concentrationsis termed the apparent equilibrium constant and denoted by K. In ideal dilute solutions, the 'transformed Gibbs energy of reaction' is a function of the apparent reaction quotient: r G =RTln K /Q . The 'standard' transformed Gibbs energy of reaction ( r G @BULLET ) is the value of r G at standard conditions, i.e. when all compound concentrations are 1 M. Therefore, r G @BULLET =RTlnK (I). r G determines the direction of net flux in a reaction. A negative r G would correspond to a positive (forward) net flux and vice versa. Cell physiology imposes constraints on metabolite concentrations and consequently on Q. Reactions for which r G @BULLET  0 for any physiological Q can only carry a forward flux and are thus called irreversible reactions. This classification of reactions is especially important in constraint-based modeling that covers whole-cell metabolic networks and depends on the knowledge of reaction directionality for predicting flux distributions, growth rates and other large-scale metabolic phenotypes (). Directionality, annotations typically rely on phenomenological data and arbitrary definitions of reversibility. Recent advances in the field allow incorporating thermodynamic data directly into the model by adding explicit constraints that connect r G, concentrations and reaction directionality (). The NIST database for Thermodynamics of Enzyme-Catalyzed Reactions (NIST-TECR) is the most comprehensive collection of empirical thermodynamic data (
DISCUSSIONThe advances in metabolic modeling (), have created a need for accurate genome-wide values for reaction thermodynamic parameters. As metabolic network models for more organisms and cells emerge, it is increasingly important to have correct predictions for acidic and basic environments and for different ionic strengths. This requirement is most prominent when modeling organisms with multi-compartmented cells, and having to adjust the Gs to the conditions in each compartment. Most data that do exist are hard to access (e.g. in out-of-print books) and cover only a limited part of the scope of required compounds and reactions. Moreover, the attempts to use group contribution to expand this coverage are based on a closed implementation and are not extendable for outside users to add new group definitions or training examples. In this article, we explored two approaches to estimating free energies. We show that the formation energies obtained using PRC achieve a good fit to the observed data (RMSE 2.4 kJ/mol), but do not provide genome-wide coverage of metabolic reactions (30% of E. coli model). As an alternative, PGC does provide free energy estimates for the majority (77%) of known biochemical reactions, but with larger errors (RMSE 8.5 kJ/mol). Therefore, a combination of the two methods might be beneficial, where PRC values are used whenever possible, and PGC is used to fill the gaps. There is, however, a potential problem with this approach as combinations of reactions can become inconsistent (e.g. stoichiometrically balanced cycles can have a non-zero G). The challenge of combining r G @BULLET estimations from different sources and estimation approaches in a unified and consistent manner requires an update to the methods described above (manuscript under preparation). We hope that, with time, new measurements of reaction equilibrium constants will be published and used to improve the accuracy and coverage of both these methods (PGC and PRC). We thus join the plea of (), who published a table of compounds that contain groups with yet unknown contributions.
CONCLUSIONWe believe that the tools and data that enable thermodynamic analysis of biochemical systems should be easily and freely accessible. In addition to supplying r G @BULLET predictions as a table for use in metabolic models, we created a website (http://equilibrator.weizmann.ac.il) with a simple user interface that enables anyone to find reactions by chemical formula or enzyme name (). The user can adapt the concentration of reactants and the conditions of the reaction. The thermodynamics of biochemical reactions has a key role to play in our understanding and manipulation of metabolic pathways. An integrated and open framework that combines accuracy and coverage will facilitate the wide use of this fundamental constraint by physics on the biochemistry of life.