Motivation: Primary purpose of modeling gene regulatory networks for developmental process is to reveal pathways governing the cellular differentiation to specific phenotypes. Knowledge of differentiation network will enable generation of desired cell fates by careful alteration of the governing network by adequate manipulation of cellular environment. Results: We have developed a novel integer programming-based approach to reconstruct the underlying regulatory architecture of differentiating embryonic stem cells from discrete temporal gene expression data. The network reconstruction problem is formulated using inherent features of biological networks: (i) that of cascade architecture which enables treatment of the entire complex network as a set of interconnected modules and (ii) that of sparsity of interconnection between the transcription factors. The developed framework is applied to the system of embryonic stem cells differentiating towards pancreatic lineage. Experimentally determined expression profile dynamics of relevant transcription factors serve as the input to the network identification algorithm. The developed formulation accurately captures many of the known regulatory modes involved in pancreatic differentiation. The predictive capacity of the model is tested by simulating an in silico potential pathway of subsequent differentiation. The predicted pathway is experimentally verified by concurrent differentiation experiments. Experimental results agree well with model predictions, thereby illustrating the predictive accuracy of the proposed algorithm.
INTRODUCTIONPhenotype and functionality of a cell is largely governed by the underlying gene regulatory network (GRN). The GRN is of fundamental importance for the developmental process, where a pluripotent progenitor cell gives rise to multiple cell types * To whom correspondence should be addressed. in a multicellular organism. Acquisition of different cellular phenotypes stems from the differential expression patterns of specific transcription factors that activate a cascade of complex network architecture. While experimental data are fundamental in identifying the level of transcription and the nature of transcriptional control, understanding of the complex network architecture and prediction of the effects of individual interactions in such networks will require their quantitative description in terms of strength of interaction governing the network dynamics. In this article, we report a novel mathematical modeling effort that aims at identifying the transcription factor network governing differentiation of progenitor cells to a specific lineage. We exploit the notion of sparsity, common to many biological networks, to identify the most plausible GRN operative in this scenario. Our model predictions are supported by concurrent experiments in differentiating embryonic stem cells to a specific lineage, for this case the pancreas. As will be discussed subsequently, we believe that our approach will be beneficial for the development of targeted experimental protocols for the production of cells with a pre-specified fate. Developments in large-scale genomic technologies have made data acquisition more tractable. This feat is increasing the emphasis on the development of meaningful quantitative models utilizing the wealth of experimental data (). However, it is not always obvious how the data acquired through such techniques can be assembled into unambiguous predictive models. Tremendous effort has been focused to tackle the network identification problem (with significant success in analyzing bacterial and yeast () networks. However, the generalization of these methods to the inference of networks in higher eukaryotes is not always obvious. Furthermore, developmental GRNs are organized very differently from the GRNs responsible for cellular physiology, house-keeping, cell cycle, etc. (). In contrast to most other GRNs, developmental network occurs in a sequence of multiple cascades of transcriptional regulations (). Endomesoderm specification in pre-gastrular sea urchin embryo () was among the first attempts in identifying developmental GRN, followed by mesoderm specification in the frog Xenopus laevis (), dorsoventral patterning and segmentation of the Drosophila embryo (), and B-cell differentiation in thePage: 1333 13321339
DISCUSSIONWe have developed a bi-level mixed integer programming formulation to reliably identify the GRN from a data-limited scenario. The developed framework can accurately capture the regulatory interactions solely from the data of gene expression profiles, without any a priori information regarding regulatory interactions between transcription factors. Our mathematical formulation is based on the understanding that a sparse network reproducing the transcription factor profile will be the optimal one chosen by nature. The network architecture derived by promoting sparsity could adequately predict the experimentally observed regulations reported in the literature. It could also accurately predict the perturbation required to induce subsequent differentiation, an outcome confirmed by concurrent experiments. The GRN determined by the proposed bi-level methodology could reliably capture the known effects of Shh inhibition of Cyclopamine, along with key governing features of the pancreatic organogenesis. The reconstructed network had excellent predictive capability even outside the domain of experimental data used to determine the network. It could accurately predict the effects of Foxa2 silencing on up-regulation of Ngn3 expression, which would induce the next cascade of pancreatic differentiation. Such an effect has not been reported in literature and concurrent experiments validated the nature and even the predicted magnitude of Ngn3 up-regulation. As detailed in, the model prediction could accurately capture the most significant effect of Foxa2 silencing on the genes considered in the network. The prediction of the magnitude of effect had different degrees of accuracy; but the most significant effect, that of Ngn3 up-regulation, was accurately predicted. This is significant in establishing confidence in the presented reverse engineering approach based on the notion of sparsity, and its usefulness in assisting in-vitro differentiation to derive specific cellular phenotypes of interest. The proposed method offers significant advantage in analyzing differentiating cell population, where the cells are typically induced to a specific lineage by exposing them to different environmental conditions with respect to extracellular matrix, growth factors and chemical inducers or repressors. The proposed method can efficiently utilize this information in analyzing the governing network and does not rely on more laborious gene knockout data. This is even more pertinent in stem cell studies since knockout of certain key genes can have severe consequences with respect to cell survival and differentiation. However, in the event of availability of such data it can be easily incorporated into the network identification formulation. Moreover, the bi-level formulation ensures efficient utilization of experimental data by essentially reducing the number of variables being optimized in the inner loop. Since the proposed algorithm extracts regulatory information from the dynamic profile of transcription factors, the choice of the transcription factors and the quality of the input experimental data will play a significant role on the reliability of the predicted network. It is crucial to consider all salient transcription factors important for the differentiation stage under consideration. Since the formulation will have no information of the excluded TFs, it is likely that any strong effect of the excluded TFs will be reported as spurious interactions of the existing network. However, as illustrated in the case of Cyclopamine A, the identified network will still capture functional interactions even in the absence of all the intermediate TFs involved in such interaction. The resolution of the identified network will thereby be largely dependent on the input experimental data. However, this interaction will be negligible if the excluded TF have only a mild effect. The mathematical framework proposed in this paper is deterministic in nature, and does not consider the experimental variability and parameter uncertainty in the network prediction. Even then, the posterior sensitivity analysis illustrated inindicates an acceptable level of sensitivity of network connections to the experimental uncertainty. The developed methodology has been illustrated in the context of differentiating population of embryonic stem cells to pancreatic lineage. However, the mathematical framework is general enough to be used to analyze the differentiation of stem cells, embryonic or adult, to any lineage. Although there is considerable information regarding specific role of transcription factors at different stages of organogenesis, very little information is available at present on how transcriptional networks are organized within these cells. The proposed methodology will be instrumental in identifying such transcriptional networks and the environmental effect on such networks, which will have potential application in designing in silico protocols for stem cell differentiation. The proposed scheme holds Page: 1339 13321339