Motivation: We present an integrated toolkit, BoBro2.0, for prediction and analysis of cis-regulatory motifs. This toolkit can (i) reliably identify statistically significant cis-regulatory motifs at a genome scale; (ii) accurately scan for all motif instances of a query motif in specified gen-omic regions using a novel method for P-value estimation; (iii) provide highly reliable comparisons and clustering of identified motifs, which takes into consideration the weak signals from the flanking regions of the motifs; and (iv) analyze co-occurring motifs in the regulatory regions. Results: We have carried out systematic comparisons between motif predictions using BoBro2.0 and the MEME package. The comparison results on Escherichia coli K12 genome and the human genome show that BoBro2.0 can identify the statistically significant motifs at a genome scale more efficiently, identify motif instances more accurately and get more reliable motif clusters than MEME. In addition, BoBro2.0 provides correlational analyses among the identified motifs to facilitate the inference of joint regulation relationships of transcription factors. Availability: The source code of the program is freely available for noncommercial uses at
INTRODUCTIONComputational identification of conserved cis-regulatory motifs represents an important problem in computational genomics, and it can provide a key piece of information for inference of gene regulation networks (). In the past three decades, numerous tools have been developed to find cis-regulatory motifs in the promoter regions of given genes (), and have been successfully applied to several organisms to generate large-scale regulatory networks (). In addition, two related problems are also of great interest: (i) motif scanning for additional motif instances across a genome based on known or predicted motifs, which needs a reliable measurement for the statistical significance of the scanned motif instances; and high false-positive prediction rates are the main issue with the existing prediction tools; and (ii) reliability assessment of the predicted motifs against annotated motifs in motif databases, which requires an effective way to compare the predicted motifs with the documented cis-regulatory motifs in the published literature and databases. A number of software packages have been developed to deal with such issues (). For example, the MEME package () was originally developed to identify conserved motifs (), and now consists of a number of analysis capabilities, such as FIMO () and MAST () for motif scanning and TOMTOM () for motif comparison. These additional capabilities have substantially extended the utility of the MEME program. Although substantial efforts have been invested to study these motif-related problems since the mid-80s, they are still largely unsolved, especially for genome-scale applications (). A number of challenging issues persist and await for better solutions, including (i) more effective ways for reliably assessing the statistical significance of the predicted motifs (), hence possibly overcoming the high false-positive rate issue; (ii) improved capabilities for evaluating predicted motif instances to decrease the false-positive rates in motif scanning (da); and (iii) improved similarity measures between two motifs, which currently suffer from the inability to effectively deal with sequence variations in motifs, hence leading to low prediction sensitivities (). We have recently developed an improved version of our previous tool BoBro (), BoBro2.0, to address some of these issues (seefor the flowchart of BoBro2.0). Compared with BoBro, the new toolkit has a number of novel capabilities (i) motif refinement and evaluation based on information extracted from the entire genome and a phylogenetic footprinting method, (ii) motif scanning based on a global P-value estimation method, (iii) motif comparison and clustering using a novel and effective *To whom correspondence should be addressed.