Motivation: Recently, a number of programs have been proposed for mapping short reads to a reference genome. Many of them are heavily optimized for short-read mapping and hence are very efficient for shorter queries, but that makes them inefficient or not applicable for reads longer than 200 bp. However, many sequencers are already generating longer reads and more are expected to follow. For long read sequence mapping, there are limited options; BLAT, SSAHA2, FANGS and BWA-SW are among the popular ones. However, resequencing and personalized medicine need much faster software to map these long sequencing reads to a reference genome to identify SNPs or rare transcripts. Results: We present AGILE (AliGnIng Long rEads), a hash table based high-throughput sequence mapping algorithm for longer 454 reads that uses diagonal multiple seed-match criteria, customized q-gram filtering and a dynamic incremental search approach among other heuristics to optimize every step of the mapping process. In our experiments, we observe that AGILE is more accurate than BLAT, and comparable to BWA-SW and SSAHA2. For practical error rates ( 5%) and read lengths (200−1000 bp), AGILE is significantly faster than BLAT, SSAHA2 and BWA-SW. Even for the other cases, AGILE is comparable to BWA-SW and several times faster than BLAT and SSAHA2.
INTRODUCTIONRecent advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology have led to affordable desktop-sized sequencers with low running costs and high throughput. These sequencers produce small fragments of the genome being sequenced as a result of the sequencing process. By mapping these small fragments (reads) to a reference genome, we can sequence the DNA of a new individual. The NGSs are making it possible for these studies to be conducted at a mass scale. These advances will usher an era of personal genomics when each individual can have his/her DNA sequenced and studied * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to develop more personalized ways of anticipating, diagnosing and treating diseases (). Studies of this nature have already begun. Scientists have found the genetic causes of diseases like CharcotMarieTooth () and Miller syndrome () by sequencing the genomes of patients. These studies have been made possible by plunging costs and increasing speeds of high-throughput sequencing. Next generation sequencers (NGSs) sequence the DNA by generating small substrings of the DNA called reads. With rapid improvements in sequencing technologies, the lengths of the reads are constantly increasing.The rate of throughput as well as read lengths of these NGSs are increasing at a pace that puts even the Moore's law to shame. Hence, there is a growing need for tools that can work for longer reads and can still match the pace of the NGSs. A number of tools have been developed for shorter illumina queries. These include MAQ (), ELAND, SOAP (), BowTie (), Mosaik, PASS (), and SHRiMP (). However, most of these tools work only for read lengths  200. Also, they allow very few number of mismatches (usually  2) and many of them do not allow any gaps. However, as the lengths of reads are rapidly increasing, we need tools that can work for longer read lengths. Moreover, these new tools for longer reads should be able to handle a larger number of gaps and mismatches. To the best of our knowledge, the only other tools specifically designed to work for longer reads are BWA-SW () and FANGS (). BWA-SW is a package based on Burrows Wheeler Transform (BWT). It supports gapped global alignment with respect to queries and is one of the fastest long read alignment algorithms while also finding suboptimal matches. Hash tables have been used extensively for short-read mapping and many other related problems (). Hence, it may appear that we have exhausted all possible uses of hash tables for sequence mapping. However, we will find that with proper heuristics, hash tables can give excellent speedups for sequence mapping of longer reads as well. The general structure of any hash table-based sequence mapping algorithm is as follows:(i) create a hash table index of the genome; (ii) use the index to find regions in the genome that can potentially be homologous; (iii) examine each region in more detail and output regions that are
CONCLUSIONAdvances in sequencing techniques necessitate the development of high performance, scalable algorithms to extract biologically relevant information from these datasets. Research on developing sequence mapping algorithms has been largely focused on mapping short reads, and little work has been done for longer 454 reads. AGILE is a hash-based sequence mapping algorithm that rapidly maps long reads using efficient heuristics to optimize different steps of the mapping process. AGILE can handle very large genome sizes and read lengths. It is flexible in that it allows a large number of mismatches and insertions/deletions in mapping and provides command line parameters to control every step of the mapping process. The best sensitivity and specificity of AGILE is achieved when the reads are longer and the error rate is small. Considering that with the improvement in sequencing technology, the read lengths will increase further and the error rates will decrease, AGILE should be even more useful in the future.