Motivation: Despite numerous successful Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS), detecting variants that have low disease risk still poses a challenge. GWAS may miss disease genes with weak genetic effects or strong epistatic effects due to the single-marker testing approach commonly used. GWAS may thus generate false negative or inconclusive results, suggesting the need for novel methods to combine effects of single nucleotide polymorphisms within a gene to increase the likelihood of fully characterizing the susceptibility gene. Results: We developed ancGWAS, an algebraic graph-based centrality measure that accounts for linkage disequilibrium in identifying significant disease sub-networks by integrating the association signal from GWAS data sets into the human protein–protein interaction (PPI) network. We validated ancGWAS using an association study result from a breast cancer data set and the simulation of interactive disease loci in the simulation of a complex admixed population, as well as pathway based GWAS simulation. This new approach holds promise for deconvoluting the interactions between genes underlying the pathogenesis of complex diseases. Results obtained yield a novel central breast cancer sub-network of the human interactome implicated in the proteoglycan synde-can-mediated signaling events pathway which is known to play a major role in mesenchymal tumor cell proliferation, thus providing further insights into breast cancer pathogenesis. Availability and implementation: The ancGWAS package and documents are available at
IntroductionGenome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) have successfully identified genetic variants in human populations, however many authors have pointed out that GWAS may not detect genetic variants with low or moderate risk, which don't reach the intrinsic genome-wide significance cut-off (5.00e  08) (). Today, only a few common variants have been linked to disease and the associated loci explain only a small fraction of the). Because the effect of a gene polymorphism may be small, GWAS may fail to detect a significant signal if the effect of a variant in another gene is not taken into account (). Since complex diseases are typically caused by multiple factors, including multiple genes, through genegene interactions (), single-marker-based analysis in GWAS may generate false negative and inconclusive results (). Currently the challenges facing GWAS include:(i) the translation of associated loci into suitable biological hypotheses, (ii) the well-known problem of missing heritability () and (iii) the understanding of how multiple modestly associated loci within genes interact to influence a phenotype (). Detecting the underlying genetic etiology of the disease can be difficult, as it may involve a single gene or interactions between two or more genes. Recent studies have demonstrated that there is a relationship between gene function and phenotype, and that functionally related genes are more likely to interact (). Alternatively, the effect can be at the phenotypic level, where a pair of genes can interact to produce a specific phenotype (). Interactions can play critical roles in the cause of disease, therefore standard GWAS analysis alone is insufficient to examine the complex genetic structure of complex diseases (). The challenge of genegene interaction methods is that the large number of multi-locus genotype combinations generated from large numbers of genetic variants may leads to the so-called 'curse of dimensionality' problem (). Recently, gene-set based methods have been used to examine gene sets, particularly in the form of biological pathways or grouping genes by cellular functions or functional groups, using GWAS datasets (O'). These methods search for significantly enriched gene sets collected from predefined canonical pathways or functional annotations such as Gene Ontology (GO) terms. However, these approaches have limitations, such as (i) the requirement for strong disease-specific background knowledge, (ii) the incomplete annotation of pathways or GO annotations in the current knowledgebase () and (iii) the results might be limited to a priori knowledge, thus, making it difficult to identify a meaningful combination of genes (). Because risk genes may differ in different individuals, but may still lie in the same pathway (), the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network based approach was recently introduced. This approach has been shown to largely overcome some of the limitations in its flexibility in setting the components of a gene set (). Examining the combined effects of genes by detecting genetic signals beyond single gene polymorphisms may increase our ability to fully characterize the susceptible genes and unravel the pathogenesis of disease (). These existing network-based approaches are mostly based on combining p-values from standard GWAS for correlated SNPs into an overall significance level for a gene, and combining P-values for the genes in a pathway into an overall significance level to investigate the association of a pathway with the disease (). However, in many cases, SNPs within genes and genes within pathways are correlated, and these methods do not account for this dependency, but rather assume genes or SNPs to be independent and uniformly distributed under a null hypothesis, which may lead to erroneous results. In addition, most of these network-based approaches do not account for topological properties of biological networks, which may lead to meaningless sub-networks (). Here, we present a method, ancGWAS that leverages PPI network information, local ancestry (in the case of admixed populations) and Linkage Disequilibrium data to mine GWAS results. ancGWAS introduces flexibility in estimating gene-and subnetwork-specific ancestry using the inferred local ancestry from ancestry inference approaches such as in (). From different simulation results, we demonstrate that ancGWAS holds promise for comprehensively examining the interactions between genes underlying the pathogenesis of genetic diseases and also underlying ethnic differences. In addition, we applied ancGWAS to a GWAS data set from postmenopausal women of European ancestry with invasive breast cancer (). Our result yielded an interesting central breast cancer sub-network of the human interactome implicated in the proteoglycan syndecanmediated signaling events pathway.
DiscussionWe introduced ancGWAS, a post GWAS method based on an algebraic graph-based approach that leverages the topological analysis of the PPI network to (i) identify hub genes, and use their topological properties, (ii) identify the most meaningful and significant genes or sub-networks relevant to a disease and those underlying ethnic difference in disease risk in the case of admixed populations and (iii) account for the correlation that exists between SNPs within or between genes and genes within pathways. ancGWAS integrates the association signal from standard GWAS data, the local ancestry for admixed populations and the SNP LD into the human PPI network. In addition, ancGWAS also handles other user-defined weights such as topological weight. ancGWAS introduces flexibility in estimating gene-and sub-network-specific ancestry using the inferred local ancestry from ancestry inference approaches such as in (). When ruling out the gene-and sub-networkspecific ancestry, the proposed method corrects for possible bias in the inferred local ancestries obtained from current approaches of local ancestry inference (). In addition, it tests for casecontrol unusual difference in ancestry at the gene and sub-network level using the corrected local ancestry of admixed populations.We have done 3 types of simulation to test ancGWAS (i) causal simulation (with some causal SNPs) on a 4-way admixed population to test if ancGWAS can recover the GWAS signal and ancestry differences, (ii) null simulation (without disease SNPs) on a 4-way admixed population to test if ancGWAS produces a false signal or type I error and (iii) pathway-based simulation with weak disease effect to test ancGWAS's ability to recover interactive disease genes within a pathway. All simulated data sets are available with the ancGWAS package, at http://www.cbio.uct.ac.za/ ancGWAS. Our results from the causal simulation of a 4-way admixed population; and the data set of invasive breast cancer demonstrated that ancGWAS can recover weak and moderate association signals from standard GWAS results by leveraging effects of all SNPs within a gene and sub-network to unravel signals of possible disease associated genes or pathways (further discussion in Supplementary Text S9). Although our statistical methods account for false discovery, we assessed the ability of ancGWAS to control both type I and II errors based on null simulation with no causal loci and causal simulation of disease loci in the simulation of an admixed population, respectively. In these assessments, no false positive/negative signals were identified (Supplementary Tables S1 and S4). Moreover, ancGWAS can detect ancestry differences in admixed data as shown in, which displays candidate ancestry difference at the gene/sub-network level. However, our current method cannot perform allelic tests of association directly from the data, controlling for differences in gene/sub-network-specific ancestry (candidate peaks), as this is very challenging due to genegene interactions (or considering sub-networks of iterative genes). This would mean a large number of multi-locus genotype combinations generated from large numbers of genetic variants, leading to the so-called 'curse of dimensionality' problem (). Inferring accurate local ancestry is also challenging () and currently we do not have access to a phenotypic data set of an admixed population. Otherwise it would be interesting to apply the proposed approach to such a population to evaluate the performance of this approach in identifying the pathways associated with a disease. The lack of accurate knowledge of complex traits and the incomplete human protein interaction network makes it challenging to directly compare the results from different pathway analysis methods. Nevertheless, we used a GWAS data set of invasive breast cancer (Supplementary Text S8) to compare ancGWAS to dmGWAS. These results have shown that ancGWAS identified more cancer associated genes in its results than dmGWAS, and holds promise for deconvoluting the interactions between genes underlying the pathogenesis of complex diseases. dmGWAS recently released a new feature () that uses gene expression profiles for edge weights (). However, because the new dmGWAS still uses the same greedy searching algorithm to break down the biological network into sub-networks, it still doesn't take advantage of the topological properties of biological networks like ancGWAS does.