Computational methods in molecular biology will increasingly depend on standards-based annotations that describe biological experiments in an unambiguous manner. Annotare is a software tool that enables biologists to easily annotate their high-throughput experiments, biomaterials and data in a standards-compliant way that facilitates meaningful search and analysis. Availability and Implementation: Annotare is available from
INTRODUCTIONMeta-data describing high-throughput investigations enable unambiguous interpretation of experiments, experiment reproducibility and meaningful searching and analysis of the resulting data. The microarray community has developed MAGE-TAB (), an annotation format for microarray data. MAGE-TAB allows laboratories to manage, exchange and publish wellannotated biomedical data using a spreadsheet-based paradigm. Several public repositories and analysis tools for microarray data such as ArrayExpress (), Stanford Microarray Database (SMD) (), MeV (), Bioconductor () and caArray () support microarray data submissions with MAGE-TAB annotations, and open source tools are available for conversion of legacy formats into MAGE-TAB (). In order to improve the volume, quality and granularity of annotations, there is a compelling need for software that enables biologists to easily annotate such data. We describe Annotare, a tool that facilitates annotation of gene expression data in MAGE-TAB format. Annotare is available under the terms of the MIT License at http://code.google.com/p/annotare/. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONAnnotare is a collaborative open-source software development effort involving many institutions. The tool is freely available from Annotare's project web site http://code.google.com/p/annotare/. Updates and improvements are planned in response to current usability studies. A web-based version of Annotare is also under development. Not only will a web-based version be able to take advantage of finding key ontology terms or publications via the internet, but it will be configurable so that it can be directly connected to a software package or database. Both ArrayExpress and SMD will provide access to the web-based Annotare tool to construct and view high-throughput experimental annotations. In addition to the web-based version of Annotare, future work will provide support for the MAGE-TAB version 1.1 as well as RNA-seq data. In particular, Annotare will be extended to allow researchers to annotate their RNA-seq or ChIP-seq experiments to satisfy the MINSEQE data sharing requirements for high-throughput sequence data (A.submitted for publication).