Motivation: Most proteins interact with small-molecule ligands such as metabolites or drug compounds. Over the past several decades, many of these interactions have been captured in high-resolution atomic structures. From a geometric point of view, most interaction sites for grasping these small-molecule ligands, as revealed in these structures, form concave shapes, or pockets, on the proteins surface. An efficient method for comparing these pockets could greatly assist the classification of ligand-binding sites, prediction of protein molecular function and design of novel drug compounds. Results: We introduce a computational method, APoc (Alignment of Pockets), for the large-scale, sequence order-independent, structural comparison of protein pockets. A scoring function, the Pocket Similarity Score (PS-score), is derived to measure the level of similarity between pockets. Statistical models are used to estimate the significance of the PS-score based on millions of comparisons of randomly related pockets. APoc is a general robust method that may be applied to pockets identified by various approaches, such as ligand-binding sites as observed in experimental complex structures, or predicted pockets identified by a pocket-detection method. Finally, we curate large benchmark datasets to evaluate the performance of APoc and present interesting examples to demonstrate the usefulness of the method. We also demonstrate that APoc has better performance than the geometric hashing-based method SiteEngine. Availability and implementation: The APoc software package including the source code is freely available at http://cssb.biology.gatech. edu/APoc.
INTRODUCTIONIn a biological cell, small-molecule ligands, such as metabolites or drug compounds, constantly interact with their protein receptors. This gives rise to or modulates various aspects of protein function. Understanding how these interactions take place has been one key goal of many research efforts for several decades (). Accompanying the advance of structural determination techniques such as X-ray crystallography and NMR, tens of thousands of structures of proteins in complex with small-molecule ligands have been determined at atomic resolution and deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) (). Thus, there is a diverse collection of high-resolution snapshots of proteinligand interactions that can be examined to help provide functional insight. Ligand-binding sites on protein surfaces, where direct physical contacts form between small-molecule ligands and proteins, are of special interest. From a structural prospective, most of these sites are located within a concave-shaped structure known as a 'pocket' (). Owing to this characteristic, a pocket may be detected through a geometrical analysis of protein structure. Consequently, a number of methods have been developed to predict ligand-binding sites exploiting the idea. Among them, SURFNET uses a sphere-filling technique to locate a pocket (), POCKET () and LIGSITE () adopt grid-based approaches and CAST identifies the pocket through Delaunay triangulation and the-shape theory (). Alternatively, several methods using energy-based or template-based strategies have also been proposed [see a recent review (. It should be recognized that a protein surface is bumpy and the boundaries of pockets depend on a series of extrinsic (and to some extent arbitrary) choices, e.g. how far should a pocket extend towards the open space, and how high must a ridgeline be for it to delineate two disjoint, but adjacent, pockets versus a single united pocket. The large number of available structures in the PDB provides opportunities for comparative studies of ligand-binding pockets (). In general, small-molecule ligands can interact with proteins of different structural folds. Do pockets that recognize similar ligands share some common structural features? If such features exist, can we use it to predict protein function? To answer these questions, global structural comparison often is not adequate, and it is necessary to develop methods for local structural comparison dedicated to the geometric and/or physicochemical features of the protein pockets themselves. Among existing methods for pocket comparison, a heuristic maximum clique finding algorithm has been widely implemented, e.g. as in Cavbase (), IsoCleft () and SOIPPA (). In these methods, pockets are represented by pseudoatoms, all-atoms or C atoms, and an associated graph is generated, wherein nodes are pairs of atoms from two pocket structures and edges represent a similarity relationship. The maximum clique found in this graph corresponds to the optimal alignment between the pocket structures. Another popular type of algorithm used for aligning pocket-lining residues is geometric hashing, e.g. SiteEngine (). Instead of using atoms to represent a pocket, spherical harmonics () or 3D Zernike descriptors () have *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com been proposed to describe protein pockets. The reduced pocket descriptors permit fast computation, but they do not return a detailed alignment of pocket residues, which is useful for certain studies, such as the identification of mutations corresponding to subtle changes of substrate specificity. An existing pocket comparison method is usually tied with a specific pocket-detection procedure, and it is difficult to extend its usage to generic pockets detected by different procedures. This difficulty is partly caused by the fact that many scoring functions for measuring pocket similarity are dependent on the size of the pockets (); different pocket detection methods can assign different sizes and/or numbers of pockets for the same structure. As in the case of a global structural alignment, a linear normalization of a similarity score by the size of a pocket does not eliminate the size-dependence issue, which is usually non-linear. Most approaches do not properly estimate the statistical significance of their similarity score. This becomes an issue when one performs large-scale comparisons of the entire PDB (). To address these issues, we introduce a new method, APoc, for the sequence order-independent structural alignment of pockets on protein surfaces. Below, a length-independent scoring function PS-score is first introduced. This is followed by a description of the algorithm, which includes iterative dynamic programming and iterative integer programming procedures to obtain an optimal sequence order-independent alignment between two protein pockets. We then introduce Subject/Control sets for largescale benchmark tests, and describe the results of APoc on three types of pockets detected by different pocket-detection methods. Two interesting examples from the benchmark sets are presented. Finally, we compare the performance of APoc to a publicly available method SiteEngine.