Motivation: We study a stochastic method for approximating the set of local minima in partial RNA folding landscapes associated with a bounded-distance neighbourhood of folding conformations. The conformations are limited to RNA secondary structures without pseudoknots. The method aims at exploring partial energy landscapes pL induced by folding simulations and their underlying neighbourhood relations. It combines an approximation of the number of local optima devised by Garnier and Kallel (2002) with a run-time estimation for identifying sets of local optima established by Reeves and Eremeev (2004). Results: The method is tested on nine sequences of length between 50nt and 400nt, which allows us to compare the results with data generated by RNAsubopt and subsequent barrier tree calculations. On the nine sequences, the method captures on average 92% of local minima with settings designed for a target of 95%. The run-time of the heuristic can be estimated by O(n 2 Dνlnν), where n is the sequence length, ν is the number of local minima in the partial landscape pL under consideration and D is the maximum number of steepest descent steps in attraction basins associated with pL.
INTRODUCTIONThe method presented in the article targets sampling algorithms designed for RNA secondary structure prediction and pathway analysis that employs in one way or another features of the underlying free energy landscape. For this type of algorithms, knowledge of metastable states (local minima) in the vicinity of intermediate conformations can be of advantage in speeding up the folding simulation. Here, the term sampling algorithm covers any type of random walks, Markov processes and kinetic or co-transcriptional folding simulations applied to RNA secondary structure prediction. Simulations of kinetic folding based upon the master equation dp u (t)/dtare feasible only for short sequences due to the large number m of folding conformations (), even when executed on parallel computing systems (p u (t) is the probability that the folding process is in conformational state u at time t and the k uv are the transition rates from state u to state v). A standard setting for values k uv is * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONFor the 11 sequences we analysed in the present paper, the Garnier Kallel method not only produced estimations within the same order of magnitude of the true number of local minima (calculated by RNAsubopt and barriers), but also with an average deviation of 36% (in most cases overestimation); the estimations of the number of local minima seem to be a useful input to the subsequent approximation of the entire set of local minima. On the nine sequences with a sufficiently large size of the partial landscape, the estimations and parameter settings provided by Reeves and Eremeev (2004) have led to an average approximation rate of 92% for a target rate of 95%, which we see as a confirmation of the Reeves Eremeev method and a justification for the entire approach. The results were achieved for sequences with varying ratios of the size of the partial landscape versus the number of local minima within the subspaces. An open question is the secure selection of the initial sample size M 0. A potential way for solving this problem could be based on good approximations of the number of secondary structures that constitute the Hamming-sphere around a particular structure under consideration. The increase of the sample size in case of  1 / 2  3 can be organized in different ways. For example, when starting with a relatively small M 0 , a sample size of 2 t M 0 in step t provides a rapid increase that could lead within a few steps to at least  1 / 2  3 (additionally, one could then search backwards between 2 t1 M 0 and 2 t M 0 additive steps for better values of T  where the current M-run still complies with  1 / 2  3). On the other hand, for a given sequence length n and a fixed radius it might be possible to devise standard rules for initial settings of M 0 , which could result in a very small number of M-runs. Another line of further improvements could be the combination of the data from two runs for the same value of M, with one run for a 'horizontal' selection of samples (high free energy within the partial landscape) and the second run for a random selection over all conformations obtained by M random walks of length K within the partial landscape. Here, one would need to establish rules of how to determine the approximation from two different sets of values for M and outtaken together with the current value of M.