Identifying chemical probes or seeking scaffolds for a specific biological target is important for protein function studies. Therefore, we create the Annotated Scaffold Database (ASDB), a computer-readable and systematic target-annotated scaffold database, to serve such needs. The scaffolds in ASDB were derived from public databases including ChEMBL, DrugBank and TCMSP, with a scaffold-based classification approach. Each scaffold was assigned with an InChIKey as its unique identifier, energy-minimized 3D conformations, and other calculated properties. A scaffold is also associated with drugs, natural products, drug targets and medical indications. The database can be retrieved through text or structure query tools. ASDB collects 333 601 scaffolds, which are associated with 4368 targets. The scaffolds consist of 3032 scaffolds derived from drugs and 5163 scaffolds derived from natural products. For given scaffolds, scaffold-target networks can be generated from the database to demonstrate the relations of scaffolds and targets. Availability and implementation: ASDB is freely available at http://www.rcdd.org.cn/asdb/with the major web browsers.
IntroductionMedicinal chemists, phytochemists and chemical biologists are seeking novel chemical scaffolds or probes for a specific biological target (mainly a protein). Therefore, great attention has been paid in developing methods and resources to discover new chemical scaffolds or probes associated with biological targets. In the high-throughput synthesis and screening campaigns, privileged scaffolds were identified () to establish structure activity relations (SAR) for further property and activity optimizations. Small chemical scaffolds have been studied for many years (), and resulted in many scaffold-oriented techniques including scaffold hopping (), virtual screening (), and diversity-oriented synthesis (). Bemis and Murcko are the pioneers in chemical scaffold concept ().used the scaffold concept to classify compounds and measure molecular diversity. Bajorath and colleagues studied scaffolds and activity cliffs relations (), scaffolds and activities (). These scaffold related studies generated new needs for chemical scaffold resources. Shen and coworkers developed a scaffold database for scaffold hopping studies (). To systematically study current chemical scaffolds associated with biological targets, we created an annotated scaffold data base (ASDB). ASDB collects chemical scaffolds derived from the major databases for medicinal chemistry or chemical biology. The scaffolds have been) databases, and can be retrieved through structural query or text query tools. To demonstrate scaffold-target and scaffold-scaffold relations, ASDB provides a network viewing tool to present the database search hits.