ASSIsT (Automatic SNP ScorIng Tool) is a user-friendly customized pipeline for efficient calling and filtering of SNPs from Illumina Infinium arrays, specifically devised for custom genotyping arrays. Illumina has developed an integrated software for SNP data visualization and inspection called GenomeStudio V R (GS). ASSIsT builds on GS-derived data and identifies those markers that follow a bi-allelic genetic model and show reliable genotype calls. Moreover, ASSIsT re-edits SNP calls with null alleles or additional SNPs in the probe annealing site. ASSIsT can be employed in the analysis of different population types such as full-sib families and mating schemes used in the plant kingdom (backcross, F1, F2), and unrelated individuals. The final result can be directly exported in the format required by the most common software for genetic mapping and marker–trait association analysis. ASSIsT is developed in Python and runs in Windows and Linux. Availability and implementation: The software, example data sets and tutorials are freely available at http://compbiotoolbox.fmach.it/assist/.
IntroductionAdvances in whole genome genotyping technologies enabled the investigation of several hundred thousand SNP markers simultaneously on a genome-wide scale. To date, Illumina (GoldenGate V R and Infinium V R ) and Affimetrix (Axiom V R ) are the most widely used array-based genotyping platforms worldwide. Illumina has developed GenomeStudio V R , a proprietary software with a graphical user interface (GUI) for SNP data visualization and filtering that enables the selection of high-quality markers showing robust performance across the examined germplasm. However, the actual filtering of such SNPs requires a deep understanding of the performance of SNP markers, genetic segregation patterns and familiarity with the many tools and parameters in GenomeStudio V R (GS). ASSIsT accounts for this by offering a user friendly, automated pipeline that builds on the results of Illumina's GenCall algorithm () as incorporated in GS. In addition to filtering, ASSIsT also re-edits GS-calls in order to better explore the available information for SNPs showing null alleles or additional SNP clusters V R due to additional polymorphisms at the probe annealing site. This re-editing enhances correct SNP calling and reduces unnecessary removal of potentially valuable markers.