
INTRODUCTIONUnderstanding the compositional differences of microbial communities (microbiomes) is essential in microbial ecology. With the development of next-generation sequencing technologies, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. microbiome composition can now be determined by direct DNA sequencing without the need for laborious cultivation (). There has been a great interest in human microbiome studies in different body sites, ranging from skin () to gut () and respiratory tract (). Important insights have been gained from analysis of large-scale human microbiome data, including the discovery of enterotypes () and discovery of the link between diet and these enterotypes (). Although the metagenomic shotgun approach is potentially more powerful and unbiased, 16S rRNA gene targeted sequencing is routinely performed to determine the taxonomic composition. The generated 16S rRNA sequence tags are usually clustered into operational taxonomic units (OTUs) with a specified amount of variability allowed within each OTU (). At 97% similarity, these OTUs represent 'species'. Downstream analysis is then performed on the OTU abundance data. Two central themes in human microbiome studies are to identify potential biological and environmental factors that are associated with microbiome composition, and to define the relationship between microbiome features and biological or clinical outcomes. The goal is to provide a better understanding of the factors that shape our microbiome and, potentially, contribute to the development of new therapeutic strategies to modulate the microbiome composition and affect human health (). Testing the association of microbiome composition with potential environmental factors using OTU abundances directly is difficult due to high dimensionality, non-normality and phylogenetic structure of the OTU data. Instead, distance-based non-parametric testing, in which a distance measure is defined-between any two microbiome samples, is usually used to achieve this goal (). The power of the distance-based test depends on a proper choice of the distance measure. Numerous distance measures have been proposed to compare microbial communities (). Phylogenetic distance measures, which account for the phylogenetic relationship among the species, provide far more power because they exploit the degree of divergence between different sequences. Among these, the UniFrac distances are the most popular ones (Copyedited by:MANUSCRIPT CATEGORY: ORIGINAL PAPER
DISCUSSIONMicrobiome data are multivariate count data in their original form and are statistically challenging to analyze due to their high dimensionality, phylogenetic constraints among species/OTUs, overdispersion and excessive zeros. To circumvent the difficulty, the data are often summarized in the form of distance matrix. Testing association of microbiome composition with environmental covariates is performed using the distance matrix. We have demonstrated in simulations that the weighted and unweighted UniFrac impose large weight either to abundant lineages or to rare lineages; they can be underpowered in detecting change in moderately abundant lineages. Since microbiome composition change could occur in any lineages, our generalized UniFrac distances, which unify the weighted and unweighted UniFrac in a common framework, enable us to detect a much wider range of biologically relevant changes. Our simulation studies have clearly demonstrated that the generalized UniFrac distance d (0.5) is more robust than d W or d U , and its performances are in general comparable to the best UniFrac distances among the scenarios we considered. In addition, the generalized UniFrac distances are very robust to tree constructing methods. We suggest the use of d (0.5) for testing association of microbiome composition with environmental covariates to avoid missing important findings. Both weighted and unweighted UniFrac distances are sensitive to sampling depth (). Inflated distances at a low sampling depth are caused by sampling variation especially for the rare lineages. The generalized UniFrac distances are also sensitive to sampling depth (Supplementary). However, as the sampling depth increases, the distance stabilizes. For the gut microbiome dataset, we found a sequencing depth of 1000 reads is sufficient to stabilize the generalized UniFrac distances. To overcome the potential adverse effects of uneven sampling, rarefaction is usually used to subsample the samples to the same depth. However, when the sampling depth varies greatly across the samples, rarefaction throws away a significant portion of the 16S reads and increases the sampling variation. We found that rarefaction is not necessary, at least, in the context of testing the association of the microbiome composition with covariates (Supplementary). The power of UniFrac variants can also be compared in the context of testing whether two microbial communities differ significantly as in (). Instead of comparing power for detecting the difference between two communities, we focus our evaluations on the performance of UniFrac distances for associating microbiome composition to environmental covariates by collecting multiple independent samples. The rational is that as the sequence depth increases, two sample comparison will have increased power to detect differences due to sources that we are not interested in (random noises), such as the individual-to-individual variability, day-to-day variability, sampling location variability or even technical variability (e.g. sample preparation). Multiple samples from a population coupled with multivariate statistical methods such as the distance-based PERMANOVA provide powerful design and analysis methods to overcome these potential random noises (). As more and more large-scale microbiome datasets are being collected, we expect that our generalized UniFrac distances can help to identify important covariates that are associated with the microbiomes that could be missed using the commonly used UniFrac distances. In addition to identifying environmental covariates that may be determinants of microbiome composition, our approach would be equally suited to identifying microbiome features associated with biological or clinical outcomes, which is needed to begin to understand the impact of the microbiome on health.