Motivation: Digital reconstruction, or tracing, of 3D neuron structures is critical toward reverse engineering the wiring and functions of a brain. However, despite a number of existing studies, this task is still challenging, especially when a 3D microscopic image has low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR) and fragmented neuron segments. Published work can handle these hard situations only by introducing global prior information, such as where a neurite segment starts and terminates. However, manual incorporation of such global information can be very time consuming. Thus, a completely automatic approach for these hard situations is highly desirable. Results: We have developed an automatic graph algorithm, called the all-path pruning (APP), to trace the 3D structure of a neuron. To avoid potential mis-tracing of some parts of a neuron, an APP first produces an initial over-reconstruction, by tracing the optimal geodesic shortest path from the seed location to every possible destination voxel/pixel location in the image. Since the initial reconstruction contains all the possible paths and thus could contain redundant structural components (SC), we simplify the entire reconstruction without compromising its connectedness by pruning the redundant structural elements, using a new maximal-covering minimal-redundant (MCMR) subgraph algorithm. We show that MCMR has a linear computational complexity and will converge. We examined the performance of our method using challenging 3D neuronal image datasets of model organisms (e.g. fruit fly). Availability: The software is available upon request. We plan to eventually release the software as a plugin of the V3D-Neuron package at http://penglab.janelia.org/proj/v3d.
INTRODUCTIONDigital reconstruction, or tracing, of 3D neuron structures () is critical toward reverse engineering the wiring and functions of a brain (). A number of studies (e.g.) have been conducted to develop semi-or fully automatic neuron-tracing methods that would yield more efficient neuron reconstruction than the currently widely adopted manual reconstruction strategy. Most of these existing methods have used various structural components (SC), e.g. 3D spheres, ellipsoids, cylinders, lines segments or irregular * To whom correspondence should be addressed. compartments, to model a neuron's morphology (e). The most successful strategy among these algorithms is to build-up the reconstruction by incrementally adding more and more such SCs into the morphological modeling of a neuron. Good examples include image voxel scooping (), ray shooting () and template matching (). These bottom-up local searching methods are suitable for 3D images that have ideally continuous neurite tracts and good signal-to-noise ratio (SNR). However, precise digitization of the 3D morphological structure of a neuron acquired through various microscopy methods, such as 3D laser scanning microscopy, remains very problematic in practice. It is especially hard when an image has low SNR, and/or broken and fuzzy neurite segments that are due to the intrinsic punctuated neurite structures (e.g. synaptic boutons) or imperfections in sample preparation (and g). Notably such datasets are common for the nervous systems of different animals. For instance, the punctuated and thus often broken neurites can be ubiquitously seen in the singleneuron images of Drosophila melanogaster (fruit fly) (), Caenorhabditis elegans and mouse (). The local search methods discussed above cannot easily handle these hard situations, as it is very difficult to cross these gaps (i.e. low signal regions). One strategy to tackle this challenging situation is to combine both global and local cues. Global prior information, such as the starting and ending locations of neurite structures, will guide the finer-scale optimization using local image content. Such global priors of neurite structure can be supplied easily using a novel and highly effective 3D visualization system V3D (). The Graph-augmented Deformable model (GD) algorithm, which is a graph-augmented deformable model, can be used to trace the optimal paths from the starting location to each of the ending points automatically (). Then, the entire reconstruction can be assembled automatically by detecting branching points along the merging paths (). This method had been successfully applied to reconstructing neuronal connections in the most detailed mouse brain image atlas to date (). Unfortunately, when a neuron's structure is very complicated or the image quality is low, it may still be very time-consuming to input such simple global prior/guiding information (). Thus, a completely automatic approach for broken structures and low SNR images is highly needed. We previously proposed to detect the tips/termini of a neuron automatically based on the spatial anisotropy of these terminal points (manuscript under review) or adaptive template matching (e.g. the AutoMarker function in the V3D system), followed by the GD-tracing. However, tip detection may not be accurate when the termini of a neuron do not form sharp tips, such as those terminated with synaptic boutons (). Adaptive template matching may also mis-detect the irregularly shaped termini. Therefore, here, we propose a new method that iteratively prunes an over-reconstruction. Neuron tracing/reconstruction from images and SC examples of a reconstruction. (a) A 3D reconstruction of a fruit fly neuron. (b) The entire morphology model can typically be decomposed as individual segments (shown in different colors), which are connected at the branching points. Typically, each segment can be traced/reconstructed separately. (c) The zoom-in view of the BOX1 in (a) and (b). (d) Illustration of the modeling of image voxel information using a series of spherical SCs. The edge of image region (bright voxels) best matches to the aggregation of SCs. (e) Other types of SCs besides spheres, such as ellipsoids and cylinders, can be used in locally matching the image content and thus growing the reconstruction. (f ) A maximum intensity project of a 3D stack of a fruit fly lamina neuron (courtesy of G. Rubin lab, Janelia Farm, HHMI). The neurites are highly punctuated, have high contrast in image intensity and appear to be broken. (g) Stained CA3 pyramidal neuron of a mouse brain region (courtesy of R. Tsien lab, Stanford University), where axonal varicosities make it hard to grow a reconstruction using local searching based on SCs. of a neuron. We show its efficiency and convergence. We examine its performance using challenging 3D neuronal image datasets of different model organisms (e.g. fruit fly).
CONCLUSIONWe have developed an automatic APP method to trace the 3D structure of a neuron. This method is fast. We show that this method is robust to image noise and locations of seeds. It is able to produce results comparable to the semi-automatic tracing methods and also produce automatic reconstructions for neurons of complicated morphology.