Motivation: Upstream open reading frames (uORFs) are often found in the 5-untranslated regions of eukaryotic messenger RNAs. Some uORFs have been shown to encode functional peptides involved in the translational regulation of the downstream main ORFs. Comparative genomic approaches have been used in genome-wide searches for uORFs encoding bioactive peptides, and by comparing uORF sequences between a few selected species or among a small group of species, uORFs with conserved amino acid sequences (UCASs) have been identified in plants, mammals and insects. Regulatory regions within uORF-encoded peptides that are involved in translational control are typically 10–20 amino acids long. Detection of homology between such short regions largely depends on the selection of species for comparison. To maximize the chances of identifying UCASs with short conserved regions, we devised a novel algorithm for homology search among a large number of species and the automatic selection of uORFs conserved in a wide range of species. Results: In this study, we developed the BAIUCAS (BLAST-based algorithm for identification of UCASs) method and identified 18 novel Arabidopsis uORFs whose amino acid sequences are conserved across diverse eudicot species, which include uORFs not found in previous comparative genomic studies due to low sequence conservation among species. Therefore, BAIUCAS is a powerful method for the identification of UCASs, and it is particularly useful for the detection of uORFs with a small number of conserved amino acid residues.
INTRODUCTIONUpstream open reading frames (uORFs) are small ORFs located in the 5-untranslated regions (5-UTRs) of many eukaryotic mRNAs. Recent genome-wide analyses revealed that 1050% of eukaryotic genes contain one or more uORFs (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.). The presence of a uORF can modulate the translational efficiency of the downstream main ORF (mORF) (). Regulatory roles of uORFs have been demonstrated in processes such as the stress response and feedback regulation of biosynthesis (). Although the effects of most uORFs seem to be independent of their amino acid sequence, several uORFs have been shown to affect the translation of the mORF in an amino acid sequence-dependent manner (). For example, in the translational feedback regulation of the Neurospora crassa arg-2 gene, which encodes the small subunit of arginine-specific carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, the 24-residue nascent peptide encoded by the arg-2 uORF causes ribosome stalling at the stop codon of the uORF in response to arginine, resulting in translational repression of the mORF (). In plants, uORFs with conserved amino acid sequences (UCASs) have been reported to be involved in the translational regulation of four Arabidopsis thaliana genes (), and the importance of uORF-encoded amino acid sequences has been demonstrated in the translational regulation of the SAMDC1 and bZIP11 genes (). Although uORFs present only in a limited number of species can have a regulatory role, it is more likely that evolutionarily conserved uORFs have a regulatory function. Therefore, to identify uORFs with potential regulatory roles, genome-wide searches for conserved uORFs have been conducted using comparative genomic approaches in various organisms, including mammals (), yeasts (), plants (), insects () and fungi (). Some of these studies searched for UCASs to identify peptide sequence-dependent regulatory uORFs. In plants, Hayden and Jorgensen identified 19 groups of UCASs by comparing uORF sequences between orthologous genes of A. thaliana and rice. Additionally, they found seven groups of UCASs by comparing A. thaliana paralogous genes. These UCASs were referred to as conserved peptide uORFs (CPUs) (). In mammals, uORF sequences were compared
DISCUSSIONIn this study, we developed BAIUCAS, a novel algorithm to identify UCASs and identified 18 novel UCASs in A. thaliana using BAIUCAS. The main feature of BAIUCAS is the comparison of uORF sequences with EST sequences from a large number of species and the selection of uORFs conserved across multiple taxonomic categories. This feature increases the chances of identifying UCASs compared with conventional comparative genomic approaches in which the uORF sequences are compared between a few selected species, because BAIUCAS can identify a UCAS even if it is not conserved in certain species. In fact, conserved uORFs corresponding to some of the UCASs were not found in certain taxonomic groups. For example, although the AT4G12790 UCAS is conserved in dicots and monocots, corresponding conserved uORFs were only found in Solanales among asterids, which is one of two large eudicot groups. In addition, although the AT1G30270 UCAS is conserved in angiosperms and gymnosperms, no corresponding conserved uORF was found in homologous genes of monocots. This feature of BAIUCAS is considered particularly advantageous for the identification of conserved uORFs with only a small number of conserved amino acid residues, because detection of the homology of such uORFs is largely dependent on the selection of species for comparison. In fact, we identified UCASs, such as AT1G30270 and AT3G55050, with relatively short conserved sequences. In addition, we identified UCASs, such as AT2G42880 and AT5G46590, with relatively low sequence conservation in A. thaliana and only a small number of conserved amino acid residues (). In this study, we tested two selection criteria in the fourth step of BAIUCAS, and demonstrated that, by using different selection criteria regarding taxonomic categories, BAIUCAS can extract uORFs conserved among different ranges of taxonomic groups. Although the selection of uORFs conserved among smaller taxonomic groups [i.e. categories (i) and(ii)] increased the risk of extracting uORFs whose sequences are retained at the nucleotide level, such a selection led us to identify UCASs more comprehensively. The UCASs identified in this study can be classified into the following two groups according to sequence conservation patterns: (I) uORFs with highly conserved C-terminal regions and perfectly conserved stop codon positions and (II) uORFs in which the entire sequences or the N-terminal and middle regions are conserved. Group I is composed of 10 groups of UCASs (, F, G, H, L, K, M, N, O and P), whereas Group II consists of seven UCASs (, C, D, E, I, J and Q). In contrast to the Group I UCASs, the position of the stop codons is not perfectly conserved in the Group II UCASs, and differences in several codons of the stop codon positions are observed among species. The features of the Group I UCASs are consistent with those of previously reported sequencedependent regulatory uORFs, in some of which the importance of the C-terminal amino acid sequence for translational regulation has been experimentally demonstrated (). For two of these regulatory uORFs, cryo-electron microscopy analyses have shown that the C-terminal regions of the uORF-encoded nascent peptides interact with the ribosomal exit tunnel when ribosome stalling occurs (). To assess whether the amino acid sequences of the UCASs identified in this study indeed have a regulatory function, experimental validation is necessary. For example, this can be validated by comparing the effects of amino acid sequence alterations and synonymous codon changes of uORFs on translation of the mORFs. In addition to the identification of the 18 UCASs, we also demonstrated that BAIUCAS could extract 43 of the previously identified CPUs. Taking these CPUs into account, BAIUCAS could extract 61 A. thaliana UCASs, which are classified into 38 homology groups. Although BAIUCAS failed to extract 15 of the 58 CPUs, the reason why five of these were not extracted is that they did not fit one of our conditions that the amino acid sequence and the stop codon position of a uORF must be conserved in the multiple eudicot categories. Additionally, two of the CPUs were eliminated because of the condition that a uORF must not be within an mORF of a splice variant. In the sixth step, two of the CPUs were not extracted because of low conservation in the N-terminal region of the mORF-encoded protein. In this study, to assess whether A. thaliana uORFs and their tBLASTn-hit ESTs are derived from homologous genes, we directly compared A. thaliana protein sequences and amino acid sequences encoded by putative partial mORFs within the EST sequences. If the protein database expands to include a greater variety of plant species in the future, an alternative approach would be possible, in which full-length protein sequences corresponding to partial mORFs within the ESTs are compared with A. thaliana protein sequences. Such an approach may increase the number of conserved uORFs that are identifiable by BAIUCAS. In conclusion, this study demonstrated that BAIUCAS is a powerful method for the identification of UCASs that makes it possible to more comprehensively identify conserved uORFs than conventional comparative genomic approaches. Because BAIUCAS is particularly useful for the identification of conserved uORFs with a small number of conserved amino acid residues, the algorithms used in BAIUCAS can be applied to the identification of short bioactive peptides besides uORF-encoded peptides, such as peptide hormones.).