Basic4Cseq is an R/Bioconductor package for basic filtering , analysis and subsequent near-cis visualization of 4C-seq data. The package processes aligned 4C-seq raw data stored in binary alignment/map (BAM) format and maps the short reads to a corresponding virtual fragment library. Functions are included to create virtual fragment libraries providing chromosome position and further information on 4C-seq fragments (length and uniqueness of the fragment ends, and blindness of a fragment) for any BSGenome package. An optional filter is included for BAM files to remove invalid 4C-seq reads, and further filter functions are offered for 4C-seq fragments. Additionally, basic quality controls based on the read distribution are included. Fragment data in the vicinity of the experiments viewpoint are visualized as coverage plot based on a running median approach and a multi-scale contact profile. Wig files or csv files of the fragment data can be exported for further analyses and visualizations of interactions with other programs. Availability and implementation: Basic4Cseq is implemented in R and available at http://www.bioconductor.org/. A vignette with detailed descriptions of the functions is included in the package. Contact: Carolin.Walter@uni-muenster.de
INTRODUCTIONCircular chromosome conformation capture combined with high-throughput sequencing (4C-seq) is a method that allows the identification of chromosomal interactions between one potential interaction partner, called viewpoint, and virtually any other part of the genome (). Two rounds of digestion and ligation with two distinct restriction enzymes are performed to create a 4C-seq library. Unlike regular next-generation sequencing data, valid 4C-seq reads can only originate from precisely defined points in the genome. Any 4C-seq read will map to the end of a so-called 4C-seq fragment, i.e. a genomic region flanked by two primary restriction sites. When a secondary restriction site is not present, a fragment is called blind; a fragment end is defined as the region between a primary restriction site and the nearest secondary restriction site (van de). Blind fragments are expected to yield less reads than non-blind fragments; the length of a fragment end in general can cause variations in the read count. Any repetitive fragment end is to be interpreted with caution (van de). Consequently, these properties have to be considered during the analysis of 4C-seq data to prevent biases or misinterpretation. van de Werken et al.'s 4Cseqpipe is a pipeline to analyze 4C-seq data, which respects these issues (van de). However, it is not embedded into the R/Bioconductor environment, has little transparency regarding internal data structures, limited output options and less flexibility for smaller interactions with a length of up to 10 kb. The package r3Cseq () works on regular binary alignment/map (BAM) files and can detect and visualize interactions, but does not differentiate between fragment types, which is a source of bias. The recently published fourSig method () includes fragment filtering options and detects different types of interactions, but does not provide more complex visualization routines for the data profile in the viewpoint region. In contrast, Basic4Cseq offers routines for the analysis of 4C-seq fragment data that are easy to customize. Provided functionality includes fragment filtering, quality control, explorative near-cis visualization and data export/import functions.