Motivation: Gene expression assays allow for genome scale analyses of molecular biological mechanisms. State-of-the-art data analysis provides lists of involved genes, either by calculating significance levels of mRNA abundance or by Bayesian assessments of gene activity. A common problem of such approaches is the difficulty of interpreting the biological implication of the resulting gene lists. This lead to an increased interest in methods for inferring high-level biological information. A common approach for representing high level information is by inferring gene ontology (GO) terms which may be attributed to the expression data experiment. Results: This article proposes a probabilistic model for GO term inference. Modelling assumes that gene annotations to GO terms are available and gene involvement in an experiment is represented by a posterior probabilities over gene-specific indicator variables. Such probability measures result from many Bayesian approaches for expression data analysis. The proposed model combines these indicator probabilities in a probabilistic fashion and provides a probabilistic GO term assignment as a result. Experiments on synthetic and microarray data suggest that advantages of the proposed probabilistic GO term inference over statistical test-based approaches are in particular evident for sparsely annotated GO terms and in situations of large uncertainty about gene activity. Provided that appropriate annotations exist, the proposed approach is easily applied to inferring other high level assignments like pathways. Availability: Source code under GPL license is available from the
INTRODUCTIONThe well-known gene ontology (GO) () is at the center of different research questions in Systems Biology and Bioinformatics. Even for well-studied model organisms such as Saccharomyces cerevisiae, annotations of genes to ontology terms is far from complete. To improve this situation, () proposed a BLAST ()based sequence similarity analysis and machine learning approaches for a denovo annotation of genes to GO terms. Novel-scientific discoveries require a constant updating of the standardized gene ontology (). Maintaining a well-curated specification is a tedious and time-consuming manual task. For improving the reaction time () propose inferring Bayesian networks by literature mining to generate domain-specific ontologies automatically. With the purpose of benchmarking gene associations inferred with Bayesian networks, (To whom correspondence should be addressed.2003) propose using known GO term annotations for assessing the significance of inferred associations. Research is also concerned with mapping biological assays like expression experiments to global biological function. Such approaches use known gene to GO annotations and represent biological function by assigning standardized GO terms to experimental data. Recent surveys (show that a majority of these methods use statistical test-based inference. Strategies are often modular and will first rank genes using state-of-the-art expression data analysis which includes statistical test based (), and Bayesian methods () More recently, the quantification of transcript abundance from next generation sequencing data () attracted a lot of attention. Approaches like FatiGO () and Ontoexpress () rely on rank lists obtained from first level analysis, separate the genes which are annotated to GO terms into groups and use Fishers exact test, the hyper geometric distribution or similar approaches for calculating Pvalues of GO term enrichment. All GO terms with P-values below a suitably chosen threshold are then assigned to the experiment, with the inherent multiple testing problem being tackled with stateof-the-art approaches. Separation into lists of active and inactive genes depends greatly on the chosen threshold. As is illustrated in (), in particular conservative thresholds are likely to underestimate over-representation of GO terms by functionally active genes. A solution to this problem was suggested as FatiScan (), which repeatedly applies FatiGO with different thresholds, adjusts P-values correspondingly and thus reduces the effect of choosing a particular threshold. With BayGO, () proposed a Bayesian tool for inferring active GO terms. BayGO is based on gene counts allows, however, for unobserved genes which may result from missing probes or poor quality measurements. The approach regards the true number of active and inactive genes as random variables and infers active GO terms by calculating significance levels of (lack of) association via Monte Carlo simulation. If all annotated genes are observed, the method will provide the same result as statistical tests based on the hyper geometric distribution. More recently, () proposed another Bayesian approach for counts-based GO term enrichment which considers the GO DAG structure to ease identification of groups of closely related GO terms. A recent investigation in () finds methodological biases in the assigned GO terms which depend on the statistical approach used for assessing significance. Their observation is likely caused by variations in the power of the tests which in general
DISCUSSIONThis article proposes a Bayesian approach for assigning GO terms to expression experiments which can be used as a post-processing step to Bayesian expression data analysis. Probabilities of GO term activity are obtained by combining results from probabilistic expression analysis in a Bayes' consistent manner. Calculations are isolated from pre-and post-processing and based on a tab delimited representation of GO term annotations and indicator probabilities which assess gene activity. Inference uses the variational Bayesian framework, which warrants that computations can feasibly be carried out on personal computers. The results of the proposed approach are compared against a counts-based enrichment analysis which uses Fisher's exact test. Synthetically generated data reveals that the proposed Bayesian GO term assignment provides more accurate results for sparsely populated GO terms and in situations where expression data analysis has large uncertainty about gene activity. In scenarios, where a sufficiently large number of genes is annotated to GO terms and where expression data allow assessing genes activity with high probability, the Bayesian approach and counts-based enrichment analysis provide similar results, without, however, leading to situations which would disfavor the proposed Bayesian approach. Our assessment that GO term activity can be more reliably inferred by quantitatively combining probabilities of gene activity is also supported by analysing probabilities of shared gene function () in mammary gland development () and endothelial cell apoptosis (). Compared with the GO term ranking obtained in Ref. () with Fishers exact test, we observe with the proposed approach a stronger enrichment of cell death-related GO terms at the top of the GO term rank list. Shared apoptosis events in these assays are expected from reports that endothelial cell apoptosis may play an important role in mammary gland development (). A second expression data set by () which investigates heat shock stress in S. cerevisiae lead to a much more clear cut distinction between active and inactive genes. In this situation, we find a strong agreement between the proposed Bayesian GO term assignment and the counts-based enrichment analysis and thus equal performance. The experiments allow hence the conclusion that a Bayesian GO term assignment has the potential of outperforming countsbased enrichment analysis in situations where GO terms are sparsely annotated and gene activity is difficult to assess. In situations with sufficiently many genes annotated to GO terms or with low uncertainty about gene activity, both counts-based enrichment and the proposed Bayesian assignment will provide similar accuracies. Although the application of the proposed Bayesian ontology assignment used gene ontology and microarray experiments as examples, the method is easily generalized to other ontology annotations and expression experiments by adapting the preprocessing filters and exchanging expression data analysis. The main limiting factor of Bayesian GO term assignment is the requirement of Bayesian indicator probabilities assessing gene activity. For statistical test-based array analysis, a comparable quantitative combination of P-values using statistical meta analysis can be obtained by applying the approach in Ref. ().