Motivation: Systems biology demands the use of several point of views to get a more comprehensive understanding of biological problems. This usually leads to take into account different data regarding the problem at hand, but it also has to do with using different perspectives of the same data. This multifaceted aspect of systems biology often requires the use of several tools, and it is often hard to get a seamless integration of all of them, which would help the analyst to have an interactive discourse with the data. Results: Focusing on expression profiling, BicOverlapper 2.0 visualizes the most relevant aspects of the analysis, including expression data, profiling analysis results and functional annotation. It also integrates several state-of-the-art numerical methods, such as differential expression analysis, gene set enrichment or biclustering. Availability and implementation: BicOverlapper 2.0 is available at:
INTRODUCTIONBicOverlapper 1.0 () focused on the visualization of complex gene expression analysis results coming from biclustering algorithms. Based on Venn-like diagrams and overlapping visualization layers, it successfully conveyed biclusters. With the use of BicOverlapper by the authors and thirdparty users, several new requirements arose, and it has evolved to support other analysis techniques and additional steps of the analysis process. Similar evolutions have occurred on other tools on the field. For example, Expander has extended microarray data analysis with relational and functional information (). Hierarchical Clustering Explorer, although originally designed for general use, added new methods for bioinformatics analysis (). Treeview () is developing toward a new version that will address highthroughtput biology needs (see https://www.princeton.edu/ *abarysh/treeview/).
CONCLUSIONBicOverlapper is a simple-to-use, highly visual and interactive tool for gene expression analysis. Easily and without programming knowledge, the user can have an overall view of several expression aspects, from raw data to analysis results and functional annotations. This may significantly reduce the analysis time and improve the analytical discourse with the data. For the future, we are working on the support of high-throughput data, especially RNA-Seq and a comprehensive report and image generation.). Each cell cycle is divided into three time intervals (early, mid and late). Differential expression for every combination of such intervals is computed and visualized as overlapping groups. Thirty-six genes high-regulated at early and mid intervals have been selected (intersection between 'early versus late' and 'mid versus late' groups at the bottom left); their expression profiles are shown in parallel coordinates and heatmap visualizations. Finally, the functional annotations, stacked by term, are shown as a word cloud, indicating, for example, that 9 of the 36 genes are related to metabolic and oxidationreduction processes