A host of formal, textual languages for modeling cellular processes have recently emerged, but their simulation tools often require an installation process which can pose a barrier for use. Bio Simulators is a framework for easy online deployment of simulators, providing a uniform web-based user interface to a diverse pool of tools. The framework is demonstrated through two plugins based on the KaSim Kappa simulator, one running directly in the browser and another running in the cloud.
INTRODUCTIONThe last decade has seen the emergence of a host of formal languages for modeling cellular processes in systems biology. Examples include process calculi such as the Pi calculus, and rule-based languages () such as Kappa (). However, simulation tools often require installation on a local machine, a process which at best poses a barrier for use by the casual observer and at worst is riddled with non-trivial dependency problems. Advances in web technology enable simulation tools to be made available online, directly through a browser. Bio Simulators is a web framework providing basic user interface components which are common to many simulators: an editor with syntax highlighting for writing textual models, and a plot for showing the results of time course simulation. A screenshot is shown in. At the top is a listing of available simulators. A new simulator can be added simply by pressing the '' button and entering a URL to a simulator definition. The simulator definition, in turn, is a file in the JSON format which specifies a URL to a JavaScript simulator file together with meta-information for, e.g. syntax highlighting in the given language. Bio Simulators thus facilitates easy prototyping and deployment of novel simulators, made available directly through a web browser with no need for user interface development. Bio Simulators also provides a foundation for online model repositories in which simulation of a model can be started simply by pressing a link which points to Bio Simulators; the link encodes an URL to the relevant simulator and to the model. Finally, assuming a critical mass of simulator plugins, Bio Simulators can serve as a uniform interface for learning and experimenting with the plethora of languages and simulators available. We demonstrate the concepts with two Bio Simulators plugins, both of which provide simulators for models in the Kappa language and are based on the open source KaSim tool available at www.kappalanguage.org. In the first case, KaSim is translated to JavaScript and the resulting simulator plugin runs entirely within the browser. In the second case, KaSim is deployed to an Azure Cloud service. We end by outlining the simulator definition interface file format.