The Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets (BioGRID) representational state transfer (REST) service allows full URL-based access to curated protein and genetic interaction data at the BioGRID database. Appending URL parameters allows filtering of data by various attributes including gene names and identifiers, PubMed ID and evidence type. We also describe two visualization tools that interface with the REST service, the BiogridPlugin2 for Cytoscape and the BioGRID WebGraph. Availability and implementation: BioGRID data and applications are completely free for commercial and non-commercial use. http://webservice.thebiogrid.org/resources/interactions (REST Service), http://wiki.thebiogrid.org/doku.php/biogridrest(REST Service parameter list and help), http://webservice.thebiogrid.org/ resources/application.wadl(REST Service WADL), http://thebiogrid .org/download.php (BiogridPlugin2, v2.1 download), http://wiki .
INTRODUCTIONThe aim of the Biological General Repository for Interaction Datasets (BioGRID, http://thebiogrid.org) is to curate and distribute comprehensive collections of physical and genetic interactions from all major model organisms, including human (). BioGRID currently houses 362 355 interactions, categorized by evidence code and supplemented with annotation such as modifications and phenotypes. BioGRID data are accessible through a searchable web interface, the Osprey network visualization tool () and partner databases such as Saccharomyces Genome Database (). Downloadable data files in tab-delimited or PSI-MI 2.5 XML () formats are available for off-line data analysis. However, since these files are often large and/or complex, full utilization of the data can require specialized scripts to be written. From release 3.0.64 (), BioGRID has been made available in MITAB format (), a tab-delimited format, with BioGRID evidence codes mapped to PSI-MI ontology * To whom correspondence should be addressed. terms. The PSICQUIC web service has been established by the IMEx consortium (http://imex.sourceforge.net) providing federated access to multiple interaction databases, including BioGRID, in MITAB format (). Although access via PSICQUIC provides all available interactions in BioGRID, it is not ideal for provision of BioGRID data as it does not contain original BioGRID evidence codes, post-translational modifications, phenotypes or freetext qualifiers. Here, we describe a new representational state transfer (REST) web service allowing access to full BioGRID data, and two visualization tools that programmatically access it. Example use cases for all components are provided in Supplementary File 1.