Motivation: Although several recently proposed analysis packages for microarray data can cope with heavy-tailed noise, many applications rely on Gaussian assumptions. Gaussian noise models foster computational efficiency. This comes, however, at the expense of increased sensitivity to outlying observations. Assessing potential insufficiencies of Gaussian noise in microarray data analysis is thus important and of general interest. Results: We propose to this end assessing different noise models on a large number of microarray experiments. The goodness of fit of noise models is quantified by a hierarchical Bayesian analysis of variance model, which predicts normalized expression values as a mixture of a Gaussian density and t-distributions with adjustable degrees of freedom. Inference of differentially expressed genes is taken into consideration at a second mixing level. For attaining far reaching validity, our investigations cover a wide range of analysis platforms and experimental settings. As the most striking result, we find irrespective of the chosen preprocessing and normalization method in all experiments that a heavy-tailed noise model is a better fit than a simple Gaussian. Further investigations revealed that an appropriate choice of noise model has a considerable influence on biological interpretations drawn at the level of inferred genes and gene ontology terms. We conclude from our investigation that neglecting the over dispersed noise in microarray data can mislead scientific discovery and suggest that the convenience of Gaussian-based modelling should be replaced by non-parametric approaches or other methods that account for heavy-tailed noise.
INTRODUCTIONThe importance of microarray data for the biological sciences has generated a large number of sophisticated analysis methods. Approaches like t-tests (), linear models () and many Bayesian methods () consider data to be approximately Gaussian distributed. Recent investigations have, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. however, cast doubt on the correctness of the Gaussian assumption. By testing for Gaussianity, Hardin and Wilson (2009) find that microarray data does not follow a Gaussian distribution. The observed overdispersion leads to a large number of outlying values which can have a considerable influence on the inference results. The cost of measurements and the possibility that outlying data points are caused by biological processes rule out that such samples get removed. All samples must thus be taken into account carefully, as excluding outlying values or including them based on incorrect distribution assumptions would falsify the biological findings. The adverse effects of outliers in microarray data can be overcome with non-parametric approaches (cf.). Non-parametric methods replace the restrictive assumptions linked with the Gaussian distribution with very general ones, however, at the expense of losing some power of tests (cf.). Alternatively, we can analyze overdispersed data with robust parametric noise models like Student's-t distributions (cf.). The issue of appropriate noise models led to an ongoing discussion, witharguing that microarray data are Gaussian distributed. Similar methods let Hardin andconclude that microarray data require heavy-tailed noise models. The conclusion ofwas that 515% of genes are non-Gaussian distributed, with the majority following Gaussian distributions. Finding such diverse conclusions about noise in microarray data suggest an in-depth investigation of this issue. We propose to this end inferring the appropriate degree of overdispersion in microarray data with a hierarchical Bayesian model, which is inspired by the proposal of. Builtin means for ranking genes according to differential expression enable investigations of the biological implications of deviating from the optimal noise model. The essential components of the proposed model are thus two indicator variables, one decoding whether a gene is differentially expressed, the other decoding the most appropriate noise model. These variables are built into a hierarchical Bayesian analysis of variance (ANOVA) model which can be used for analyzing a variety of experimental designs. Inferring the proposed model with uninformative prior settings provides reliable probability measures, which quantify the suitability of competing noise models. This mode of operation compares the goodness of fit of a Gaussian noise model with t-distributions of different degrees of freedom and infers the appropriate robustness level required for analyzing a microarray dataset. The ultimatePage: 808 807814
DISCUSSIONThis article provides an in-depth assessment of two competing assumptions about the noise characteristics in microarray data. Assuming Gaussian noise has the benefit of leading to highly efficient analysis methods. A considerable sensitivity to outlying observations is, however, an unfortunate weakness of Gaussian noise-based data analysis. This weakness may be overcome with non-parametric methods or by methods which assume heavytailed noise distributions. Applying robust analysis methods to microarray data has the disadvantage of introducing more involved computations. The application of non-parametric methods is in addition limited to problems with sufficiently many samples. Comparing robust analysis methods with Gaussian-based microarray data analysis has to provide conclusions, which are relevant for biological practise. Certain technical aspects can be tested by gold standards like the spike-in data from. Other aspects like, for example, biological variation are only captured by data analysing real-world biology. Although certain facts about individual experiments are well known, complete knowledge of ground truth is not available for any biological microarray experiment. An assessment of biological implications has thus to resort to indirect strategies. The route chosen in this article first compares the technical suitability of Gaussian noise and heavy tailed t-distributions. This requires a mode of operation in data analysis, which allows comparing different noise models. Once we established which noise model is preferred for technical reasons, we can turn to investigating the biological implications caused by changing the noise model. This mode of operation relies in our analysis on counting the number of genes which show a noise modeldependent difference in differential expression. These gene counts are complemented by investigating which GO terms are significantly affected from the noise model-dependent gene lists. For providing conclusions of far-reaching validity, we analysed 14 carefully chosen microarray experiments, covering a wide range of model organisms and measurement platforms. To avoid reporting spurious results, our simulations included careful tuning of hyperparameters to minimize model sensitivity, steps for assessing convergence of the algorithm and applied different normalization and preprocessing methods. The arresting result of our assessment is that we find highly decisive evidence in favour of t-distributions with high kurtosis for every experiment we looked at. The significance of this finding is backed up by the observation that the choice of error model considerably influences the biological conclusions drawn from the analyses. Gene lists differ in dependence of the noise model by between 119 and 3561 genes. These differences have a substantial influence on the conclusions we draw on a higher level of biological abstraction. The number of differences in the GO term lists we find in dependence of the chosen noise model ranges from 14 to 316. For many datasets, the number of GO terms with noise model-dependent equivocal assessment is larger than the number of GO terms we can unambiguously assign to these experiments irrespective of the chosen noise model. We may thus conclude that a substantial number of outlying measurements is present in many microarray studies. Relying on implicit Gaussian assumptions means ignoring the heavy tails of the residuals and that can have adverse effects on biological conclusions drawn from microarray data. Practitioners should thus apply robust approaches for microarray data analysis, which work reliably irrespective of whether noise is Gaussian or heavy tailed. We suggest for this purpouse considering non-parametric approaches (cf.), or, for small sample sizes, apply Bayesian approaches likeor the MatLab implementation which accompanies this paper at http://bioinf.boku.ac.at/alexp/robmca.html.