Compilation of genetic maps combined to quantitative trait loci (QTL) meta-analysis has proven to be a powerful approach contributing to the identification of candidate genes underlying quantitative traits. BioMercator was the first software offering a complete set of algorithms and visualization tool covering all steps required to perform QTL meta-analysis. Despite several limitations, the software is still widely used. We developed a new version proposing additional up to date methods and improving graphical representation and exploration of large datasets. Availability and implementation: BioMercator V3 is implemented in JAVA and freely available
INTRODUCTIONIntegration of multiple independent QTL mapping experiments is of major interest to unravel genetic factors underlying complex traits. As a first step, a consensus map is built from independent QTL maps and, if available, the organism reference map. QTLs are then projected onto the consensus map and subjected to metaanalysis (). As a result, meta-QTLs and mapped genes lie on the same consensus map, greatly simplifying the inventory of candidate genes. In addition, the confidence interval (CI) of a meta-QTL is often shorter than CI of corresponding QTLs, decreasing the number of candidate genes to consider or the extent of fine mapping to conduct. In a survey of flowering-time traits in maize, 62 meta-QTLs were identified () including one corresponding to VGT1, which was subsequently cloned in the predicted region by fine mapping (). As map compilation and QTL meta-analysis are not based on genotyping raw data or trait measure, they can be easily achieved from maps available from the literature or databases. The BioMercator software () offers a complete set of analysis and visualization tools dedicated to these approaches and is widely used () but suffers several limitations. We propose here a major upgrade of the software to overcome algorithm and graphical user interface limitations; map compilation can now be achieved in a single step whatever the number of maps, there is no limitation to the number of meta-QTL per chromosome and the code) and QTL overview curve (all traits, right map). (C) Meta-analysis output; meta-QTL are drawn within chromosome and QTL-CI is colored according to the probability of its belonging to meta-QTLs; an enlarged region is displayed on the right along the full chromosome. The dataset used is maize maps collected by. Traits are silking date (brown), days to pollen shed (black) and plant height (orange) some regions and occupy a really large space, impairing whole map representation (). To address such cases, a new QTL track summarizing QTL data along the chromosomes has been developed. Basically, this track is a curve depicting QTL density that may be weighted or not by R2. (iii) For whole map representation, each chromosome can be enlarged independently at the user convenience in order to focus on regions of interest. By default, for a lighter display, only a randomly selected set of loci is represented at whole chromosome scale. By zooming in progressively, more loci are displayed. However, an option forcing the display of all loci is available. Datasets as well as analysis output may be exported in several formats (tabulation-delimited text file, xml). Either whole genome map or single chromosome can be exported in JPEG, PNG or the useful SVG vectorial format allowing image editing in dedicated third-party software.