Motivation: Increasing quantity and quality of data in transcri-ptomics and interactomics create the need for integrative approaches to network analysis. Here, we present a comprehensive R-package for the analysis of biological networks including an exact and a heuristic approach to identify functional modules. Results: The BioNet package provides an extensive framework for integrated network analysis in R. This includes the statistics for the integration of transcriptomic and functional data with biological networks, the scoring of nodes as well as methods for network search and visualization. Availability: The BioNet package and a tutorial are available from
INTRODUCTIONIntegrated analysis of microarray data in the context of biological networks such as proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks has become a major technique in systems biology. The primary objective is the identification of functional modules (significantly differentially expressed subnetworks) within large networks. This can be achieved by computing a score for each node in the network reflecting its functional relevance. Subsequently, a network search algorithm is required to find the highest scoring subgraph. In fact, this problem has been proven to be NP-hard (). Various heuristic approaches have been proposed, most of them inspired by the seminal work fromthat used a simulated annealing heuristic to identify highscoring subgraphs in integrated networks. Recently, we have devised an algorithm (heinz, heaviest induced subgraph) that computes provably optimal and suboptimal solutions to the maximal-scoring subgraph (MSS) problem in reasonable running time using integer linear programming (ILP) (). In extension to this, we present an R package for (i) integrating multiple P-values obtained from different experiments, (ii) scoring the nodes of the network by a modular scoring function, (iii) calculating
APPLICATIONWe apply our package to gene expression data from diffuse large B-cell lymphomas (DLBCL) and survival data () with a human PPI network based on human protein reference database (HPRD;respectively. Then we aggregate both P-values by the second-order statistics using BioNet.We now fit a BUM model to the distribution of aggregated P-values and score the nodes using an FDR threshold of 0.001.The exact search algorithm can be started from R by runHeinz if the CPLEX library is installed (). Alternatively, the fast heuristic search algorithm (runFastHeinz) often delivers a close approximation. Finally, the resulting modules can be visualized in 2D or 3D.BioNet captures an interaction module that has been described to play major biological roles in the GCB and ABC DLBCL subtypes (). The combination of biological and clinical data with PPI networks generates a meaningful biological context in terms of functional association for differentially expressed, survival-relevant genes.