Motivation: The accurate discovery and annotation of regulatory elements remains a challenging problem. The growing number of sequenced genomes creates new opportunities for comparative approaches to motif discovery. Putative binding sites are then considered to be functional if they are conserved in orthologous promoter sequences of multiple related species. Existing methods for comparative motif discovery usually rely on pregenerated multiple sequence alignments, which are difficult to obtain for more diverged species such as plants. As a consequence, misaligned regulatory elements often remain undetected. Results: We present a novel algorithm that supports both alignment-free and alignment-based motif discovery in the promoter sequences of related species. Putative motifs are exhaustively enumerated as words over the IUPAC alphabet and screened for conservation using the branch length score. Additionally, a confidence score is established in a genome-wide fashion. In order to take advantage of a cloud computing infrastructure, the MapReduce programming model is adopted. The method is applied to four monocotyledon plant species and it is shown that high-scoring motifs are significantly enriched for open chromatin regions in Oryza sativa and for transcription factor binding sites inferred through protein-binding microarrays in O.sativa and Zea mays. Furthermore, the method is shown to recover experimentally profiled ga2ox1-like KN1 binding sites in Z.mays. Availability and implementation: BLSSpeller was written in Java. Source code and manual are
IntroductionOne of the major challenges in systems biology is gaining a full understanding of gene transcriptional regulation. Transcription factors, for which the binding sites are usually hidden in the promoter sequence of the gene, are in this respect of particular importance. Computational approaches for de novo motif discovery can be classified in (i) methods to identify binding sites in promoter sequences of co-regulated genes within a single genome and (ii) comparative approaches using homologous sequences from multiple related species (). The first category uses clusters of co-expressed genes, which are assumed to be regulated by the same set of transcription factors. A drawback of these methods is that the relationship between co-expression and co-regulation relies on complex regulatory mechanisms, making it difficult to assemble reliable datasets since co-expression does not necessarily imply that there is a common binding site involved. Two different algorithmic approaches coexist: the statistical () and the exhaustive, word-based algorithms. The latter contain graph-based approaches () and methods based on index structures (). Due to the growing availability of genome sequences, a second category of algorithms based on phylogenetic footprinting emerged (): orthologous regulatory regions from multiple species are compared with the underlying assumption that functional elements evolve at a much slower pace, compared to the non-functional part of the genome, due to selective pressure (). Most comparative motif discovery approaches rely in some way on multiple sequence alignments, in which regulatory signals are expected to be well-aligned. Pioneering algorithms in this category are Conreal (), Phylonet () and Phyloscan (). More recent algorithms relying on alignments are used to study mosquitoes (), Fusarium (), vertebrates () and mammals (). It has, however, been shown that known regulatory elements are not always correctly aligned (), an issue that is further complicated by the different alignments produced by various alignment programs (). Transcription factor (TF) binding sites are short, flexible against certain mutations and even mobile which explains why they are sometimes misaligned. Mechanisms have been observed that allow the modification of regulatory sequences without altering their function: divergence driving words and binding site turnover. Regulatory sequences can diverge freely if the divergence driving words, which are specific short words in the non-coding DNA, are not altered (). Since a TF can often bind to multiple similar sites, mutations turning one site into another should not affect regulation. Binding site turnover, on the other hand, is the mechanism where the gain of a redundant binding site allows the loss of a previously functional site (). The corresponding TF can then bind to the new site, maintaining the regulatory interaction. This allows binding sites to relocate within the regulatory sequence, making it difficult for alignment algorithms to correctly align them. Binding site discovery, especially in plants, has to deal with large divergence times and complex diversification mechanisms such as genome duplications. This makes approaches based on whole genome alignments, often used in de novo algorithms, impractical. Some of these problems have been addressed in earlier studies.used a mixed approach in a study with 12 Drosophila species, starting from whole genome alignments but allowing for limited motif movement within an alignment. Elemento and Tavazoie (2005) designed an alignment-free algorithm to discover overrepresented k-mers over the exact ACGT alphabet in pairs of related genomes. Finally, MDOS () is a new version of this algorithm with improved statistics. In this article, four monocotyledonous plant species are studied using a phylogenetic footprinting approach: Oryza sativa ssp. indica(osa), Brachypodium distachyon (bdi), Sorghum bicolor (sbi) and Zea mays (zma). We adopt a gene-centric approach, where the promoter sequences of orthologous genes are grouped into gene families. A word-based discovery algorithm was designed to exhaustively report all genome-wide conserved motifs. The term conserved relates to the occurrence of the motif in multiple promoter sequences of a particular gene family. Genome-wide conservation relates to the fact that this conservation occurs in more gene families than what is expected by chance. Motifs are modeled as words (k-mers) over an alphabet that contains the four bases (ACGT) and (optionally) additional degenerate characters from the IUPAC alphabet (). This degeneracy allows a motif to model a collection of binding sites. The algorithm can be run in both alignment-free or alignment-based mode. In case of alignment-free discovery, the conservation of a motif is scored irrespective of its orientation or position within a promoter sequence. This relaxed definition of conservation was previously used byand is especially relevant when studying more diverged species for which accurate multiple sequence alignments are difficult to generate. Alignment-based discovery adds the constraint that motifs must be aligned, i.e. occur at the same position in the multiple sequence alignment. Robust algorithms for comparative genomics are expected to gain in power when more related species are added. Most studies so far only consider motifs that are conserved within all organisms. The branch length score (BLS) was developed to quantify motif conservation in a biologically meaningful manner and ranges from 0% (not conserved) to 100% (conserved in all sequences). The BLS takes the phylogenetic relationships between the species into account by representing a relative evolutionary distance over which a candidate binding site is conserved within a gene family. The BLS was first used in a comparative study with 12 Drosophila genomes () and allows studying motifs only conserved in subsets of the organisms. Whereas most current algorithms avoid exploring the full motif space by using greedy algorithms, our method is unique in the sense that it is exhaustive. MDOS () only processes promising k-mers and gradually adds degeneracy if this improves the conservation score.use the mini-motifs approach (van) only processing promising trinucleotide duos before adding degeneracy. Here, every word that occurs in one of the input sequences, including their degenerate variants, is considered as a candidate motif. The only imposed restrictions are a prespecified minimum and maximum length and a maximum number of degenerate IUPAC characters. The advantage of such exhaustive approach is that the method yields globally optimal results. In order to strongly reduce the runtime and avoid excessive memory requirements, the MapReduce programming model () was adopted as a means to take advantage of a parallel, distributed-memory cloud computing environment. By enabling disk I/O to store intermediate results, the current MapReduce implementation overcomes the memory bottleneck in a prototype implementation of this software that relied on the Message Passing Interface (MPI) for parallelization ().
ConclusionA novel phylogenetic footprinting approach was developed for the sensitive discovery of conserved cis-regulatory elements even in diverged sequences. Using IUPAC strings as motif model and using the MapReduce programming model to enable distributed computing, it was shown that it is feasible to compute all genome-wide conserved words in a large dataset in an exhaustive manner. For a given false discovery rate, it was demonstrated that an alignment-free approach detects more conserved words than an alignment-based approach. Even though millions of genome-wide conserved motifs were identified by our method, mapping of these motifs to the promoter sequences results in constrained conserved genomic regions. It was shown that these conserved regions were significantly enriched for experimentally profiled open chromatin regions in rice and for TF binding sites inferred through protein-binding microarrays in rice and maize. Finally, it was shown that the alignment-free approach shows an improved recovery of the ga2ox1-like KN1 binding site, compared to the alignment-based approach or competing methods.