Identification of protein interaction subnetworks is an important step to help us understand complex molecular mechanisms in cancer. In this paper, we develop a BMRF-Net package, implemented in Java and Cþþ, to identify protein interaction subnetworks based on a bagging Markov random field (BMRF) framework. By integrating gene expression data and protein–protein interaction data, this software tool can be used to identify biologically meaningful subnetworks. A user friendly graphic user interface is developed as a Cytoscape plugin for the BMRF-Net software to deal with the input/output interface. The detailed structure of the identified networks can be visualized in Cytoscape conveniently. The BMRF-Net package has been applied to breast cancer data to identify significant subnetworks related to breast cancer recurrence. Availability and implementation: The BMRF-Net package is available at http://sourceforge.net/pro-jects/bmrfcjava/. The package is tested under Ubuntu 12.04 (64-bit), Java 7, glibc 2.15 and Cytoscape 3.1.0.
IntroductionBiological systems can be represented as networks of multifunctional elements and modules. The interactions among elements and modules can make it difficult to elucidate biological behavior using any single type analytical approach (). Data integration across multiple sources is required to solve the problem in different aspects and levels. Network-based analysis becomes an important tool in revealing the underlying modular structure of the signaling driving complex diseases such as cancer. Several methods () have been proposed to identify protein interaction subnetworks by integrating high-dimensional gene expression data with protein protein interaction (PPI) data. However, these methods treat proteins/genes in a network independently, which leaves less differentially expressed hub genes likely unidentified. Recently, a bagging Markov random field (BMRF)-based method (), namely BMRF, have been proposed to identify protein interaction networks by modeling the gene dependency in a network explicitly. Here we describe a BMRF-Net software package that implements the BMRF algorithm, an integrated network analysis of gene expression data and PPI data. The package provides an effective implementation that reduces the execution time of analyzinglarge-scale biomedical data and makes visualization of PPI subnetworks immediately accessible to users. A user friendly graphic user interface (GUI) is developed as a Java Cytoscape () plugin to support ease of use for biomedical researchers in the field of cancer research. To handle high dimensional data, the opensource software package accelerates the analysis by enabling parallel computing on multi-core machines in laboratories or at large computing centers. In addition to providing the statistical information of the identified networks, the detailed structure of the identified subnetworks can be viewed in Cytoscape. The core analytic or computing program is implemented in C in the Linux environment, with a simple interface that can be run without the GUI. To evaluate performance, we applied the BMRF-Net software package to breast cancer data for subnetwork identification. The identified subnetworks show a significant enrichment in cancer related signaling pathways.
Description