Motivation: Given a pair of metabolic pathways, an alignment of the pathways corresponds to a mapping between similar substructures of the pair. Successful alignments may provide useful applications in phylogenetic tree reconstruction, drug design and overall may enhance our understanding of cellular metabolism. Results: We consider the problem of providing one-to-many alignments of reactions in a pair of metabolic pathways. We first provide a constrained alignment framework applicable to the problem. We show that the constrained alignment problem even in a primitive setting is computationally intractable, which justifies efforts for designing efficient heuristics. We present our Constrained Alignment of Metabolic Pathways (CAMPways) algorithm designed for this purpose. Through extensive experiments involving a large pathway database, we demonstrate that when compared with a state-of-the-art alternative , the CAMPways algorithm provides better alignment results on metabolic networks as far as measures based on same-pathway inclusion and biochemical significance are concerned. The execution speed of our algorithm constitutes yet another important improvement over alternative algorithms. Availability: Open source codes, executable binary, useful scripts, all the experimental data and the results are freely available as part of the Supplementary Material at
INTRODUCTIONMetabolic pathways consisting of metabolites, biochemical reactions transforming a set of metabolites to others and enzymes catalyzing these reactions provide valuable information regarding material processing centers of a functioning cell and cellular metabolism in general. Several online databases including KEGG () and BioCyc () provide access to metabolic pathways of various organisms. A comparative analysis of pathways from different organisms provides insights for understanding evolution, speciation, phylogenic reconstruction () and drug target discovery). Pharmaceutical drug testing is usually implemented on animals, most of the time on mice, before human testing. In such an application, it is usually crucial to know whether specific pathway components of the two species exhibit similar properties (). A successful pathway alignment would prove useful for determining whether test results on one species could be transferred to another without incurring complications. Furthermore, such an analysis is not limited to that between different organisms. It may also be applied between pathways of cancer types and those of healthy cell types to enhance our understanding of cancer-specific metabolic features (). A common method for comparative analysis of pathways and biological networks in general is through network alignment. Given a pair of biological networks either from different species or from different tissues within the same species, the goal of network alignment is to map components in one of the networks to their similar counterparts in the other. With regard to alignments targeting specifically metabolic pathways, several methods have been suggested. In, an alignment method based on enzyme hierarchies and enzyme EC number similarity was suggested for the alignment of possibly more than two pathways. Path matching and graph matching to query certain metabolic pathways in an input graph was provided by. Sets of reactions in multiple pathways were compared, omitting the connectivity between the reactions in. Heymans and Singh (2003) created an enzyme graph and obtained a one-to-one mapping between the enzymes of two input pathways via maximum weight bipartite matching. Similar enzyme graph construction was used in. An integer quadratic programming-based method was suggested by. Similar to metabolic pathway alignment is the problem of proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network alignment. The graph models used in the latter are undirected, whereas the former usually aligns directed graphs. However, as far as general graph matching and alignment is concerned, most of the time, the techniques can be extended in both directions, and mainly similar approaches are proposed. Two versions of network alignment have been suggested in related work. In local network alignment, the goal is to identify from the input networks, subnetworks that closely match in terms of network topology and/or sequence similarities. Approaches proposed for this version of the problem include PathBLAST (), NetworkBLAST (), MaWISh () and Graemlin (). In global network alignment on the other hand, the goal is to align the networks as a whole, providing unambiguous mappings between the nodes of different networks. Starting with IsoRank (), several global network algorithms using similar definitions have been suggested (). We provide a constrained alignment framework and a metabolic pathway alignment algorithm, CAMPways. Our algorithm is inspired by the model suggested in. Within this *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com general model, the goal is to find a global one-to-many alignment of the pathways such that a node may be mapped to a connected subgraph of many nodes. The model is justified by the fact that biologically meaningful mappings may exist when different organisms perform the same function through varying number of steps. Therefore, it appropriately handles the gaps/mismatches inherent in alignment problems, an issue arising in both sequence-related and network-wise alignment. Such is the motivation behind the PPI network alignment approach of Liao et al.(2009) as well. Although this general model of one-to-many alignments is the same, our method diverges from that ofafter this point. The novelties of the current work are 3-fold. First of all we provide a novel constrained alignment framework appropriate for the one-to-many alignments model. This framework has not been used in biological network alignment previously. Second, we show that even the simplest version of the alignment problem within this framework is computationally hard. Based on this computational intractability result, we finally provide a novel algorithm, CAMPways, which appropriately and efficiently implements this framework. Through experimental evaluations based on reverse engineering pathways and biochemical significance measured through functional group conversion hierarchy of KEGG (), we demonstrate that the CAMPways algorithm provides higher quality alignments than the state-of-the-art approaches. Furthermore, a second major advantage of the CAMPways algorithm is in terms of its much faster execution speeds as compared with the alternatives.