Motivation: The identification of genes involved in specific phenotypes, such as human hereditary diseases, often requires the time-consuming and expensive examination of a large number of positional candidates selected by genome-wide techniques such as linkage analysis and association studies. Even considering the positive impact of next-generation sequencing technologies, the prioritization of these positional candidates may be an important step for disease-gene identification. Results: Here, we report a large-scale analysis of spatial, i.e. 3D, gene-expression data from an entire organ (the mouse brain) for the purpose of evaluating and ranking positional candidate genes, showing that the spatial gene-expression patterns can be successfully exploited for the prediction of gene–phenotype associations not only for mouse phenotypes, but also for human central nervous system-related Mendelian disorders. We apply our method to the case of X-linked mental retardation, compare the predictions to the results obtained from a previous large-scale resequencing study of chromosome X and discuss some promising novel candidates.
INTRODUCTIONIndividuals belonging to the same species show not only phenotypic variations that influence all biological aspects of the organism in more or less profound ways, including physiology, metabolic pathways and development, but also susceptibility to diseases. In the last years, genome-wide techniques such as linkage analysis and association studies have been very successful in establishing the molecular basis of many phenotypic traits. However, these approaches often select loci containing many hundreds of positional candidates, the experimental evaluation of which can be time-consuming and expensive. Therefore, computational approaches to disease-gene prediction or prioritization can be an important step prior to further empirical analysis in a laboratory. In silico disease-gene prediction can be based on different types of information, such as sequence properties (Lpez), functional annotation (), text-mining of biomedical literature (), proteinprotein interactions (), high-throughput gene-expression data () or combinations of these (To whom correspondence should be addressed.2006;). While some of these approaches are clearly biased towards already consolidated knowledge, e.g. the mining of functional annotations and biomedical literature, others allow for a less biased evaluation of candidate genes. Avoiding such a bias, that tends to diminish the value of all candidate genes about which little or nothing is known, is a key problem of disease gene prediction methodologies. For this reason, approaches that rely on (or at least include) genome-wide high-throughput data, like the one proposed in this article, are generally preferable. The introduction of next-generation sequencing technologies is likely to have a significant impact on disease-gene discovery by speeding up the identification of potentially disease-relevant mutations (). However, especially if large sets of positional candidates are involved, a high number of sequence variations can be expected to be found., for example, found 185 non-synonymous and 207 synonymous polymorphisms in a screen of the coding regions of 106 human genes relevant to cardiovascular disease, endocrinology and neuropsychiatry. During a screen of the coding exons of 718 genes on chromosome X from 208 families for mutations causing X-linked mental retardation (XLMR),found mutations in three novel and several known disease genes, but could not, for most families, identify the genetic cause of XLMR, despite the identification of a large number of missense and even truncating mutations. These results illustrate that even with the aid of novel technologies candidate evaluation remains a difficult task, thus providing a rationale for the inclusion of computational predictions or prioritizations in the evaluation process. High-throughput expression data from microarray experiments are valuable as a potentially unbiased source of information for comparing the expression profiles of candidate genes with those of 'reference genes' known to be (directly or indirectly) associated to a phenotype. This 'guilt-by-association' approach, however, has usually been applied to heterogeneous datasets containing samples from multiple tissues and cell types (). Traditional high-throughput expression data, although being highly informative, have the shortcoming of carrying only limited spatial information: although samples are usually associated to specific tissues and organs, often no detailed 3D localization of samples within a tissue or organ is recorded. This may be a problem, especially for tissues or organs characterized by a high degree of spatial organization, such as the central nervous system (CNS). Some of the microarray or EST expression datasets that have so far been used for disease gene predictionsee for examplecontain subsets for the brain or the CNS that have a somewhat more detailed anatomical (and hence in some sense spatial) annotation, associating the expression data toPage: i619 i618i624