Genomes undergo large structural changes that alter their organization. The chromosomal regions affected by these rearrangements are called breakpoints, while those which have not been rearranged are called synteny blocks. Lemaitre et al. presented a new method to precisely delimit rearrangement breakpoints in a genome by comparison with the genome of a related species. Receiving as input a list of one2one orthologous genes found in the genomes of two species, the method builds a set of reliable and non-overlapping synteny blocks and refines the regions that are not contained into them. Through the alignment of each breakpoint sequence against its specific orthologous sequences in the other species, we can look for weak similarities inside the breakpoint, thus extending the synteny blocks and narrowing the breakpoints. The identification of the narrowed breakpoints relies on a segmentation algorithm and is statistically assessed. Here, we present the package Cassis that implements this method of precise detection of genomic rearrangement breakpoints. Availability: Perl and R scripts are freely available for download at
INTRODUCTIONLarge scale modifications of the genome, such as inversions or transpositions of DNA segments, translocations between nonhomologous chromosomes, fusions or fissions of chromosomes and deletions or duplications of small or large portions are called rearrangements. They are further involved in evolution, speciation and also in cancer. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First authors.One crucial step before analysing the rearrangements and their possible relation with other genomic features is to locate these events on a genome. In the case of two genomes, it is possible to identify conserved regions, also known as synteny blocks, by comparing the order and orientation of orthologous markers along their chromosome sequences. A region located between two consecutive synteny blocks on one genome, whose orthologous blocks are rearranged in the other genome (not consecutive or not in the same relative orientations), is called breakpoint. As far as we know, current methods for detecting breakpoints [Grimm-synteny () Mauve (), for example] are in fact strategies for detecting synteny blocks: they provide the coordinates of the breakpoint regions only as a byproduct, simply by returning regions that are not found in a conserved synteny.developed a formal method that aims to go one step further and to extend the synteny blocks by focusing on the breakpoints themselves. This method was shown to improve significantly the precision of breakpoint locations on mammalian genomes and enables to better characterize breakpoint sequences and distributions () (see also datasets and comparisons available together with the package). The first step of the method is to process a list of orthologous genes to identify synteny blocks between the genomes of two related species (a reference genome G r and a second genome G o ). This step outputs a list of ordered and non-intersecting synteny blocks that are used to identify the breakpoints. For each breakpoint on the genome G r , we can define three sequences: the breakpoint sequence S r , and its two orthologous sequences on the second genome G o , S oA and S oB (). In a second step, the method aligns the breakpoint sequence S r against S oA and S oB and the information provided by the hits of the alignments is coded along S r as a sequence of discrete values. A segmentation algorithm calculates the best segmentation of this sequence of discrete values into at most three segments: a segment related with S oA , a segment related with S oB and a central segment which will represent the refined breakpoint.