Motivation: The interpretation of high-throughput datasets has remained one of the central challenges of computational biology over the past decade. Furthermore, as the amount of biological knowledge increases, it becomes more and more difficult to integrate this large body of knowledge in a meaningful manner. In this article, we propose a particular solution to both of these challenges. Methods: We integrate available biological knowledge by constructing a network of molecular interactions of a specific kind: causal interactions. The resulting causal graph can be queried to suggest molecular hypotheses that explain the variations observed in a high-throughput gene expression experiment. We show that a simple scoring function can discriminate between a large number of competing molecular hypotheses about the upstream cause of the changes observed in a gene expression profile. We then develop an analytical method for computing the statistical significance of each score. This analytical method also helps assess the effects of random or adversarial noise on the predictive power of our model. Results: Our results show that the causal graph we constructed from known biological literature is extremely robust to random noise and to missing or spurious information. We demonstrate the power of our causal reasoning model on two specific examples, one from a cancer dataset and the other from a cardiac hypertrophy experiment. We conclude that causal reasoning models provide a valuable addition to the biologists toolkit for the interpretation of gene expression data. Availability and implementation: R source code for the method is available upon request. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONOver the past decade gene expression datasets have been generated at an increasing pace. Other types of large-scale * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. data (e.g. metabolomics or genetics) are also becoming more commonplace. Approaches for inferring correlative or causal structure directly from large datasets, generated by perturbing a biological system and consisting of several data types, e.g. expression data and genetics data, demonstrate great promise in uncovering novel biological insights. One example of a successful inference of causal relationships is the work of (), in which the authors predict and validate three novel susceptibility genes for obesity based on a rodent model. The inference proceeds from expression data and genetics data from a controlled population of several hundred mice. In practice, most available datasets are much smaller, observational in nature and report a single kind of measurement. In parallel with an ever-increasing amount of data generated, the biomedical literature is also growing exponentially. The results of new experiments should be evaluated in light of this knowledge for at least two reasons: (i) to discover novel biology, one needs to know what is already known, understand what hypotheses need refinement and what phenomena remain unexplained; and (ii) data interpretation in light of previous experiments can add significant interpretative power, especially given the limitations of small sample size in many current omics experiments. The goal of our methodology is to predict upstream regulators of observed expression changes based on a set of 450 000 causal relationships. The resulting putative regulators constitute directly testable hypotheses for follow-up in the laboratory. In this article, we (i) define a scoring scheme to identify putative upstream regulators for any given input dataset based on a set of causal relationships encoded as a causal graph; (ii) analytically compute significance scores for our predictions based on random input gene sets; (iii) analytically quantify the recoverability of embedded signals from regulators for our causal graph under various kinds of noise; and (iv) give concrete examples where our methodology helps elucidate biological phenomena when presented with real data.
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we have presented a comprehensive methodology to derive concise molecular hypotheses that can explain the transcriptional changes observed in genome-wide microarrays. We have compiled a large causal graph of curated interactions, to which we have successfully applied a simple but powerful reasoning method. Our method is very similar in spirit to the method of (). However, we have shown here for the first time how to analytically compute the statistical significance of detected hypothetical drivers of the expression data. Given the importance of current knowledge for the creation of the causal network, we investigated how its characteristics such as redundancy and coverage impact our ability to retrieve clear signals. In order to understand this based on our current causal graph of over 250 000 unique causal relationships, we defined the concept of recoverability and derived an analytical method to assess it for