To address the impending need for exploring rapidly increased transcriptomics data generated for non-model organisms, we developed CBrowse, an AJAX-based web browser for visualizing and analyzing transcriptome assemblies and contigs. Designed in a standard three-tier architecture with a data pre-processing pipeline, CBrowse is essentially a Rich Internet Application that offers many seamlessly integrated web interfaces and allows users to navigate, sort, filter, search and visualize data smoothly. The pre-processing pipeline takes the contig sequence file in FASTA format and its relevant SAM/BAM file as the input; detects putative polymorphisms, simple sequence repeats and sequencing errors in contigs and generates image, JSON and database-compatible CSV text files that are directly utilized by different web interfaces. CBowse is a generic visu-alization and analysis tool that facilitates close examination of assembly quality, genetic polymorphisms, sequence repeats and/or sequencing errors in transcriptome sequencing projects.
INTRODUCTIONWeb-based genome browsers, such as GBrowse () and UCSC Genome Browser (), are widely utilized for visualizing genomes and their sequence features to facilitate various data analyses that address interesting biological questions. For non-model organisms without sequenced genomes, transcriptome sequencing is definitely the most efficient way to explore the transcribed portions of genomes and determine their dynamics (). Many bioinformatics programs have been developed/improved to address the challenges in transcriptome assembly, especially de novo assembly without a reference genome, using complementary DNA (cDNA)/messenger RNA (mRNA) data from next-generation sequencing and Sanger sequencing (). So far, there is no open-source, web-based contig browser yet that allows users to navigate transcript assembly, visualize contigs and examine genetic polymorphisms, simple sequence repeats and sequencing errors embedded in the assembly. To address the impending need for exploring rapidly increased transcriptomics data for non-model organisms, we developed CBrowse (contig browser), an AJAX-based web browser to visualize and analyze transcriptome assemblies and their individual contigs.
CONCLUSIONSimilar to GBrowse 2.0 (http://gmod.org/wiki/GBrowse), X-MAP (), Genome Projector () and JBrowse (), CBrowse essentially is an AJAX-based Rich Internet Application that decouples interactions with users from interactions with the server. Such decoupling empowers web applications with rich graphic user interface (GUI) characteristics such as desktop application, enables a asynchronous clientserver communication and offers faster and smoother user experience by partial updates in web pages. Different from these genome browsers, CBrowse is designed for analyzing and visualizing transcriptome assembly and contigs, with unique functionality such as seamlessly integrated data grid viewer, alignment viewer and sequence viewer that allow users to navigate, sort, filter, search and visualize transcriptome data efficiently. As an open source project, our web-based CBrowse can be utilized by the research community to disseminate and release transcriptome data over the Internet.