The atomic structures of protein–protein interactions are central to understanding their role in biological systems, and a wide variety of biophysical functions and potentials have been developed for their characterization and the construction of predictive models. These tools are scattered across a multitude of stand-alone programs, and are often available only as model parameters requiring reimple-mentation. This acts as a significant barrier to their widespread adoption. CCharPPI integrates many of these tools into a single web server. It calculates up to 108 parameters, including models of electrostatics, desolvation and hydrogen bonding, as well as interface packing and complementarity scores, empirical potentials at various resolutions, docking potentials and composite scoring functions. Availability and implementation: The server does not require registration by the user and is freely available for non-commercial academic use at
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions are involved in most cell processes, and their structural and functional annotation is essential to understand biological and pathological phenomena and to develop new therapeutic approaches. The increasing volume of experimental data on proteinprotein interactions at the molecular level offers many opportunities for functional characterization and the construction of predictive models based on properties arising from structure, such as interface geometry, hydrogen bonding, electrostatics and desolvation energy, which act as an intermediate layer between structure and function (). Indeed, the selection and combination of structure-based potentials within a learning framework have been used for many tasks, often beyond their original development purpose, such as the prediction of binding affinity (), kinetics (), mutational effects (), interface design (), proteinprotein docking () and the detection of hotspots (), with many further possibilities remaining to be explored (). Although many tools have been developed to calculate structural properties, some of which are available online (), their availability and ease of use are an impediment, often requiring the installation of stand-alone programs with different library dependencies, reimplementation of models for which only parameters are given and reformatting of pdb files. Thus, there is a need to consolidate these methods into a single implementation. Here, we present CCharPPI, a web server, which gathers together a large number of these functions, including those on which many of our previous models were based, into a single easy-to-use interface.