Motivation: Time-lapse experiments play a key role in studying the dynamic behavior of cells. Single-cell tracking is one of the fundamental tools for such analyses. The vast majority of the recently introduced cell tracking methods are limited to fluorescently labeled cells. An equally important limitation is that most software cannot be effectively used by biologists without reasonable expertise in image processing. Here we present CellTracker, a user-friendly open-source software tool for tracking cells imaged with various imaging modalities, including fluorescent, phase contrast and differential interference contrast (DIC) techniques. Availability and implementation: CellTracker is written in MATLAB (The MathWorks, Inc., USA). It works with Windows, Macintosh and UNIX-based systems. Source code and graphical user interface (GUI) are freely available at: http://celltracker.website/.
IntroductionThe migration analysis of in vitro cultured cell populations plays a key role in a wide range of dynamic cell behavior studies (). In the last decade, dozens of methods have been proposed for such analyses (). There is no universally best, but a great variety of methods exist for different fluorescent microscopic scenarios (). However, very few tracking tools can analyze images taken by phase contrast, DIC, or other label-free microscopy (i.e. techniques using transmitted light or its modulations), which are common ways to observe living cells. Furthermore, the majority of these tools require relevant image processing skills, which strongly limits their practical usefulness within the biologist community (). For instance, BioImageXD (), TimeLapseAnalyzer () and TACTICS () require segmented cells for tracking, and cell segmentation on label-free microscopic images is very challenging. Accordingly, so-called point-and-click manual tracking tools are often used () and they are considered as the gold standard for cell tracking (). Nevertheless, manual tracking is operator-dependent, laborious and error-prone (). An automated, user-friendly, and versatile open source software with track editing possibilities would boost live cell analysis research. In this work we present CellTracker, a cellcenter detection and tracking tool for different imaging modalities. An early version of CellTracker was already used in (). Here we describe its implementation and usage (Supplementary Material S1) with the intention of providing a tool also for users with limited image processing background.