CentiLib is a library and plug-in for the comprehensive analysis and exploration of network centralities. It provides 17 different node centrality and four graph centrality measures in a user-friendly interface and supports the exploration of analysis results within the networks. Its architecture allows for easy adaption to Java-based network analysis, simulation and visualization tools, which is demonstrated by providing the plug-in for two popular network analysis tools—Cytoscape and Vanted. With the ability to quantitatively analyze biological networks in an interactive and visual manner, CentiLib supports a better understanding of complex biological networks and processes. Availability and implementation: Software with manual and tutorials is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONThe development of various highly parallel techniques for biological research and data generation has led to the advance of methods to analyze this data. Many tools have been developed to visualize, rearrange, combine, edit and analyze biological data. Biological networks, which can be derived from experimental data or downloaded from publicly available databases, are an increasingly important data structure in life science research. Since many investigated networks are very large and elements are connected to each other in many ways, it is still difficult to analyze the structure of such a network and the correlations between elements or groups of elements. Therefore, several tools allow statistical, visual and other analysis methods. An important measurement to analyze networks, which is widely used in other sciences such as sociology and becoming increasingly significant in biology, is the centrality of nodes. Centrality measures are used to rank elements in a network according to different importance concepts. This can be very helpful, especially for biological networks, because often there are only a few elements crucial to the underlying biological process. Centralities can help to find those elements without time-and cost-intensive experiments, or can at least guide experiments. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.There are already some tools available which support the analysis of network centralities. These are either stand-alone tools such as Visone (), Pajek (), Network Analyzer () and CentiBiN (), or extensions (plug-ins) to other tools such as CentiScaPe () for Cytoscape. CentiBiN is the stand-alone tool which offers most centralities. It provides 17 node centralities but the user has to install and become accustomed to new software, and further analysis methods and functions such as importing and analyzing experimental data are absent. A general disadvantage of most stand-alone tools is that the biological context is absent; hence one has to export the results and import them in a biology-focused tool to compare and combine them with other experimental data. CentiScaPe is a plug-in for Cytoscape and therefore provides new functionality to a well-known tool for biological network analysis. However, it is only available for Cytoscape and it provides only nine centrality measures. There are more stand-alone tools and extensions available but all of them have similar disadvantages as those mentioned above. To overcome these drawbacks and to make centrality measures accessible to software tools which are already employed by users, CentiLib bundles 17 node and four graph centralities in a Java library, containing a ready-to-use user interface which can be integrated into nearly every Java-based tool that works with graphs and uses a plug-in mechanism. We provide this integration for two tools, Cytoscape () and Vanted (), , seefor a screenshot. Besides the integration into existing tools, software developers are able to use CentiLib as a pure Java library to compute all centralities via a single and simple to use class. Furthermore, CentiLib not only allows the computation of centralities for directed and undirected graphs but also for weighted ones.