Motivation: p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase activation plays an important role in resistance to chemotherapeutic cytotoxic drugs in treating multiple myeloma (MM). However, how the p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase signaling pathway is involved in drug resistance , in particular the roles that the various p38 isoforms play, remains largely unknown. Method: To explore the underlying mechanisms, we developed a novel systems biology approach by integrating liquid chromatog-raphy–mass spectrometry and reverse phase protein array data from human MM cell lines with computational pathway models in which the unknown parameters were inferred using a proposed novel algorithm called modularized factor graph. Results: New mechanisms predicted by our models suggest that combined activation of various p38 isoforms may result in drug resistance in MM via regulating the related pathways including extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway and NFiB pathway. ERK pathway regulating cell growth is synergistically regulated by p38 isoform, whereas nuclear factor kappa B (NFiB) pathway regulating cell apop-tosis is synergistically regulated by p38 isoform. This finding that p38 isoform promotes the phosphorylation of ERK1/2 in MM cells treated with bortezomib was validated by western blotting. Based on the predicted mechanisms, we further screened drug combinations in silico and found that a promising drug combination targeting ERK1/2 and NFB might reduce the effects of drug resistance in MM cells. This study provides a framework of a systems biology approach to studying drug resistance and drug combination selection. Availability and implementation: RPPA experimental Data and Matlab source codes of modularized factor graph for parameter estimation are freely available online at
INTRODUCTIONMultiple myeloma (MM), as the second most common hematologic malignancy with $15 ,000 new cases per year in the USA, remains incurable with a median survival of 47 years (). The relapse of this disease and resistance to treatment cannot be avoided, while recent advances in novel therapeutics keep producing promising clinical responses (). The p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38 MAPK) signaling pathway is known to play a key role in many cellular responses, including apoptosis, cell cycle regulation, induction of expression of cytokine genes and cellular differentiation (). More recently, p38 MAPK has been shown to have a central role in resistance to chemotherapeutic agents (). To date, four isoforms of the p38 MAPK family have been identified: p38, p38, p38 and p38. Activation of various p38 isoforms may determine cell fate after drug treatment. Previous research has shown that the activation of particular p38 isoforms can be specifically controlled through different upstream regulators and co-activated by various combinations of such regulators (). Enhanced cell death resulting from p38 MAPK inhibition when cells are treated with arsenic trioxide (ATO) and/or bortezomib (BZM) is thought to be due to the suppression of c-Jun N-terminal kinase (JNK) activation by p38 MAPK (). In MM cells, increased killing by dexamethasone and BZM as a result of p38 MAPK inhibition was associated with reduced phosphorylation and activation of the antiapoptotic protein heat shock protein 27 (). In addition, the p38 MAPK inhibitor SB203580 has been shown to suppress the function of P-glycoprotein in drug-resistant cell lines leading to the increased efficacy of cytotoxic drugs (). Together, these studies suggest that p38 MAPK activation may mediate drug resistance via multiple mechanisms. However, how the p38 MAPK signaling pathway *To whom correspondence should be addressed.