Motivation: Measurement precision determines the power of any analysis to reliably identify significant signals, such as in screens for differential expression, independent of whether the experimental design incorporates replicates or not. With the compilation of large-scale RNA-Seq datasets with technical replicate samples, however, we can now, for the first time, perform a systematic analysis of the precision of expression level estimates from massively parallel sequencing technology. This then allows considerations for its improvement by computational or experimental means. Results: We report on a comprehensive study of target identification and measurement precision, including their dependence on transcript expression levels, read depth and other parameters. In particular, an impressive recall of 84% of the estimated true transcript population could be achieved with 331 million 50 bp reads, with diminishing returns from longer read lengths and even less gains from increased sequencing depths. Most of the measurement power (75%) is spent on only 7% of the known transcriptome, however, making less strongly expressed transcripts harder to measure. Consequently, 30% of all transcripts could be quantified reliably with a relative error 20%. Based on established tools, we then introduce a new approach for mapping and analysing sequencing reads that yields substantially improved performance in gene expression profiling, increasing the number of transcripts that can reliably be quantified to over 40%. Extrapolations to higher sequencing depths highlight the need for efficient complementary steps. In discussion we outline possible experimental and computational strategies for further improvements in quantification precision.
INTRODUCTIONRNA-Seq is a novel method for gene expression profiling by next-generation sequencing of transcripts. The technology has been applied to gain global views of the complex transcriptomes of mammalian samples, including human embryonic kidney and B-cells (), mouse embryonic stem cells (), blastomeres (), and different mouse tissues (). An advantage of RNA-Seq over * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Present address: Institute of Molecular Pathology, 1030 Dr Bohr Gasse 7, Vienna, Austria. other profiling technologies is that it allows a comprehensive assay of gene expression that is not reliant on probes for targets that must be specified in advance. It is particularly well suited for the de novo detection of splice junctions and allows genome-wide qualitative expression profiling of organisms with unknown genome sequence. Transcript detection obviously benefits from the digital nature of counting sequence reads. The observed identification rate increases with additional sequencing but is partly determined by the non-random nature of biological sequences and the highly skewed distribution of transcript abundances. We can extrapolate an expected achievable identification rate from the observed dependency on experimental parameters like read depth and read length. In addition, we examine the effects of random read sampling on the identification of low-copy number transcripts, as resulting from the distribution of reads mapped to different spliceforms. With many transcription factors being biologically active in low-copy numbers, this is particularly topical for studies of gene regulation. Increasingly, there has been an interest in applying RNA-Seq not only for qualitative transcriptome profiling but also for the quantification of gene expression (). Using raw read counts mapped to individual targets, however, can result in length-dependent bias (, and see Supplementary Material). A common approach for the quantification of gene expression in an RNA-Seq experiment thus computes the number of reads per kilobase of exonic sequence per million mapped reads (RPKM) to produce a gene expression measure which overall correlates well with measurements from microarrays (). Such normalization is also necessary to allow the combination or the comparison of RNA-Seq runs. While earlier work has focused on reads that unambiguously identify a transcript, current developments extend data analysis to complex gene models of alternative splicing, also taking into account the many reads that may come from different spliceforms (). A popular recently emerging approach is to align reads to the genome, and then use this information to assemble transcripts de novo and calculate their abundances, as implemented by the TopHat/Cufflinks tools (). Despite or perhaps even because of the fast pace of development of both the measurement technology and the associated novel analysis tools (), the central question of measurement reliability or, of how precisely we can actually quantify transcript expression, has received relatively little attention beyond initial observations of overall good correlation (). Simple correlation coefficients, however, can be misleading, as they are dominated by a small number of very highly expressed genes (see Supplementary Section S8 for discussion/examples). Despite the excellent overall correlation, reproducibility seems to be lower for gene classes that are less strongly expressed (). We will examine this in greater detail to show that, as a consequence, some transcripts can be assessed with extremely good precision, whereas a large number of transcripts are hard to measure reliably. It is therefore interesting to consider measurement precision for all targets individually. Similar to the early microarray data, however, there has been a lack of large RNA-Seq datasets with the necessary technical replicates. Now a comprehensive analysis of the reproducibility of gene expression level measurements by RNASeq has become possible and constitutes a necessary complement to characterizations of systemic measurement bias in next-generation sequencing (). Measurement precision in particular determines the power of any analysis to reliably identify relevant signals or changes, such as in screens for differential expression, independent of whether replicates are employed or not ().compiled one of the first large RNA-Seq datasets with technical replicates (240 million reads per sample), reporting reduced precision for less strongly expressed transcripts. We here provide a systematic study of the reliability of expression level estimates from an extended dataset with technical replicates (3331 million reads). Based on our observations, we then introduce a hybrid approach in the analysis of sequencing reads, for which we can demonstrate substantially improved quantification performance.
DISCUSSIONMany modern applications in the life-sciences rely on accurate profiles of gene expression, supporting as diverse areas as functional genomics and systems biology. Gene expression profiling by nextgeneration sequencing protocols like RNA-Seq now promises to discriminate alternative spliceforms, assess allele specific expression (), and detect transcript fusion (). With a growing interest in applying RNA-Seq for the quantitative assessment of expression levels, the questions of systemic bias and random noise become particularly topical. While systemic deviations due to length bias, lane effects, and processing artefacts are increasingly being investigated (), reproducibility has in general received much less attention. Measurement precision, however, determines the power of most analyses, including screens for differential expression, whether they exploit replicates or not (). As illustrated, however, high correlation coefficients and the perceived tightness of scatter plots alone can be misleading (Supplementary Section S8). Indeed, despite overall good correlation between replicates, in one of the first large RNA-Seq studies with technical replicates (240 million reads per sample),observed reduced precision for less strongly expressed transcripts. We here report on a comprehensive systematic study of the reliability of expression level estimates from an extended dataset with technical replicates (3331 million reads). The observations and trends apparent from this large ABI SOLiD dataset are the direct result of the uniform sampling approach of RNA-Seq. They are therefore of generic nature and independent of a particular sequencing platform or analysis particulars; see supporting complementary results for Illumina Genome Analyser data () and an experiment with paired-end reads from a second generation Illumina device (Supplementary Sections S5 and S6, respectively). Considering the first step in estimating expression levels, we examined alternative ways of read alignment. Similar to other recent RNA-Seq analyses (), only a proportion of the collected reads could ever be mapped to known transcript sequences, even allowing for multiple mismatches (Supplementary Tables S5 and S6). It is noteworthy that at present there is no explanation for the remaining unmapped reads. These constitute a substantial proportion of reads that cannot be identified even by modern alignment algorithms () and that are also not due to contamination with sequences from other organisms (data not shown). The unmappable reads may reflect errors specific to certain sequencing kits (Mortazavi, personal communication, 2009) as well as artefacts from the processing of RNA for massive parallel sequencing (). For the simple identification of transcripts, a further increase of read depth may show diminishing returns, as saturation effects were already apparent in the detection rate for higher read depths (). Pooling all 993 million reads yielded a target recall of 90% of the estimated true transcript population in the profiled sample. A single flowcell already achieved 84%. A considerable extension beyond that can still be expected from longer read lengths (Supplementary), especially up to lengths of 300bp per fragment, or from the application of advanced sequencing strategies like paired-end reads (Supplementary Sections S5.2 and S6). While, on one hand, the reads of massively parallel sequencing technologies are getting longer (), on the other hand, the sequencing depth achieved by longer-read technologies is continuously being improved (). With some approaches claiming fulllength reads (), a comprehensive identification of collected reads may become feasible in the future. Depending on the dataset, at present only 1033% of the collected reads could be mapped to known spliceforms unambiguously. Modern algorithms therefore exploit gene models of alternative spliceforms to infer expression levels that explain both unique and ambiguous read alignments (). We next investigated how well the expression levels of individual identified transcripts could be quantified. In general, the more strongly expressed transcripts could be measured more reproducibly (). It is interesting to consider the mechanism behind the larger technical scatter for the less strongly expressed transcripts. Earlier SAGE studies have already shown that a small proportion of genes can be responsible for the majority of a cell's mRNA mass, with just 14% of measured genes contributing 75% of the expressed mRNA (). While it is thus recognized that abundant transcripts can dominate collected samples of expressed mRNAs, the consequences of this effect for genome-wide studies are remarkable, even for deep sequencing. Here we find that over 75% of all read alignments concentrate on just 7% of the known transcriptome. Similarly, the more abundant transcripts in the remaining transcriptome received most of the remaining reads, and so on (). Most of the measurement power was thus spent on a small number of highly abundant transcripts, thus explaining the higher sampling noise for the remaining targets. With new technologies promising ever higher read depth, we examined its effect on measurement precision. Although the achievable dynamic range of RNA-Seq increases linearly with higher sequencing depths, most of the additional reads will again hit already extensively sampled transcripts. As a result, the number of spliceforms that can be measured reliably follows a sigmoid shape, indicating that even at higher read depths transcripts with low to moderate expression levels are difficult to quantify at good precision with current RNA-Seq protocol (). As the cost of next-generation sequencing drops and new advanced platforms and protocols emerge, it will be interesting to see the results of full-scale comparisons with sufficiently elaborate replication structures in their experimental designs, similar to recent efforts for a number of microarray technologies (). In lieu of such an elaborate comparison, was can still consider the measurementPage: i390 i383i391