Motivation: The accurate identification of chemicals in text is important for many applications, including computer-assisted reconstruction of metabolic networks or retrieval of information about substances in drug development. But due to the diversity of naming conventions and traditions for such molecules, this task is highly complex and should be supported by computational tools. Results: We present ChemSpot, a named entity recognition (NER) tool for identifying mentions of chemicals in natural language texts, including trivial names, drugs, abbreviations, molecular formulas and International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry entities. Since the different classes of relevant entities have rather different naming characteristics, ChemSpot uses a hybrid approach combining a Conditional Random Field with a dictionary. It achieves an F 1 measure of 68.1% on the SCAI corpus, outperforming the only other freely available chemical NER tool, OSCAR4, by 10.8 percentage points.
INTRODUCTIONMetabolic and signaling networks representing complex physiological processes play an essential role in systems biology and drug research (). For instance, simulation results derived from recently published human metabolic networks provided substantial insight into functional biochemical relationships at the systems level (). Such networks are typically built by a group of biological experts that systematically scan relevant publications and extract the important information, which is a particularly tedious and time consuming task requiring considerable expertise (). Natural language processing (NLP) can accelerate this process, especially by automatically pre-annotating network components (e.g. chemicals and proteins) and their interactions (). Such annotations, if of high quality, can considerably help to speed-up literature curation (). Accordingly, most work has been invested in the development of tools for named entity recognition (NER) of biomedical entities (). While these tools mainly focus on identifying genes and protein names, in this work we address chemical names, a task which has not received much attention yet * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). Finding mentions of chemicals in text is hindered by the fact that there exist various and highly heterogeneous ways of naming them. This includes trivial names (e.g. water), brand names (e.g. Voltaren), systematic International Union of Pure and Applied Chemistry (IUPAC) names [e.g. adenosine 3 ,5-(hydrogen phosphate)], generic or family names (e.g. alcohols), company codes (e.g. ICI204636), molecular formulas (e.g. COOH) and identifiers of various databases. On top, many of these names are used in abbreviated form (e.g. DMS for dimethyl sulfate). A number of nomenclature organizations exist and strive for systematic naming in the biochemical field, such as the IUPAC and the International Union of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology (IUBMB). However, most of their rules are only recommendations, leaving ample room for variation in their appliance (). For instance, separating digits in systematic chemical names using dashes or commas is equally valid. In contrast, both, the existence as well as the non-existence of brackets and whitespaces can be crucial for the correct identification of chemicals. For instance, the placement of spaces between methyl, ethyl and malonate, results in four different chemical structures (). This situation accounts for a high amount of possible synonyms for one chemical entity. Sometimes these synonyms do not even share a single pair of adjacent letters, e.g. in the case of phthalonitrile and o-dicyanobenzene (). Chemical NER also tends to be sensible to spelling errors, which is especially crucial in long formulas, and errors during document transformations, for instance through inappropriate tokenization or sentence splitting (). Even small errors may change the meaning of a chemical name completely; for instance, Brecher (1999) points out that several pairs of different structures differ only by one single character (e.g. methylamine and menthylamine). On top of these problems, also homonyms are common-place, especially when it comes to abbreviations. Despite this heterogeneity, names for chemical structures in text can roughly be divided into two classes: a rather closed (finite) class for brand and trivial names, and an open (infinite) class for names following rule-based conventions (e.g. IUPAC names). In this article, we show that using a proper method for recognizing entities in each of these two classes enables the construction of a high-quality chemical NER system. We built ChemSpot, a tool which combines into a single system the two most prominent methods in NER: machine learning and dictionary matching. ChemSpot uses a conditional random field (CRF) to achieve high quality in recognizing IUPAC names. As dictionary, ChemSpot uses ChemIDPlus (http://www.nlm .nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/chemidplusfs.html), which allows, when applied with a proper matching algorithm, tokenization method, post-processing rules, high-quality annotation of trivial and brand
DISCUSSION