Motivation: In the era of network medicine and the rapid growth of paired time series mRNA/ microRNA expression experiments, there is an urgent need for pathway enrichment analysis methods able to capture the time-and condition-specific active parts of the biological circuitry as well as the microRNA impact. Current methods ignore the multiple dynamical themes—in the form of enriched biologically relevant microRNA-mediated subpathways—that determine the functionality of signaling networks across time. Results: To address these challenges, we developed time-vaRying enriCHment integrOmics Subpathway aNalysis tOol (CHRONOS) by integrating time series mRNA/microRNA expression data with KEGG pathway maps and microRNA-target interactions. Specifically, microRNA-mediated subpathway topologies are extracted and evaluated based on the temporal transition and the fold change activity of the linked genes/microRNAs. Further, we provide measures that capture the structural and functional features of subpathways in relation to the complete organism pathway atlas. Our application to synthetic and real data shows that CHRONOS outperforms current subpathway-based methods into unraveling the inherent dynamic properties of pathways. Availability and implementation: CHRONOS is freely available at
IntroductionIn the last decade, pathway-based approaches have become the first choice in complex disease analysis for gaining more delicate biological insights and have enabled the comprehension of the higherorder functions of the biological systems (). In parallel, the increasing number of time course experiments has opened new avenues for pathway analysis to unravel the dynamic features of the interdependencies among a cell's molecular components leading to deeper characterization of the functional, molecular and causal relationships among apparently distinct phenotypes (). Toward this direction, few approaches have considered the dynamic aspects of pathways () and, to our knowledge, no method has been developed to deal with their context-dependent and systematic temporal variations.The first generation of pathway-based approaches related expression data to pathways by examining the entire pathway and wellestablished methods in this category are GSEA () and SPIA (). The next generation shifted the focus toward subpathways (local areas of the entire biological pathway), which represent the underlying biological phenomena more accurately, and have emerged as even more targeted and contextspecific molecular candidate communities for the treatment of complex diseases (). A representative example is the Subpathway-GM method which identifies key metabolic subpathways based on information from genes and metabolites by searching for similarities of signature nodes within the pathway structure (). Another relevant method is the topology enrichment analysis framework (TEAK) () which extracts linear and non-linear subpathways and scores them using the Bayes Net Toolbox to fit a context-specific Gaussian Bayesian network for each subpathway. However, these approaches do not take the temporal aspects of pathways into consideration and ignore possible perturbations on intermediate time points. Moving forward, timeClip combines dimension reduction techniques and graph decomposition theory to explore and identify the portion of pathways that is mostly time-dependent (). Although the temporal variation of the pathway is explored so as to identify the most time-dependent subpathway, information about the regulation between nodes is not included and the exact time period a subpathway is active is not provided. In parallel, nowadays genome-wide expression studies of the endogenous non-coding small RNAs (microRNAs) have given a strong impulse to the comprehension of cell regulatory mechanisms (). Recent studies have examined the microRNA (miRNA) regulation upon pathways by showing that the perturbations on pathways does not necessarily occur at the overall level but more likely at specific areas of the topology (subpathways) (). Toward addressing these challenges, we introduce the timevaRying enriCHment integrOmics Subpathway aNalysis tOol (CHRONOS) which detects significantly enriched miRNA-mediated subpathways per time point from paired miRNA/mRNA time series expression profiles (). Our key assumption is that during the time course, different subareas of the pathway topology are active and the transitions of subpathway activity at time t depend solely on time t  1 (). We illustrate the enhanced performance of CHRONOS over other state-of-the-art subpathwaybased methods based on synthetic time series expression data. Finally, we evaluate our method on a publicly available time series microarray dataset () which investigates the transcriptional changes of miRNA and mRNA expression levels over time after activation of the Janus kinase/Signal transducer and activator of transcription (Jak/STAT) pathway by interferon-gamma stimulation (IFN-g) of melanoma cells. Our results show how timeevolving subpathway analysis generates new robust and dynamically context-rich biological hypotheses that complement those generated by other classical bioinformatics pipelines.
ConclusionCHRONOS is a computationally fast and efficient approach for scanning the complete pathway topology to track the time-/contextspecific biologically enriched subpathways along with their time-/ context-specific miRNA regulators. The method and the supporting R package are flexible by allowing the user to intervene and adapt all discrete phases to the needs of the study under investigation. CHRONOS can assist significantly in complex disease analysis by enabling the experimentalists to acquire a more realistic time-varying dynamical view of the involved perturbed mechanisms.