The rapidly increasing research activity focused on chromatin-mediated regulation of epigenetic mechanisms is generating waves of data on writers, readers and erasers of the histone code, such as protein methyltransferases, bromodomains or histone deacetylases. To make these data easily accessible to communities of research scientists coming from diverse horizons, we have created ChromoHub, an online resource where users can map on phylogenetic trees disease associations, protein structures, chemical inhibitors, histone substrates, chromosomal aberrations and other types of data extracted from public repositories and the published literature. The interface can be used to define the structural or chemical coverage of a protein family, highlight domain architectures, interrogate disease relevance or zoom in on specific genes for more detailed information. This open-access resource should serve as a hub for cell biologists, medicinal chemists, structural biologists and other navigators that explore the biology of chromatin signalling. Availability: http://www.thesgc.org/chromohub/.
INTRODUCTIONChromatin-mediated control of gene expression and cell fate is regulated in part by distinct combinations of post-translational modifications on histone proteins, predominantly methylation or acetylation of lysine or arginine side chains at the N-terminal tails of histones (). Alteration of this histone code can lead to diseases states, and chemical inhibition of proteins that write, read or erase histone marks represents a promising avenue to restore to normal level diseaseassociated gene expression (). Following the clinical validation of this strategy with histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibitors (), writers, readers and erasers of histone marks constitute emerging therapeutic target classes for a variety of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. disease conditions. Consequently, a dramatic increase in research activity has been observed in the field. The rapidly growing body of heterogeneous data generated by diverse communities of scientists is in part accessible through public repositories or the published literature. But retrieving the data is time-consuming at best for the non-specialist: will a cell biologist know where to find what small molecule inhibitors are available for his protein of interest, and what their IC 50 's are? Will a medicinal chemist easily retrieve all compounds co-crystallized with her protein target? Will a biochemist know which somatic aberration, buried in vast cancer genomics databases, is linked to the protein he is characterizing? We have built a database that integrates such heterogeneous data types extracted from multiple repositories and the published literature. A simple yet powerful web interface allows research scientists coming from diverse horizons who are interested in writers, readers and erasers of the histone code to interrogate this database through phylogenetic representations of each protein family. The interface is freely available and should promote crosspollination between diverse communities of scientists interested in epigenetic signalling.
CONCLUSIONThe explosion of research activity on epigenetic signalling and recent technological breakthroughs in genome-scale biology are providing a wealth of data related to writers, readers and erasers of histone marks. The open-access resource that we have developed should help research scientists involved in chromatin biology rapidly find data that inform their research.