
INTRODUCTIONThe development of high-throughput technologies such as DNA microarrays and Serial Analysis of Gene Expression (SAGE) has revolutionized profiling of complex transcriptomes, enabling researchers to determine the transcription level of all known, unknown or putative genes within one experiment. During the last years, numerous genome-wide expression studies were performed to analyze the regulation of genes in different developmental stages, diseases or tissues. Due to the rapidly decreasing costs of nextgeneration sequencing, it is expected that the number of such expression studies will dramatically increase within the next years. Differentially expressed genes identified by these experiments became a starting point to characterize putative functions, interactions and biological roles of identified genes. Recent studies reveal that the number of genes encoded in higher organism (e.g. human) is not as high as initially expected; the current number of protein-coding genes is predicted to be between 20 000 and 25 000 * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). Yet, a considerable number of putative genes is still not characterized (), which is in part due to the current mode of data processing. Researchers tend to exclude genes with unknown annotations from further analysis even if they show a specific expression profile suggesting a distinct function in the process under examination ().assumes that one of the reasons for this bias is caused by the tendency to focus on certain well-known signaling pathways. Such a focus facilitates further evaluation and manipulation of processes under study because of available knowledge and tools. However, there is no doubt that characterization of unknown genes is needed to obtain a comprehensive understanding of the underlying biology in a system-wide manner (). C-It is a knowledge database focusing on uncharacterized genes to build a starting point for biologists to study genes with unknown functions. The database implements literature information from the PubMed database to identify genes that lack publication records. Based on the assumption that genes are likely to fulfill important functions when their expression is enriched in a certain tissue, C-It uses the tissue expression information of UniGene () expressed sequence tags (EST) profiles to identify tissue-enriched genes. Since evolutionary conservation of gene expression profiles usually indicates important functions of genes in a specific tissue, we implemented our algorithm 'Databasedependent Gene Selection and Analysis' (DGSA;). This algorithm identifies tissue-enriched genes by using EST profiles in all available tissues of organisms that biologists typically use for their research [Mus musculus (mouse), Rattus norvegicuis (rat), Gallus gallus (chicken) and Danio rerio (zebrafish)] as well as human (Homo sapiens). C-It combines microarray and SAGE data to give users integrated access to comprehensive transcriptional profiles. Furthermore, C-It is linked with a custom version of the exon array analyzer (EAA;) to allow tissue-enriched alternative splicing analysis.