Motivation: Increasing evidences suggest that most of the genome is transcribed into RNAs, but many of them are not translated into proteins. All those RNAs that do not become proteins are called non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), which outnumbers protein-coding genes. Interestingly, these ncRNAs are shown to be more tissue specifically expressed than protein-coding genes. Given that tissue-specific expressions of transcripts suggest their importance in the expressed tissue, researchers are conducting biological experiments to elucidate the function of such ncRNAs. Owing greatly to the advancement of next-generation techniques, especially RNA-seq, the amount of high-throughput data are increasing rapidly. However, due to the complexity of the data as well as its high volume, it is not easy to re-analyze such data to extract tissue-specific expressions of ncRNAs from published datasets. Results: Here, we introduce a new knowledge database called C-It-Loci, which allows a user to screen for tissue-specific transcripts across three organisms: human, mouse and zebrafish. C-It-Loci is intuitive and easy to use to identify not only protein-coding genes but also ncRNAs from various tissues. C-It-Loci defines homology through sequence and positional conservation to allow for the extraction of species-conserved loci. C-It-Loci can be used as a starting point for further biological experiments.
IntroductionA series of articles by 'Functional Annotation Of Mammalian genome (FANTOM)' projects (), 'ENCyclopedia Of DNA Elements (ENCODE)' consortium (), and others clearly indicate that a majority of genome is transcribed in the form of RNAs, yet only few percentages of them fall under the category of protein-coding genes. The current estimate is that less than 3% of the mammalian genome encodes for protein-coding genes (). Previously, many of the remaining RNAs were discarded as transcriptional noises and experimental errors. However, through the discovery of microRNAs (miRNAs) and other non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) (e.g. long non-coding RNAs (lncRNAs)), it became evident that RNAs have functions beyond templates for protein expression. The concept of ncRNAs is not new, as ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) and transfer RNAs (tRNAs) do not encode for proteins but are necessary for protein translation. Given such a complex reality of transcriptomes, lncRNAs are an immensely important topic of studyfor understanding biological systems. Furthermore they are of major interest in medicine with a huge range of potential applications from the detection of neurological diseases and treatments, anticancer therapies, and even cardiac regeneration (). However, compared to protein-coding genes, the functions of lncRNAs are poorly understood. One of the major reasons is that lncRNAs exhibit low sequence conservation, making evolutionary comparison difficult. Indeed, a recent study using a computational pipeline for homologybased comparison found that only 3.4% of lncRNAs share sequence conservation between human and other non-marsupial mammals () [compared to 85% of protein-coding genes between human and mice (. Although lncRNAs are poorly conserved among species, their expression patterns are distinct compared to those of protein-coding genes as a majority of lncRNAs (both with high and low sequence conservation) is expressed in a tissue-specific manner (). Furthermore, when a set of highly conserved lncRNAs was examined, their tissue expressions are conserved between species (). Since it is highly unlikely that the level of (convergent) evolution has occurred to allow for the specificity of lncRNAs when comparing to their poor sequence conservation, it is possible that evolutionary pressure is effective but not on a sequence-specific manner, which might suggests a sequence-independent way to understand the conservation of lncRNAs is necessary. Indeed, a number of methods have already been explored. One is based on the observation that the secondary structures of a number of lncRNAs are conserved (). However, a large-scale attempt using such methodology is still impeded by poor understanding of secondary structures of RNA in general (). Other studies have observed that promoter regions of lncRNAs are relatively conserved even when compared to those of protein-coding genes (). Although defining species-conservation via promoters is valuable, recent evidences from chromatin conformational capture assays (e.g. 3C, 4C, Hi-C) suggest that a promoter and enhancer could be up to 120kb from the transcription start sites (TSS) of a gene to control its expression (). If this applies to the mammalian genome, it would be difficult to define which region is controlling the expression of one gene but not the other. To overcome these challenges, in this study, we introduced positional conservation based on the idea that certain regions of the genome are conserved from one species to another. This region is defined as a pair of adjacent genes, which share adjacency and homology when compared across another species. Applying this concept to three organisms (human, mouse and zebrafish), we built a knowledge database called 'C-It-Loci' (http://c-it-loci.uni-frankfurt.de) using published RNA-seq datasets from various studies covering different tissues. Using C-It-Loci, we revisited the idea of tissue specificity of protein-coding genes and lncRNAs. Furthermore, we examined the definition of housekeeping genes and applied its concept to screen for housekeeping lncRNAs. To show the applicability of C-It-Loci, we screened for tissue-specific lncRNAs and confirmed their expressions in the target tissues by surveying publicly-available biological experimental data.
DiscussionIn this study, we analyzed RNA-seq data of various tissues from human, mouse and zebrafish. Using the latest genomic assemblies from Ensembl, we annotated each detected transcripts with detailed biotypes known to the scientific community to avoid ambiguity currently existing in the field of lncRNAs (). The analyzed datasets can be explored through our C-It-Loci knowledge database, which allows users to screen for tissueexpressed, enriched and specific transcripts. C-It-Loci was built to assist researchers with a limited knowledge about analysis of RNAseq data as well as bioinformatics and computational programs. An easy-to-use quick search function is provided at the top page of C-ItLoci so that users can perform an in silico screening of transcripts that are expressed, enriched and/or specific by comparing up to two tissues. As an output of such in silico screening, easy-to-view Venn diagrams are provided for conserved regions and transcripts for protein-coding genes and lncRNAs separately. These Venn diagrams are clickable, which jumps to the table that lists all the identified conserved regions or transcripts. From this table, users can explore the detailed information about each entry. In the detailed information page for conserved region, gene, or transcript, Ensembl ID is provided along with an official gene name and symbol, genomic position and biotype. Furthermore, link out to Ensembl database and the UCSC Genome Browser are provided. Within the same page, genome browser is implemented so that users can visually inspect the location of the identified gene and its corresponding transcripts (i.e. isoforms). In addition, a heat map is provided to examine the expression patterns of the identified gene and its isoforms. A tab is implemented to view only for those expressed tissues as well as numerical FPKM values are provided in the table format. In the case of the identified gene that follows under conserved regions, a list of conserved regions and their region types are provided along with the links to the corresponding information. Since gene ontology terms are often used in the research community to categorize protein-coding genes, GO terms are provided along with the link to the corresponding information page provided by AmiGO 2. There are many databases available that contain expressions of protein-coding genes across various tissues, including our own 'C-It' knowledge database (). In the case of lncRNAs, there are three databases available that include the expressions of lncRNAs across tissues; namely, lncRNAMap (), lncRNAtor () and NONCODE (). lncRNAMap is limited to human lncRNAs and provides a link out to the UCSC Genome Browser for expression data, whereas lncRNAtor and NONCODE include more species. Of these three databases, lncRNAtor includes the most amount of next-generation sequencing datasets, including RNA-seq. Compared to these databases, our C-It-Loci differs in the following points. First, the latest genomic assembly for human (hg38) is utilized, whereas all the other databases are based on hg19, which was released in February 2009, and numerous transcripts are not included or ambiguously annotated (Supplementary). Second, C-It-Loci allows an in silico screening of tissue-expressed, enriched and specific transcripts by comparing two tissues, whose function is missing in all other databases. Supplementaryis provided to give an overview of tissue-specific transcripts in each tissue. Such information can only be obtained through C-It-Loci, which would be valuable to conduct loss-of-function studies to elucidate the functions of such tissue-specific transcripts, including yet-function-unknown lncRNAs. Third, C-It-Loci defines homologous lncRNAs among three organisms, which are not so well defined in all the other databases. Of note, while our study was underway, LNCipededia (), which is a database for human lncRNAs, introduced a similar method of defining homology based on genomic position. However, LNCipedia does not provide a list of conserved mouse and zebrafish lncRNAs. In our C-It-Loci, we utilized three types of conserved regions and provided all the transcripts that follow under each conserved region. Of all the databases of proteincoding genes and lncRNAs currently available to the research community, our C-It-Loci is the only database that includes both protein-coding genes and lncRNAs as well as other types of transcripts [e.g. small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs)]. We anticipate that our C-It-Loci serves as a start point for conducting functional studies in tissue-enriched/specific transcripts, including lncRNAs.