Motivation: Intra-tumor heterogeneity presents itself through the evolution of subclones during cancer progression. Although recent research suggests that this heterogeneity has clinical implications , in silico determination of the clonal subpopulations remains a challenge. Results: We address this problem through a novel combinatorial method, named clonality inference in tumors using phylogeny (CITUP), that infers clonal populations and their frequencies while satisfying phylogenetic constraints and is able to exploit data from multiple samples. Using simulated datasets and deep sequencing data from two cancer studies, we show that CITUP predicts clonal frequencies and the underlying phylogeny with high accuracy. Availability and implementation: CITUP is freely available at: http://sourceforge.net/projects/citup/.
IntroductionMost human tumors exhibit a large degree of heterogeneity. This heterogeneity is not only apparent in histology, but also presents itself in various features such as gene expression changes, genomic copy number alterations and somatic mutations as well as other aberrations. Although the origins of the intra-tumor heterogeneity are still debated, research suggests that this diversity is likely to have clinical implications. For instance,have reported a correlation between clonal diversity and progression to esophageal adenocarcinoma in Barrett's esophagus. The implications of tumor heterogeneity are not limited to diagnostics. It has been suggested that clonal diversity may also be linked to metastatic potential and drug response. Looking at biopsies from pancreas and prostate adenocarcinomas,found that metastatic tumors were derived from certain clonal populations. In colorectal cancer,reported that clonal diversity affects chemotherapy tolerance. By tracking 150 lentivirus-marked lineages from 10 human colorectal cancers, they found that previously minor or dormant clones were promoted by chemotherapy, thus, reducing the effectiveness of the treatment. Although the multi-clonal nature is virtually common to most tumor samples, determining the clonal subpopulations is a challenging process. This problem could potentially be alleviated by single-cell sequencing; however, the current cost of these methods are prohibitive in the scales that would be necessary to representatively sample a tumor tissue. Methods such as fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or silver in situ hybridization (SISH) can also assess a small number of probes in individual cells of a tumor sample. On the other hand, these methods are quite limited in scope and can not offer the same genome wide perspective as high-throughput sequencing methods. In silico, separation of the clonal subpopulations may provide a viable alternative to these methods. In a pioneering article, Schwartz and Shackney (2010) developed an unmixing method based on ageometric model to distinguish a small number of cancer subtypes in gene expression data. After determining cell types and their relative frequencies in different tumor samples, this method infers a phylogenetic tree that best fits the cell types identified. An alternative method, named TrAp (), generates possible phylogenetic trees following certain parsimony and sparsity conditions using a greedy approach. More recently, PhyloSub (), which is based on Bayesian inference is developed. This method relies on the well-known Monte Carlo Markov Chain (MCMC) sampling paradigm to infer a distribution over all possible phylogenies. Another statistical method, named PyClone ()also based on MCMC samplingleverages copy number genotypes to estimate subclonal frequencies. Unlike PhyloSub, however, this method does not infer phylogenies. In this article, we present a combinatorial algorithm, named clonality inference in tumors using phylogeny (CITUP), that can exploit data obtained from multiple samples from a single patient to infer the tumor phylogeny more accurately. Our framework also involves generating possible phylogenetic trees; unlike the previous approaches mentioned earlier; however, CITUP has the ability to find optimal solutions based on an exact Quadratic Integer Programming (QIP) formulation. Another tree-based method, named Rec-BTP (), is closely related to our framework. In this approach, mutations are subjected to a binary-tree partition, where a binary tree with the least number of conflicting triplets is sought using an approximation algorithm. In contrast to our framework, however, this method can not handle multiple samples. Our work is also related to other studies with slightly different goals (). Although THetA () predicts subclonal populations and their proportions given a sample from high-throughput sequencing data, it does not aim to infer any pyhlogenetic relationship between the subclones. Although the method proposed byinfers tumor phylogenies from multiple samples like CITUP, the goal of that study is to improve somatic single nucleotide variant (SNV) calls. Moreover, their model places the samples as leaves in a single phylogenetic tree (thus leaves do not represent clonal subpopulations but rather samples, each of which is a mixture of subclones) whereas our model assumes a shared tree between samples with different clonal frequencies.
DiscussionIn this work, we present CITUP, a novel combinatorial algorithm to determine clonal frequencies in tumors as well as their evolutionary history using one or more samples from the same patient. Our comparisons to other state-of-the-art tools show that CITUP consistently reports fewer solutions and with better accuracy. This feature is important for real cancer datasets where additional experiments may be required to validate the predictions. For example, predictions that involve contradictory assignments reported by TrAp [referred to as 'non-sparse' solutions by, complicate the downstream analysis of identifying potential drivers of cancer. Similarly, the partial order plots reported by PhyloSub () can involve many connections, making it difficult to interpret the solutions reported by this tool. Although our QIP framework is already able to handle a large number of mutations, and significantly faster than PhyloSub we acknowledge that it is considerably slower than TrAp. On the other hand, the iterative heuristic version of CITUP exhibits comparable accuracy, while achieving substantial reduction in computation time (Supplementary). Moreover, our ability to run CITUP separately on each tree topology means that parallel computing can be utilized to quickly obtain high accuracy results on large datasets. We note that the current implementation of CITUP is primarily designed for deep sequencing experiments where a high sequence coverage (5001000) is implicit. Certain aspects of our model (e.g. Gaussian noise) may not be suitable for low coverage datasets (Supplementary Methods Section 1.2). Although coverage is certainly a limiting factor in detecting rare subclones, CITUP is still able to detect low frequency subclones when model assumptions hold (Supplementary Results Section 2.4). We also acknowledge that although CITUP can theoretically be used to find arbitrarily large trees, this may not be computationally feasible. On the other hand, the number of subclones considered in this work is in accordance with the numbers reported in the literature (). Moreover, our experiments with larger number of subclones show that CITUP approximates the real trees well even when the number of subclones is limited to smaller values (Supplementary Results Section 2.4). As mentioned earlier, CITUP assumes infinite sites, which may be violated under certain conditions. For instance, lineages that die out before the first sampling of the tumor or emerge and disappear between two time points are not detectable. In addition, CITUP is only applicable to tumors with limited copy number changes. On the other hand, a reasonable proportion of cancers have low genome instability, making them amenable to analysis with CITUP. For example, in a recent survey of 12 cancer types, Ciriello et al.(2013) has found that copy number alterations and mutations are predominant in different subsets of tumors with several solid tumor types such as glioblastoma multiforme and kidney renal clear-cell carcinoma falling under the mutation-heavy class. Furthermore, this limitation of CITUP can be partially overcome by considering a restricted number of copy number corrected genotypes similar to the approach of PyClone ().