Motivation: With the advancements of next-generation sequencing technology, it is now possible to study samples directly obtained from the environment. Particularly, 16S rRNA gene sequences have been frequently used to profile the diversity of organisms in a sample. However, such studies are still taxed to determine both the number of operational taxonomic units (OTUs) and their relative abundance in a sample. Results: To address these challenges, we propose an unsupervised Bayesian clustering method termed Clustering 16S rRNA for OTU Prediction (CROP). CROP can find clusters based on the natural organization of data without setting a hard cutoff threshold (3%/5%) as required by hierarchical clustering methods. By applying our method to several datasets, we demonstrate that CROP is robust against sequencing errors and that it produces more accurate results than conventional hierarchical clustering methods. Availability and Implementation: Source code freely available at the following
INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, the development of next-generation sequencing technology has made it possible to directly sequence a huge amount of high-quality DNA/RNA fragments extracted from environmental samples in an acceptable time period (). Meanwhile, analytical tools have been developed, including multiple sequence alignments (), pairwise alignments (global/local) () and clustering (), by which we are able to address the fundamental problems in Metagenomics, in particular, the distribution, abundance and co-occurrence of microorganisms in given environmental samples. Recent studies have shown that such information may indicate environmental changes or disease conditions (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed. 16S rRNA gene sequences are widely used to infer the phylogenetic relationship between organisms. That is, by comparing two 16S rRNA gene sequences, biologists can determine whether they belong to the same genus using a conventional threshold of 5% dissimilarity, or the same species using a conventional threshold of 3% dissimilarity, although the validity of using these thresholds has not been proven. By combining sequence comparison with hierarchical clustering methods, programs such as DOTUR () and its current version mothur (), and ESPRIT () can partition 16S rRNA sequence data into clusters. Then, by using a predefined dissimilarity threshold, these methods can, in turn, report sequence clusters satisfying certain criteria (complete/average/single-linkage). In hierarchical clustering, the complete linkage and the average linkage methods are more widely used than the single linkage method (). However, a common problem with these clustering methods is the sensitivity of the results to the dissimilarity threshold such that even a slight change can result in very different clusters. Furthermore, the inevitable sequencing errors, as well as the unknown structure of microorganisms underlying an environmental sample, make it very difficult to find the optimal threshold for hierarchical clustering. For these reasons, the otherwise simple choice of 5 and 3% thresholds becomes problematic () and may result in the overestimation of operational taxonomic units (OTUs).showed that hierarchical clustering methods overestimated the number of OTUs in a given sample when sequencing errors occurred, potentially leading to faulty conclusions.also explained that distance calculated from multiple alignment was, in general, larger than those calculated from pairwise alignments and thus might also result in overestimation of the number of OTUs. In addition to the aforementioned reasons, Schloss listed and analyzed many other factors that may result in overestimation of hierarchical clustering (). Many groups have taken steps to address these problems. For example, mothur included a single linkage preclustering module to merge similar sequences before clustering (), and PyroNoise () was developed to remove sequencing errors to alleviate the overestimation of the number of OTUs. The large size of datasets currently being produced by the nextgeneration sequencing machines accounts for still another challenge in clustering 16S rRNA sequences. In the process of hierarchical clustering, it is necessary to calculate a distance matrix by comparingPage: 612 611618