ChIP-seq technology provides an accurate characterization of transcription or epigenetic factors binding on genomic sequences. With integration of such ChIP-based and other high-throughput information, it would be dedicated to dissecting cross-interactions among multilevel regulators, genes and biological functions. Here, we devised an integrative web server CMGRN (con-structing multilevel gene regulatory networks), to unravel hierarchical interactive networks at different regulatory levels. The newly developed method used the Bayesian network modeling to infer causal interrelationships among transcription factors or epigenetic modifications by using ChIP-seq data. Moreover, it used Bayesian hierarchical model with Gibbs sampling to incorporate binding signals of these regulators and gene expression profile together for reconstructing gene regulatory networks. The example applications indicate that CMGRN provides an effective web-based framework that is able to integrate heterogeneous high-throughput data and to reveal hierarchical regulome and the associated gene expression programs.
INTRODUCTIONThe combinational performance of transcriptional and epigenetic factors is central regulatory mechanisms to control gene expression networks. A fundamental challenge in post-genome era is to dissect such complex regulation associations underlying biological functions. ChIP-seq technology allows high-fidelity mapping of different regulators, such as transcription factors (TFs) or epigenetic modifications to genomic locations, thus providing a basis for profiling transcriptional or epigenetic regulatory relationships. Accurate binding features of these factors on the genomic sequences can also be used to identify regulatory modules and reconstruct gene regulatory networks (GRNs). Various algorithms and computational methods have been proposed to investigate gene regulation promoted by cooperation of TFs and epigenetic alterations. Some online tools or servers were designed to build GRNs derived from ChIP-seq data, for instance, Cscan () and ChIP-Array (). Although the existing web-based software can predict potential target genes of the multiple regulators, they are not able to discover hierarchical organizations formed by cross-interactions between the regulators and genes simultaneously. Currently, there is a lack of effective web resources to generate the topology of networks controlled by the interacting factors at transcriptional, post-transcriptional and epigenetic layers. To provide an easy-to-use bioinformatics tool to interpret these ChIP-seq high-throughput data, we devised an integrative web server, constructing multilevel gene regulatory networks (CMGRN) to unveil interrelationships between TFs or epigenetic modifications and to robustly construct hierarchical regulatory network structures in biological complex systems. It is system wide and enables biologists to analyze the mixture information of ChIP-seq and gene expression levels, using standard data formatted with minimal need of bioinformatics skills.