Motivation: The current generation of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays allows measurement of copy number aberrations (CNAs) in cancer at more than one million locations in the genome in hundreds of tumour samples. Most research has focused on single-sample CNA discovery, the so-called segmentation problem. The availability of high-density, large sample-size SNP array datasets makes the identification of recurrent copy number changes in cancer, an important issue that can be addressed using the cross-sample information. Results: We present a novel approach for finding regions of recurrent copy number aberrations, called CNAnova, from Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array data. The method derives its statistical properties from a control dataset composed of normal samples and, in contrast to previous methods, does not require segmentation and permutation steps. For rigorous testing of the algorithm and comparison to existing methods, we developed a simulation scheme that uses the noise distribution present in Affymetrix arrays. Application of the method to 128 acute lymphoblastic leukaemia samples shows that CNAnova achieves lower error rate than a popular alternative approach. We also describe an extension of the CNAnova framework to identify recurrent CNA regions with intra-tumour heterogeneity, present in either primary or relapsed samples from the same patients. Availability: The CNAnova package and synthetic datasets are available at
INTRODUCTIONDifferent genetic and epigenetic alterations can lead to the development of cancer by activating oncogenes or inactivating tumour suppressor genes. Copy number changes are one example of such alterations, where amplifications or deletions of genes implicated in cancer progression can cause abnormal cell growth and proliferation (). In the past decade, single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays have become a de facto standard for detecting copy number alterations (CNAs) in cancer * To whom correspondence should be addressed. genomes. The latest versions of SNP arrays, manufactured by Affymetrix and Illumina, have more than a million polymorphic and non-polymorphic (NP) probes. For instance, the Affymetrix SNP 6.0 array has 1.8 million probes with roughly equal proportions of SNP and NP probes. The high density of SNP arrays and the availability of NP probes has made SNP arrays the technology of choice for identifying CNAs in some recently published large-scale oncogenomic studies (). In addition to high-density arrays these studies include a large number of samples. Both the number of probes and samples create novel data analysis challenges. The most common problem is the transformation of normalized logratio values into accurate copy number calls at the highest possible resolution. This so-called single sample segmentation problem has received much attention, with numerous methods developed for this task (). A discussion of segmentation algorithms for SNP array platforms is available in the Supplementary Material. Cancer cells usually harbour two types of chromosomal abnormalities: large scale alterations such as gains and losses of whole chromosome arms, and more focal amplifications and deletions. Given the high rate of genomic instability found in cancer cells, large-scale copy number changes usually represent passenger mutations and due to their large size do not facilitate discovery of functional driver events that lead to malignancy (). On the other hand, due to their smaller size and recurrence, detection of focal CNAs could lead to the identification of new genes implicated in cancer progression. This can be facilitated by the availability of high-density/large samplesize SNP array datasets, where cross-sample frequency information can be used to identify driver CNAs and distinguish them from random mutations and probe intensity artefacts. Several methods for finding regions of recurrent CNAs using aCGH and SNP microarray data have been described in the literature. A review and qualitative comparison of different methods can be found in Shah (2008). A common theme in these methods is that they require a preliminary segmentation step to find regions of interest for each sample. For example, significance testing for aberrant copy number (STAC) starts by creating a binary matrix from the normalized log-ratios, with zeros designating no change and ones designating losses and gains (). It then utilizes two complementary statistics, footprint and frequency, to define recurrent CNA regions based on their length and the number of samples they occur in. A potential problem with this approach is the
DISCUSSIONWe have presented a novel framework, CNAnova, for using unsegmented SNP microarray data to identify recurrent copy number aberrations in cancer. It uses pseudo-replication to increase statistical power and, in contrast to segmentation-based methods, does not require permutations to estimate the null distribution of test statistics. Instead, this distribution is approximated using samples from a control set representing normal samples. CNAnova circumvents the need to specify a threshold on segmented log-ratios for calling probes with copy number changes. This threshold could be sample, region, dataset and platform dependent, which makes it hard to determine an optimal value and can increase the error rate of segmentation-based methods. This is especially true for the current generation of the SNP arrays, such as Affymetrix SNP 6.0, that often exhibit wave patterns and other artefacts. Another advantage of CNAnova stems from decoupling the process of identifying cross-sample boundaries of the regions of recurrent CNAs and pinpointing the actual samples with copy number changes. This insures that copy number changes with extreme probe intensity values do not influence CNA detectability in other samples. High probe intensity values fed into permutationbased methods such as GISTIC may increase the false negative rate by increasing the G-score (for GISTIC) in the permuted dataset, and therefore the overall threshold for calling significant CNAs. In its later implementation, GISTIC has introduced capping of segmented log-ratios with extreme probe intensities (). The comparison with GISTIC suggests that it tends to have higher error rate than CNAnova when using Affymetrix SNP 6.0 arrays. In addition to the dataset-dependent thresholds derived from the permutation-based estimation of the null distribution, the higher error rate could be explained by the fact that GISTIC was originally adapted for use with lower density arrays and a more robust probe-set design. At the same time, dependence on the control dataset requires noise in the cancer and normal samples to follow approximately identical distributions. In addition, the number of normal samples should be sufficient to capture different probe intensity artefacts and patterns of noise in the (often larger) cancer dataset. Further simulations showed (Supplementary section 'Results') that the algorithm is typically robust against sample size and noise properties of the control dataset. Only in cases of extremely low control sample sizes (10% of the size of the cancer dataset) the impact on the error rate becomes significant. Some conceptual ideas relating to different steps of the CNAnova framework have been discussed in the literature.derived a parametric mathematical model for protein-based assays, which was then used to simulate additional data points to better capture dependencies between variables within the decision tree. Such an approach resembles our pseudo-replication strategy. The use of normal control samples to control FDR was proposed byto correct the FP signals in ChIP-seq data arising from the open chromatin conformation at pol-II sites. Decomposition of the variance has been recently proposed in the context of aCGH data analysis by, where CNAs were associated with cancer tissue types. The statistical framework of CNAnova can be extended by incorporating more complex models, as we exemplified with a two-factor nested ANOVA design for identifying CNAs with intrapatient heterogeneity. A useful extension could be developed to identify recurrent CNAs prevalent in a particular tumour subtype or progression stage. In contrast to clustering, such an approach can provide an association of individual CNAs with a specific tumour phenotype. Focus on individual regions rather than clusters could facilitate the discovery and testing of new candidate genes. Similarly, additional data and biological annotation, such as gene expression data or pathway-centred gene sets, could be used to discover functionally related sets of recurrent CNAs.