Motivation: Copy number variation (CNV), a major contributor to human genetic variation, comprises ≥1 kb genomic deletions and insertions. Yet, the identification of CNVs from microarray data is still hampered by high false negative and positive prediction rates due to the noisy nature of the raw data. Here, we present CNVineta, an R package for rapid data mining and visualization of CNVs in large case–control datasets genotyped with single nucleotide polymorphism oligonucleotide arrays. CNVineta is compatible with various established CNV prediction algorithms, can be used for genome-wide association analysis of rare and common CNVs and enables rapid and serial display of log 2 of raw data ratios as well as B-allele frequencies for visual quality inspection. In summary, CNVineta aides in the interpretation of large-scale CNV datasets and prioritization of target regions for follow-up experiments. Availability and Implementation: CNVineta is available as an R package and can be downloaded from http://www.ikmb.uni-kiel.de/CNVineta/; the package contains a tutorial outlining a typical workflow. The CNVineta compatible HapMap dataset can also be downloaded from the link above. Contact: m.wittig@mucosa.de
INTRODUCTIONMany recent research findings suggest that copy number variation (CNV) plays a major role in genetic variability and hence human disease (). However, while methodologies for large-scale association studies of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) are well established, a comprehensive framework for the analysis and interpretation of genome-wide CNV predictions in large casecontrol datasets is still lacking (). CNV prediction algorithms for data derived from SNP microarrays have improved considerably over the last few years, but many predicted segments are still false positives () and can only be excluded through visual inspection in analogy to the mandatory inspection * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of genotyping assay scatterplots derived from SNP-based genomewide association studies (GWAS; WTCCC, 2007). In addition, false negative rates tend to be high () which can, for example, cause problems when rare CNV candidates are overlooked in the data. Current visualization tools such as the Affymetrix  Genotyping Console work well with small datasets and are suitable for cancer diagnostics and similarly small-sized sample sets. The difficulties in bridging the gap between packages for CNV prediction, association analysis and visualization for distinguishing genuine signals from false positive/negative predictions in generally noisy datasets have hindered many scientists from conducting genome-wide CNV analysis of their existing large GWAS datasets. We here present CNVineta, an R package capable of handling CNV data derived from large datasets with implemented analysis tools for the detection and visualization of disease-associated rare (Supplementary) and common CNVs (Supplementary Figs S5, S6). CNVineta was designed to allow researchers to access large datasets from standard desktop computers. We hope that CNVineta will empower scientists to perform genome-wide CNV screening and quickly evaluate raw data of candidate CNVs in existing GWAS datasets.