Motivation: Exome sequencing technologies have transformed the field of Mendelian genetics and allowed for efficient detection of geno-mic variants in protein-coding regions. The target enrichment process that is intrinsic to exome sequencing is inherently imperfect, generating large amounts of unintended off-target sequence. Off-target data are characterized by very low and highly heterogeneous coverage and are usually discarded by exome analysis pipelines. We posit that off-target read depth is a rich, but overlooked, source of information that could be mined to detect intergenic copy number variation (CNV). We propose cnvOffseq, a novel normalization framework for off-target read depth that is based on local adaptive singular value decomposition (SVD). This method is designed to address the heterogeneity of the underlying data and allows for accurate and precise CNV detection and genotyping in off-target regions. Results: cnvOffSeq was benchmarked on whole-exome sequencing samples from the 1000 Genomes Project. In a set of 104 gold standard intergenic deletions, our method achieved a sensitivity of 57.5% and a specificity of 99.2%, while maintaining a low FDR of 5%. For gold standard deletions longer than 5 kb, cnvOffSeq achieves a sensitivity of 90.4% without increasing the FDR. cnvOffSeq outperforms both whole-genome and whole-exome CNV detection methods considerably and is shown to offer a substantial improvement over na€ ıve local SVD. Availability and Implementation: cnvOffSeq is available at
INTRODUCTIONThe advent of whole-exome sequencing (WES) has led to a renaissance in the field of Mendelian genetics (). WES offers deep coverage for protein-coding regions at a lower cost than whole-genome sequencing (WGS) and has thus sparked renewed interest in elucidating rare diseases. Exome sequence analysis typically focuses on detecting previously unobserved (or very low-frequency) coding singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) and small frame-shift indels that are absent from a reference set. This approach is based on the prior hypothesis that such loss-of-function mutations are more likely to cause severe phenotypic effects commonly seen in rare diseases. A number of studies have also identified exonic copy number variation (CNV) as the underlying genetic basis for various Mendelian disorders (). Exome-based CNV detection is complicated by the presence of strong batch effects introduced by the enrichment process. Various approaches have been developed to detect, genotype and perform association testing on exonic CNVs in population exome datasets (). The majority of these approaches operate under the assumption that most of the variation in read depth (RD) is driven by systematic bias which swamps the real signal in global noise. Exome CNV methods attempt to mitigate such bias either through control-based normalization or by identifying and removing the strongest components of variation across the population. Most exome sequencing technologies rely on a hybridization step to enrich for DNA fragments arising from specific genomic targets. Hybridization is a sensitive but imperfect process that captures large amounts of off-target fragments along with the intended exonic regions. Although hybridization efficiency is highly variable and platform-specific, off-target sequence has been consistently shown to comprise as much as 50% of whole-exome datasets (). Despite its potential to generate high-quality SNP genotypes in non-coding regions (), non-target reads are almost always treated as a contaminant and ignored by exome analysis pipelines. We postulate that off-target data are a rich, but overlooked, source of information that could be mined to detect intergenic CNV. The off-target sequence coverage from a WES experiment can range from 0.5 to 3. We have previously shown () that it is possible to accurately identify and genotype CNVs longer than 1 kb from low-coverage WGS data, which itself can be as little as 2 coverage. Despite the similar levels of coverage, analysis of off-target exome sequence data is confounded by the highly uneven nature of off-target coverage. The mechanism behind off-target enrichment is highly complex and contingent on both sequence properties and stochastic processes. Different parts of the genome are subject to distinct biases, such that off-target RD behaves like a combination of whole-genome and whole-exome data and cannot be handled uniformly. To address the heterogeneity of off-target sequencing coverage, we have developed a dynamic RD normalization pipeline called cnvOffSeq. The pipeline is based on a modified version of singular value decomposition (SVD) that allows for flexible, region-specific noise reduction and signal enhancement. Global (or exome-wide) SVD has been established as a robust framework for on-target RD normalization and CNV calling using WES data. Here we propose a local adaptive SVD approach for detection and genotyping of intergenic CNVs based solely on off-target reads of WES experiments. In principle, introns could also be analysed using our framework, but we focused *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com on intergenic regions to avoid contamination from exome targets.
DISCUSSIONExome sequencing is a relatively nascent technology that has nevertheless achieved near ubiquity, particularly in the field of Mendelian genetics. Due to its cost-and time-effectiveness, exome sequencing has largely superseded both WGS and more traditional linkage studies for investigating rare genetic disorders. Furthermore, exome sequencing has proven to be a powerful diagnostic tool that has revolutionized clinical genetics. By elucidating disorders of unknown genetic aetiology, exome sequencing can inform custom treatment options, thus ushering in a new era of truly personalized medicine. Off-target data are an integral, but overlooked, component of exome sequencing. Regardless of the underlying technology, enrichment strategies attempt to strike a balance between on-target stringency and coverage maximization. The fortunate side effect of this delicate equilibrium is off-target reads, which are often regarded as wasteful and dispensable. As exome sequencing is maturing, it will continue to generate increasing amounts of offtarget data that represent an unexplored treasure of genomic information. cnvOffSeq is the first method to tap into this valuable resource for the purpose of CNV detection. Off-target enrichment arises through various processes leading to highly heterogeneous off-target coverage. Off-target read depth is affected by a mixture of deterministic biases and random noise that require individualized treatment, but are difficult to determine a priori. As a result off-target data pose a significant challenge for CNV detection that prompted the development of a tailored data-driven normalization approach, implemented in cnvOffSeq. We have demonstrated that our local adaptive SVD approach provides a flexible and robust framework for off-target read depth normalization that can enhance true signal while eliminating capture artifacts. cnvOffSeq clearly outperforms CNV detection methods that were designed for WGS. Furthermore, it was shown to improve upon both high-order and low-order singular component filtering, thus amounting to more than the sum of its parts. cnvOffSeq was tested on data from both Agilent and Nimblegen capture assays but remains platform-agnostic. Like all SVD-based techniques, cnvOffSeq's ability to mitigate systematic bias improves with larger sample sizes. However, even in the absence of sufficiently large datasets, cnvOffSeq retains some of its de-noising capacity by essentially reverting to loworder singular component filtering. Finally, the modular nature of our pipeline allows for the RD normalization to be separated from the CNV calling and incorporated into future applications as a pre-processing step.