The method for genome-wide association study (GWAS) based on copy number variation (CNV) is not as well established as that for single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)–GWAS. Although there are several tools for CNV association studies, most of them do not provide appropriate definitions of CNV regions (CNVRs), which are essential for CNV-association studies. Here we present a user-friendly program called CNVRuler for CNV-association studies. Outputs from the 10 most common CNV defining algorithms can be directly used as input files for determining the three different definitions of CNVRs. Once CNVRs are defined, CNVRuler supports four kinds of statistical association tests and options for population stratification. CNVRuler is based on the open-source programs R and Java from Sun Microsystems. Availability: CNVRuler software is available with an online manual at the website, www.ircgp.com/CNVRuler/index.html Contact: yejun@catholic.ac.kr.
INTRODUCTIONCopy number variation (CNV) is thought to contribute to interindividual differences in phenotypes including disease susceptibility (). Single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotypes are always represented as categorical values, while copy number variations (CNVs) are often represented as regions consisting of continuous values for consecutive probes. For this reason, the following three steps are required to perform a CNV-based genome-wide association study (GWAS): (i) calling CNVs, (ii) merging CNVs into common CNV regions (CNVRs), and (iii) statistical analysis of the associations. Despite the importance and popularity of CNV phenotype association studies, there are not many algorithms that provide all three key steps mentioned above.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors * To whom correspondence should be addressed.A number of tools supporting CNVdisease association analysis have been developed (Supplementary). However, most of these tools do not offer methods for defining the CNVRs and require additional manual processes for converting the input CNV calls into files suitable for statistical analysis. In order to support the steps from merging CNVs into CNVRs to CNVR-based association analysis in a single software program, we developed a user-friendly tool for CNVGWAS, called CNVRuler.
DESCRIPTIONCNVRuler was designed to define three different types of CNVRs from the predefined CNVs and provides four statistical methods for CNVR-based association studies. The overall analysis flow in CNVRuler is illustrated in. All forms of major CNV call outputs from different segmentation tools such as Genotyping Console, Genome Studio, Genomic Workbench, PennCNV and Nexus can be processed without additional conversion steps. Details are described in the user manual.
CONCLUSIONCNVRuler is a user-friendly program with multiple functions that support all procedures of CNVphenotype association analysis in a single system without requiring any additional manual processes.1008.