Codon optimization has been widely used for designing synthetic genes to improve their expression in heterologous host organisms. However, most of the existing codon optimization tools consider a single design criterion and/or implement a rather rigid user interface to yield only one optimal sequence, which may not be the best solution. Hence, we have developed Codon Optimization OnLine (COOL), which is the first web tool that provides the multi-objective codon optimization functionality to aid systematic synthetic gene design. COOL supports a simple and flexible interface for customizing various codon optimization parameters such as codon adaptation index, individual codon usage and codon pairing. In addition, users can visualize and compare the optimal synthetic sequences with respect to various fitness measures. User-defined DNA sequences can also be compared against the COOL optimized sequences to show the extent by which the users sequences can be further improved. Availability and implementation: COOL is free to academic and non-commercial users and licensed to others for a fee by the National University of Singapore.
INTRODUCTIONThe advent of synthetic biology ushered in the new era of life science research where synthetic genetic circuits (e.g. artificial biomolecules, usually nucleotides) can be constructed and inserted into the living host to perform novel biological functions such as a metabolic pathway, a specific cell signalling response and/or novel gene regulation (). However, the desired biological functions can be achieved only if the synthetic genes are properly expressed within the host organism. Therefore, it is highly required to develop a systematic framework that rationally designs the synthetic genes for optimal expression in the recombinant host. Factors affecting the expression of recombinant genes have been well studied. The codon usage pattern, which relates to relative abundance of tRNA isoacceptors, has been implicated as one of the crucial determinants of heterologous protein expression level (). However, experimental studies have shown that the precise factors and their relative contributions are unclear (). Computational tools, such as JCat (), Synthetic Gene Designer () and OPTIMIZER (), have been developed to quantify and optimize the codon usage frequency of the coding sequence in terms of the host's codon adaptation index (CAI) or individual codon usage (ICU). Moreover, the optimization of codon pairing, also known as codon context (CC), has been demonstrated to be effective in improving heterologous gene expression (). Additionally, the presence of hidden stop codons (HSC) also prevents off-frame reading, thereby reducing resource wastage, and maximizing the HSC count might increase gene expression (). Thus, several design factors should be simultaneously considered for better synthetic gene design. To address such a need for incorporating multiple design parameters including CAI, ICU, CC and HSC in codon optimization, we have developed a new web server application, Codon Optimization OnLine (COOL), using a multi-objective framework, which has been presented in a recent work ().