Motivation: Reconstructing the topology of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) from time series of gene expression data remains an important open problem in computational systems biology. Existing GRN inference algorithms face one of two limitations: model-free methods are scalable but suffer from a lack of interpretability and cannot in general be used for out of sample predictions. On the other hand, model-based methods focus on identifying a dynamical model of the system. These are clearly interpretable and can be used for predictions; however, they rely on strong assumptions and are typically very demanding computationally. Results: Here, we propose a new hybrid approach for GRN inference, called Jump3, exploiting time series of expression data. Jump3 is based on a formal on/off model of gene expression but uses a non-parametric procedure based on decision trees (called jump trees) to reconstruct the GRN topology, allowing the inference of networks of hundreds of genes. We show the good performance of Jump3 on in silico and synthetic networks and applied the approach to identify regulatory interactions activated in the presence of interferon gamma. Availability and implementation: Our MATLAB implementation of Jump3 is available at
IntroductionComputational reconstruction of gene regulation from expression data is a central problem of systems biology (). Gene regulation is a complex process involving multiple control steps at the chromatin, transcriptional and post-transcriptional level (); given the difficulty in measuring and modelling all of these individual processes, the identification of a suitable abstraction and associated statistical inference methodology is vital. The gene regulatory network (GRN) abstraction aims at explaining the joint variability in the expression levels of a group of genes through a sparse pattern of interactions; elucidating the topology of GRNs can provide important insights in the fundamental biology of the system and suggest possible intervention points in biomedical applications.Inferring the topology of a GRN from gene expression timeseries data has been a subject of intense research in computational biology over the last 15 years (). Current approaches can be broadly divided into model-based and model-free approaches. Model-based methods start by formulating a computational model of the system, usually in the form of differential or difference equations and recast the network inference problem as learning the parameters of such a model. To achieve a sparse pattern of interactions, such methods usually employ sparsity-inducing priors in a Bayesian setting or regularization penalties in an optimization-based scenario. Model-based methods have many appealing qualities: the assumptions made are transparently stated and, most importantly, the generative perspective enables principled predictions of expression levels under perturbations. However, model-based methods are not free from limitations: they tend to be computationally intensive, particularly in a Bayesian setting, and their parametric nature usually implies very stringent assumptions about the dynamics (e.g. linear), which may be difficult to justify biologically. Model-free methods avoid the pitfalls of model-based methods by greedily optimizing information-theoretic measures of co-variation between pairs of genes (). Such methods typically have good scalability, enabling reconstructions of networks of hundreds of genes and have consistently achieved state-of-the-art reconstruction performance in comparative evaluations (). The lack of an underpinning model also enables great flexibility, as the interactions between genes are not constrained to follow a parametric functional representation. Such flexibility comes at a cost though: model-free methods, by their very nature, do not have clearly defined semantics in terms of dynamical systems and cannot be used for prediction in a straightforward way. Furthermore, incorporation of side information, which is natural in model-based methods, is generally challenging in model-free methods. In this article, we aim to bridge the gap between model-based and model-free methods by proposing a hybrid approach to the network inference problem, called Jump3. Our approach starts from a welldefined, biologically plausible model of gene expression, the on/off model of gene expression (), which we use to model the dynamics of individual nodes. Reconstruction of the edges is instead based on a non-parametric, tree-based method modelled on the state-of-the-art GENIE3 method (). Adapting the tree-based method to the probabilistic setting is a novel challenge in machine learning and involves devising a novel decision function for learning the tree. Here, we introduce the 'jump tree', which uses the marginal likelihood of the node's dynamical model as a decision function. This choice has several benefits: it embeds the tree-based learning procedure in the probabilistic model, effectively grounding it as a greedy solution to structure learning in a large latent-variable model. Furthermore, the use of the marginal likelihood means our method inherits the ease with which side information can be incorporated in probabilistic models. Our experiments with both synthetic and real data show that Jump3 has good scalability and achieve competitive or better results than state-of-the-art alternatives.
DiscussionElucidating the topology of GRNs is a fundamental step towards our understanding of how a cell or an organism can respond to its environment. Despite years of concerted efforts by the computational biology community, this task is still far from complete and a unified framework for GRN inference remains elusive. Here, we presented Jump3, a novel approach to GRN inference, which attempts to combine the interpretability of model-based methods with the scalability of greedy, model-free methods, thus bridging the gap between the two main classes of GRN inference approaches. Experiments on simulated and synthetic data show that Jump3 is always competitive and often outperforms state-of-the-art GRN inference procedures, while an experiment on a real dataset shows its potential for biologically meaningful hypothesis generation. It has good scalability with respect to the number of genes and keeps its good performance when inferring large networks. From a modelling point of view, results show that Jump3 yields good predictions of promoter states and that, despite its simplicity, the on/off model is flexible enough to allow good fits of the data. While we believe that Jump3 is a step in the right direction, we also acknowledge that the complexity of gene regulation will pose a strict limit to the potential of GRN inference from expression dataThe highest AUPR is shown in bold for each network.The highest AUPR is shown in bold for each network.The highest AUPR is shown in bold in each case.alone. A first limitation comes from the assumption that the messenger RNA level can be used as a proxy for the protein activity, which is often not correct (). A simple improvement of Jump3 would thus be the exploitation of protein data, which are becoming less rare gradually, to predict the target promoter states. Another important direction is the integration in GRN inference algorithms of complementary data, such as microRNA expression, chromatin, protein-protein interactions or microbiomes and some promising initial steps in this direction are being taken (e.g.). The probabilistic generative model underlying Jump3 would allow the incorporation of additional information in a natural way via a modification of the likelihood function, while the non-parametric tree-based approach would ensure the scalability of the whole procedure. Using the method on large networks with relatively few observations may incur co-linearity problems, i.e. genes that have very similar profiles leading to confounding factors in the inference. A simple fix to this would be to pre-process the data with some clustering algorithm; this would further increase scalability, at the cost of some interpretability. Ultimately, a major limitation for many studies in computational biology is the lack of systematic, large-scale gold standards on which to evaluate the models; this generalized fact reinforces the need for a tight coupling between experimental and theoretical research, and we hope that inference methods such as Jump3 could be useful in prioritizing experimental designs.