Motivation: ChIP-seq data are enriched in binding sites for the protein immunoprecipitated. Some sequences may also contain binding sites for a coregulator. Biologists are interested in knowing which coregulatory factor motifs may be present in the sequences bound by the protein ChIPed. Results: We present a finite mixture framework with an expectation– maximization algorithm that considers two motifs jointly and simultaneously determines which sequences contain both motifs, either one or neither of them. Tested on 10 simulated ChIP-seq datasets, our method performed better than repeated application of MEME in predicting sequences containing both motifs. When applied to a mouse liver Foxa2 ChIP-seq dataset involving ∼12 000 400-bp sequences, coMOTIF identified co-occurrence of Foxa2 with Hnf4a, Cebpa, E-box, Ap1/Maf or Sp1 motifs in ∼6–33% of these sequences. These motifs are either known as liver-specific transcription factors or have an important role in liver function. Availability: Freely available at http://www.niehs.nih.gov/research/ resources/software/comotif/.
INTRODUCTIONA ChIP-seq experiment profiles the genome-wide binding of one transcription factor. Because transcription factors may work together to regulate gene expression, biologists are interested in knowing which putative coregulatory factor motifs may also be present in the sequences/peaks that were bound by the protein immunoprecipitated. With the primary factor and one coregulatory factor, identifying which sequences contain both motifs, either one or neither of them should provide useful information about gene regulation. Over the years, many computational tools for motif discovery have been developed. Most of them employ local search techniques typically such as Gibbs sampling, expectationmaximization (EM) or related strategies. The Gibbs sample strategy, first described for sequence analysis byand refined by, has been implemented in many motif discovery tools such * To whom correspondence should be addressed. as AlignACE (), BioProspector (), Motif Sampler (), GLAM (), NestedMICA (), A-GLAM (), BayesMD (), GIMSAN (), info-gibbs () and HMS (). The EM algorithm, first applied to motif discovery by Lawrence and Reilly (1990), also has many implementations including the widely used MEME () as well as GreedyEM (), the discriminative PSSM approach (), fdrMotif () and GADEM (). The performance of some of these tools has been assessed (). Stormo (2010) recently reviewed motif discovery using EM and Gibbs sampling techniques. These motif discovery algorithms are univariate in that they identify one motif one at a time (although a tool may run its algorithm repeatedly and output several motifs from a single run after sequentially masking motifs already identified). Application of such univariate motif discovery tools that require sequential masking to the identification of both the primary and cofactors of immunoprecipitated proteins can be problematic especially if the two motifs are similar. The order in which the motifs are masked can have a major effect on the result. For example, a univariate approach would have trouble distinguishing a full site motif from its half site counterpart. Furthermore, a univariate approach would need to combine results for two individual motifs to obtain a composite picture of which motifs appear on which sequences. Methods that consider the joint distribution of multiple motifs in the sequences include Gibbs Recursive Sampler (), cisModule () and EMCMODULE (). In contrast to the univariate approaches, those methods simultaneously search for the binding sites for K different motifs, represented by K position weight matrices (PWMs), where K can be either predefined or unknown. Those methods aim to identify clusters of binding sites that are close to each other, e.g. in a 100-or 200-bp window. Such a cluster is often referred to as a cis-module. Multiple copies of the same motif are allowed to coexist in a cis-module. Those methods are well suited for promoter sequences of coexpressed genes on which multiple transcription factor binding sites tend to colocalize. They may not be ideal for sequences, as ChIP-seq data, that are expected to lack the well-structured cis-modules of promoter sequences. Existing tools are not specifically designed for simultaneously identifying the motifs for both the primary factor and a coregulatory factor in large-scale ChIP-seq data. Consequently, we developed a finite mixture framework not only to determine simultaneouslyPage: 2626 26252632