Motivation: The transformation of the embryo during development requires complex gene networks , cell signaling and gene-regulated cell behaviors (division, adhesion, polarization, apoptosis, contraction, extracellular matrix secretion, signal secretion and reception, etc.). There are several models of development implementing these phenomena, but none considers at the same time the very different bio-mechanical properties of epithelia, mesenchyme, extracellular matrix and their interactions. Results: Here, we present a new computational model and accompanying open-source software, EmbryoMaker, that allows the user to simulate custom developmental processes by designing custom gene networks capable of regulating cell signaling and all animal basic cell behaviors. We also include an editor to implement different initial conditions, mutations and experimental manipulations. We show the applicability of the model by simulating several complex examples of animal development. Availability and implementation: The source code can be downloaded from: http://www.biocenter. helsinki.fi/salazar/software.html.
IntroductionMulti-scale computational models help in making the complexity of development more amenable to the human mind. They may be conceived as summaries of what is known about the development of an organ or embryo part. Such summaries, however, should be built upon explicit mechanistic hypotheses about how development works in these systems. Computational models can then provide explicit quantitative predictions about how an embryo changes over time according to each specific mechanistic hypothesis. These quantitative predictions (e.g. quantitative morphology as the position of each cell in space and the levels of expression of different genes in space) can then be compared with experimental results to facilitate the rejection or provisional acceptance of a hypothesis (further experiments would be required for actual acceptance of an hypothesis). There is a long list of models of pattern formation and morphogenesis involving cellcell communication and biomechanics. Some of them simulate the development of different organs, such as teeth (), limb (), turtle shell's scutes (), to cite a few. In other cases, processes involving the whole embryo, such as gastrulation in the sea urchin, are reproduced). Others implement a framework of cell biomechanical interactions and gene regulation, including one or several cell behaviors, namely cell division, apoptosis and growth. Some early models already identified the relevance of the combination of cell signaling and morphogenetic movements by making the local curvature of epithelial to depend on morphogen concentrations (). The cellular Potts model (CPM) () defines a regular lattice in which cells occupy several contiguous lattice positions. Cells may extend to further lattice positions or retract from them by minimizing a Hamiltonian energy function based on cell adhesion, volume conservation and other mechanical properties. The CPM is especially suitable for developmental systems in which cells change their neighbors and shape in rather dynamic ways (such as in cell sorting and migration by chemotaxis and haptotaxis). However, tissues in which forces can be transmitted along a specific direction at long distances, such as in epithelia, may not be so easily grasped by the CPM. There are several models based on CPM that implement several cell behaviors such as cell division, cell migration (by chemotaxis), apoptosis and cellcell signaling (). In the vertex model (), cells are defined by the contact surfaces with other cells or the media. Each cell is a polygon [or polyhedron in the three-dimensional (3D) case] defined by a set of vertices and edges (and faces in the 3D case). Forces are calculated based on overdamped motion equations or a Monte Carlo algorithm. This model is suited to simulate dynamics of densely packed tissues like epithelia but is not very well suited to simulate processes involving mesenchymal tissues or processes in which cells move freely in the extracellular space and seldom form tightly packed cell condensates. In some cases, cell signaling and gene regulatory networks have been implemented as well (). The viscoelastic model (or IBCell model) () combines an off-grid representation of cells as elastic bodies with a lattice Boltzmann method to simulate intra and intercellular fluids. Thus, each cell is represented by a set of points forming an elastic body in a continuous two-dimensional space, but chemical substance concentration is calculated on a regular grid in discrete space. Then the position of each cell part on this grid has to be interpolated every time to correctly calculate how fluid fluxes in the grid affect cell shape. This implementation and level of detail make the model computationally very costly and thus precludes, according to the authors (), its extension to 3D problems. Several cell behaviors have been implemented: cell proliferation (), cell growth and cellcell signaling (). The subcellular element model (SEM) (;) is an off-latice model in which cells are made of groups of point elements that interact mechanically based on a potential equation. Motion is computed with Langevin overdamped dynamics. In some cases, cells are modeled with a single subcellular element, thus approximating Drasdo's spheroid model (). The original model does not implement any cell behaviors apart from cellcell adhesion, but in a more recent implementation of the model (), cell division, polarization, cell signaling, migration and some basic gene networks are implemented. Here, we present a new general multi-scale model of development, the EmbryoMaker, that differs from previous models in a fundamental way: the model recognizes that the bio-mechanical properties of epithelia, extracellular matrix (ECM) and mesenchyme are crucial to correctly understand many processes in early animal development and in organogenesis. Other models are adequate for either mesenchymal cells or flat epithelia but not for both or for their interaction as it occurs in development (Biggs and Mikkola 2014). The EmbryoMaker is based on the SEM for mesenchymal cells but not for the epithelia and for the non-mechanical interactions. Epithelial cells are instead assumed to be made of cylindrical subcellular elements rather than spheres as cells in the SEM. In addition, epithelial-specific rules are used to capture how epithelia interact with mesenchyme and ECM and, in general, how they behave in development. In addition, our model implements the most complete set of basic cell behaviors used by cells in animal development (cell growth and division, cell death, cell migration, polarization, ECM secretion, cellcell adhesion, cellcell signaling and epithelial to mesenchymal transition). This is done by a unified set of rules acting on the cells' subcellular elements. EmbryoMaker includes also a detailed implementation of cell's molecular mechanisms involved in regulation and cellcell communication. This includes transcriptional and posttranscriptional gene networks and signaling by the diffusion of gene products in the extra-cellular space and the binding to their specific receptors. A fundamental aspect of the model is that the gene products present in each subcellular element can regulate its mechanical properties and activate or repress specific cell behaviors. This allows an explicit multi-scale coupling between microscale regulatory molecular processes and macroscale mechanical properties and cell behaviors.
DiscussionOur model differs from previous ones in implementing all the cell behaviors known in animal cells. In addition, it explicitly implements the molecular quantitative regulation of all cell mechanical properties and cell behaviors. Ours differs from previous models in explicitly considering the different mechanical properties of epithelial and mesenchymal cells and ECM and their interactions.