Motivation: Large-scale evolutionary events such as genomic rearrange.ments and segmental duplications form an important part of the evolution of genomes and are widely studied from both biological and computational perspectives. A basic computational problem is to infer these events in the evolutionary history for given modern genomes, a task for which many algorithms have been proposed under various constraints. Algorithms that can handle both rearrangements and content-modifying events such as duplications and losses remain few and limited in their applicability. Results: We study the comparison of two genomes under a model including general rearrangements (through double-cut-and-join) and segmental duplications. We formulate the comparison as an optimization problem and describe an exact algorithm to solve it by using an integer linear program. We also devise a sufficient condition and an efficient algorithm to identify optimal substruc-tures, which can simplify the problem while preserving optimality. Using the optimal substructures with the integer linear program (ILP) formulation yields a practical and exact algorithm to solve the problem. We then apply our algorithm to assign in-paralogs and orthologs (a necessary step in handling duplications) and compare its performance with that of the state-of-the-art method MSOAR, using both simulations and real data. On simulated datasets, our method outperforms MSOAR by a significant margin, and on five well-annotated species, MSOAR achieves high accuracy , yet our method performs slightly better on each of the 10 pairwise comparisons. Availability and implementation:
IntroductionIn addition to the point mutations (single base-pair substitutions, insertions and deletions), in the course of evolution, genomes also undergo many large-scale events, which are usually divided into two categories, rearrangements and content-modifying events. Genome rearrangements include inversions, transpositions, circularizations and linearizations, all of which act on a single chromosome, and translocations, chromosomal fusions and fissions, which act on two chromosomes. Rearrangements can shuffle the order and switch the transcriptional orientations of the genes on chromosomes but cannot change the number of gene copies. On the other hand, the content-modifying events, which include segmental duplications, tandem duplications, gene insertions and losses, can affect the copy number of the genes. These two types of large-scale events are ubiquitous in the tree of life and have been shown playing a very important role in the variations of the individual traits. The molecular mechanisms behind them, although have been widely studied, are still very diversefor a review]. One basic task of comparative genomics is to infer the events took place in the evolutionary history for the extant species. Many combinatorial optimization problems aiming to compute the most parsimonious number of events between two given genomes (i.e. the edit distance) are formulated, and many algorithms, heuristics or exact ones, are proposed for them. When only rearrangement events are considered,gave the first polynomial-time algorithm to compute the inversion distance, which was later improved to linear time ().proposed a universal operation, called double-cut-andjoin (DCJ), which can unite most of the rearrangement events. Under the DCJ model, the edit distance can also be computed in linear time, but in a more simple and elegant way (). Because of its simplicity, DCJ model has formed the basis for the following algorithmic research on rearrangements (). All of the above efficient algorithms assume that genomes do not contain duplicated genes. In the presence of duplicated genes, most V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.