Motivation: Networks to predict protein pharmacology can be created using ligand similarity or using known bioassay response profiles of ligands. Recent publications indicate that similarity methods can be highly accurate, but it has been unclear how similarity methods compare to methods that use bioassay response data directly. Results: We created protein networks based on ligand similarity (Similarity Ensemble Approach or SEA) and ligand bioassay response-data (BARD) using 155 Pfizer internal BioPrint assays. Both SEA and BARD successfully cluster together proteins with known relationships, and predict some non-obvious relationships. Although the approaches assess target relations from different perspectives, their networks overlap considerably (40% overlap of the top 2% of correlated edges). They can thus be considered as comparable methods, with a distinct advantage of the similarity methods that they only require simple computations (similarity of compound) as opposed to extensive experimental data.
INTRODUCTIONThe study of the impact of drugs and chemical compounds across multiple protein targets (polypharmacology) is of increasing importance, for many reasons including finding new therapeutic indications for known drugs, understanding the causes of drug side effects, profiling off-target interactions, and understanding the role of proteins and their associated genes using chemical compounds as probes. This latter application is of particular interest, as protein targets can share the same natural ligand but be classified completely differently from a protein function perspective: for example, the targets of opioid methadone are -opioid receptor and N-methyl-d-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor, which belong to two different types of target class (GPCR and Ion Channel). Detection of this relationship between protein targets is extremely difficult with knowledge of the targets alone. In general, protein sequence similarity is not well correlated with the chemical similarity of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. known ligand sets (). Relating proteins using ligand similarity can thus be a complementary tool to study biological function, and can be incorporated into wider 'network pharmacology' systems (). Ligand-based similarity of two protein targets can be calculated either by comparing the activity profiles of sets of ligands against a reference set of ligands for both two targets (activity similarity) or by comparing the chemical structure similarities of the two sets of ligands (chemical similarity).presented the first dendrogram of kinases based entirely on small molecule selectivity data and proposed a similarity measure, SARsim, using the difference of log IC 50 values.built target target similarity networks using the polypharmacology interaction strength, the fraction of compounds tested against two proteins that have comparable binding affinity. A similar approach was applied in PubChem BioAssay networks linking two assays if they share at least one active compound (). Metz andreviewed a number of recent activity similarity methods and their use at Abbott Laboratories.used chemical similarity between ligand sets (Similarity Ensemble Approach or SEA) to study the pharmacological relations and found many unexpected relationships, some of which were later proved experimentally. Bender's group used substructure mining to determine the similarity between groups of ligands to classify GPCRs (van der). The studies based on the activity similarity approach are limited by the lack of large-scale SAR data (for many compounds against many targets) and thus have only focused on particular classes of targets such as kinases, and are also limited in that they do not in any way take into account chemical similarity between the ligands. Conversely, the similarity-based approaches such as SEA do not take account of the degrees of chemical protein interaction. The SEA method has been subject to limited experimental validation (which showed positive results) but has not been evaluated against a wide range of targets. In this article, we carried out an evaluation using a large experimental set at Pfizer (called BioAssay Response Data or BARD) that is extracted from Pfizer BioPrint collections (). BARD contains 155 biological assays with at least 10 active compounds, and 5672 unique compounds along with their binding affinities. Using a variety of similarity and statistical association methods, we created BARD Networks from this data to project the known target relationships, and then compared this with the network derived from SEA.
DISCUSSIONBARD and SEA assess target relations using ligand data but from two perspectives. BARD measures relationship between two proteins based on correlations of the proteins' profiles of compounds that are known to be active against them; SEA assumes if the active compounds between two proteins have certain structural similarity, the two proteins would share similar pharmacology. These approaches are clearly different, but the approaches share a distinct correlation of their results. The network from BARD/Spearman has overall nearly 40% overlap with that from SEA. Clearly though each method highlights relationships not found by the other, so they can be