Biological network analysis can be enhanced by examining the connections between nodes and the rest of the network. For this purpose we have developed GraphletCounter, an open-source software tool for computing graphlet degree signatures that can operate on its own or as a plug-in to the network analysis environment Cytoscape. A unique characteristic of GraphletCounter is its ability to compute the graphlet signatures of network motifs, which can be specified by files generated by the motif-finding tool mfinder. GraphletCounter displays graphlet signatures for visual inspection within Cytoscape, and can output graphlet data for integration with larger workflows. Availability and implementation: GraphletCounter is implemented in Java. It can be downloaded from the Cytoscape plugin repository, and is also available at http://sonmezsysbio.org/software/
INTRODUCTIONAdvances in systems biology, and in particular the identification and analysis of network motifs (), have provided many insights into the structure and function of complex biological networks. Motif analysis has allowed researchers to identify common, recurring groupings of nodes and connections, and study of the motifs identified has explained the function of motifs as components of a network; for example, a feed-forward loop (FFL) acts as a sign-sensitive delay element (). However, it would also be helpful to be able to see how the motif components are connected to the rest of the network. If an FFL has a different pattern of connections to the rest of the network than would be expected by chance, study of these connections might provide further insight into the functional role of the motif and how it is integrated into the architecture of the network. Further, different types of biological networks may have different motif connection patterns, yielding information about their higher level architectures. Prulj (2007) recently introduced graphlets as a tool for examining local structures within large networks. Graphlets are small, induced subgraphs of a network graph. By counting the number of times that a node in a network participates in each possible type of graphlet composed of up to some fixed number of nodes, one can create a vector for that node describing its local connections * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to the rest of the network, called a graphlet signature. In addition to computing the number of graphlets that a node belongs to, one can count the number of times it appears in a topologically distinct position in each graphlet, known as an automorphism orbit. These counts can be combined across nodes into a measure that describes the entire network so that it can be compared to other networks or to null models (). Graphlet signatures can be used to predict characteristics of the biological entity represented by the node via clustering or statistical inference algorithms; for example, MilenkovicMilenkovic and Prulj (2008) used them to predict the function of uncharacterized nodes in proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks. They have also been used to identify cancer genes (). GraphCrunch () is a software package that uses graphlets to compare networks to random networks from various null models, and is very useful for network comparison. We believe that graphlets have great potential as a tool for analyzing biological networks, and could be used to provide insight into the ways in which motifs are integrated into the higher level structures of networks. In addition, we think graphlet data could be useful in the context of exploratory network visualization environments. To this end, we have developed GraphletCounter, a tool for collecting graphlet signatures of nodes and motifs in biological networks. In addition to running as a stand-alone utility, GraphletCounter runs as a plugin for the Cytoscape () network visualization system, allowing the exploration of graphlet signature data in a visual environment. The software is open source and freely available.