Motivation: It has been suggested that presumably distinct classes of genomic regulatory elements may actually share common sets of features and mechanisms. However, there has been no genome-wide assessment of the prevalence of this phenomenon. Results: To evaluate this possibility, we performed a bioinformatic screen for the existence of compound regulatory elements in the human genome. We identified numerous such colocated boundary and enhancer elements from human CD4 þ T cells. We report evidence that such compound regulatory elements possess unique chromatin features and facilitate cell type-specific functions related to inflammation and immune response in CD4
INTRODUCTIONSeveral types of cis-regulatory elements have been identified and classified. They include well-defined elements such as transcriptional promoters (), enhancers (), boundary elements () and enhancerblocking insulators (). They also include the less discernable elements like silencers (), promoter-tethering elements () and locus control regions (). Among all cis-regulatory elements, enhancers exhibit the highest flexibility and modularity (). Mechanistically, enhancers recruit transcription factors, which can loop over long genomic distances to reach promoters, thereby giving enhancers the ability to influence the expression of distal genes. This long-range capacity of enhancers can, however, be inhibited by boundary elements, particularly enhancerblocking insulators (). This boundary element insulating activity protects genes in domains located on the active sides of boundaries against activating or repressive regulatory effects of both flanking and distant domains. In this way, enhancer-blocking insulators play a critical role in facilitating the specificity of interactions between enhancers and genes located in the same chromosomal domains (). As such, boundaries and enhancers have hitherto been considered to be functionally antagonistic, and thus to occupy distinct and separate loci in the genome. To date no genomic loci have been reported to simultaneously encode the functional capacities of both enhancers and boundaries on a genome-wide scale. Nevertheless, it has previously been suggested that boundaries and enhancers might actually use a common set of regulatory features and strategies, and more generally, that many of the accepted distinctions between classes of regulatory elements may be overstated (). Considering this possibility, together with the coordinated regulatory activities of boundaries and enhancers, we sought to evaluate whether there actually exist colocated compound boundary-enhancer loci in the human genome. We found that numerous compound boundary-enhancer loci do in fact exist in the human genome, and have epigenetic and regulatory features that are distinct from those seen for individual regulatory elements of either class.