Motivation: Quantitative determination of metabolic fluxes in single tissue biopsies is difficult. We report a novel analysis approach and software package for in vivo flux quantification using stable isotope labeling. Results: We developed a protocol based on brief, timed infusion of 13 C isotope-enriched substrates for the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle followed by quick freezing of tissue biopsies. NMR measurements of tissue extracts were used for flux estimation based on a computational model of carbon transitions between TCA cycle metabolites and related amino acids. To this end, we developed a computational framework in which metabolic systems can be flexibly assembled, simulated and analyzed. Flux parameters were quantified from NMR multiplets by a partial grid search followed by repeated Nelder–Mead optimizations implemented on a computer grid. We implemented a model of the TCA cycle and showed by extensive simulations that the timed infusion protocol reliably quantitates multiple fluxes. Experimental validation of the method was done in vivo on hearts of anesthetized pigs under two different conditions: basal state (n = 7) and cardiac stress caused by infusion of dobutamine (n = 7). About nine tissue samples (40–200 mg dry-weight) were taken per heart. TCA cycle flux was 6.11 ± 0.28 (SEM) µmol/min·gdw at baseline versus 9.29 ± 1.03 µmol/min·gdw for dobutamine stress. Oxygen consumption calculated from the TCA cycle flux and from gold standard blood gas-based measurements were close, correlating with r = 0.88 (P  10 −4). Spatial heterogeneity in metabolic fluxes is detectable amongst the small samples. We propose that our novel isotope snapshot methodology is suitable for flux measurements in biopsies in vivo. Availability: Non-profit organizations will, upon request, be granted a non-exclusive license to use the software for internal research and teaching purposes at no charge. A web interface for using the software on our computer grid is available under
INTRODUCTIONMetabolic fluxes reflect the function and dynamics of cells in the body. However, measuring metabolic fluxes in small tissue samples in animals in vivo is very difficult and needs (i) a special experimental strategy and (ii) sophisticated computational analysis. Measurement of metabolic fluxes in whole organs or large tissue volumes was possible by measuring time series of 13 C incorporation in intermediary metabolites with in vivo NMR spectroscopy (). van) developed a strategy to infuse substrates enriched with stable isotopes for several minutes and arrest metabolism before a steady state of label incorporation is attained. Metabolic fluxes are then quantitated by computational analysis from NMR measurements on a single tissue sample collected at a single time point. Given the usually quite heterogeneous metabolism of tissue, this approach overcomes the difficulty that a time series of metabolite levels cannot be obtained from one small biopsy in tissue. However, an advanced computational analysis is key to successfully perform these metabolic flux measurements in vivo and is presented here. It was desirable to optimize the original computational analysis strategy and software to quantitate fluxes from biopsies. This analysis was originally built on a package optimized for indicatordilution studies in a PET setting (van). The underlying models were built on early pre-steady-state labeling work (). Meanwhile, further non-steady-state approaches have been developed with applications in biotechnology (). Here, we present a new analysis approach optimized for the single time point analysis applicable to biopsies. This approach is embedded in a software package that makes it possible to build carbon transition models for arbitrary metabolic pathways without the need to apply a computer programming language. Metabolic fluxes can be measured by infusion of substrates labeled with radioactive or stable isotopes. Usually the time course of incorporation of label is followed, for instance, by in vivo NMR spectroscopy, or label is infused sufficiently long that a stable steady state is reached. In the latter case relative fluxes can be determined, and if uptake from outside the cells can be measured, absolute fluxes can be derived. Under in vitro conditions, uptake of a substrate can often easily be measured. For instance, the decrease of glucose in cell culture medium gives its uptake in the cells. However, it is difficult to measure uptake of substrate in small regions in the body from the blood. This would require measurement of metabolite
DISCUSSIONWe developed and tested analysis methods and software for quantitation of metabolic fluxes by in silico simulation of the LIPSSS protocol and validated the approach in vivo in animal LIPSSS experiments. LIPSSS experiments entail that stable isotope-enriched metabolic substrates are given to the biological system and that the level of incorporation of the label in a brief, well-defined period of time allows determining the speed of metabolic turnover by computational analysis. As revealed by simulation (), the parameter estimates for J tca and P dil show low standard errors and were not sensitive to values of the parameters J exc , T trans and P anap. This means that the variations in J exc , T trans and P anap have only small effects on the estimation of J tca and P dil. Therefore, we chose to restrict J exc , T trans and P anap by prior knowledge encoded in Bayesian priors to improve the estimation of J tca and P dil. Furthermore, the in vivo experiments show that J tca , J exc and P dil reveal the expected physiological differences between the control and the dobutamine-stressed hearts. Individual differences between the pigs were expected and indeed observed (). Oxygen consumption calculated from model parameters corresponds with oxygen consumption measured from blood gas and are close to the line of identity. It is expected that oxygen consumption determined from blood gas is higher than oxygen consumption calculated from the TCA cycle measured with the LIPSSS protocol. The blood gas uptake includes other oxygen consuming reactions, e.g. catalyzed by oxygenases or reactive oxygen species formation in addition to the oxygen consumption linked to the TCA cycle. Oxygen consumption calculated using LIPSSS data reflects only the reaction with reducing equivalents produced in the TCA cycle flux. This is in accordance with the findings of Challoner (1968). Hence, the expected oxygen consumption calculated using LIPSSS data is lower than uptake of oxygen from the blood. Measurements of other oxygen consuming reactions should be added to TCA cycle-based calculations if one wants to precisely predict oxygen uptake from the blood. The differences in metabolism between hearts of the control and dobutamine group are reflected by the higher average oxygen consumption in the dobutamine group (high workload) compared with the control group. We have preliminary evidence that in future versions of the software package (FluxEs 2.0) it is possible to implement (i) on the fly C code generation that makes simulations 15 times faster, (ii) determination of optimal start values for parameter optimization using a particle swarm algorithm (), (iii) simulation of NMR multiplet time series for multiple metabolites, (iv) parameter optimization using NMR multiplet time series of multiple metabolites, and (v) multiple nonlinear optimization routines. In conclusion, FluxEs is a framework designed for parameter estimation in metabolic models by fitting simulated NMR multiplets against multiplets measured during LIPSSS experiments. FluxEs can flexibly handle arbitrary metabolic pathways that are not in isotopic steady state and will work on most computer operating systems. FluxEs was validated on NMR measurements from multiple tissue biopsies from pig hearts. The LIPSSS protocol, based on taking biopsies at a single time point, potentially has much higher spatial and biochemical resolution than in vivo NMR experiments. We anticipate that the LIPSSS approach in combination with the easy to use computer package FluxEs will prove applicable to many metabolic pathways and biological systems, such as central metabolism in cancer biopsies as well as neurotransmitter and central metabolism in neural cell cultures and animal studies.