Motivation: The mammalian central nervous system (CNS) generates high-level behavior and cognitive functions. Elucidating the anatomical and genetic organizations in the CNS is a key step toward understanding the functional brain circuitry. The CNS contains an enormous number of cell types, each with unique gene expression patterns. Therefore, it is of central importance to capture the spatial expression patterns in the brain. Currently, genome-wide atlas of spatial expression patterns in the mouse brain has been made available, and the data are in the form of aligned 3D data arrays. The sheer volume and complexity of these data pose significant challenges for efficient computational analysis. Results: We employ data reduction and network modeling techniques to explore the anatomical and genetic organizations in the mouse brain. First, to reduce the volume of data, we propose to apply tensor factorization techniques to reduce the data volumes. This tensor formulation treats the stack of 3D volumes as a 4D data array, thereby preserving the mouse brain geometry. We then model the anatomical and genetic organizations as graphical models. To improve the robustness and efficiency of network modeling, we employ stable model selection and efficient sparsity-regularized formulation. Results on network modeling show that our efforts recover known interactions and predicts novel putative correlations. Availability: The complete results are available at the project website
INTRODUCTIONThe mammalian central nervous system (CNS) generates high-level control functions, and knowledge on the anatomical and genetic organizations in this system can elucidate the functional brain circuitry. The enormous complexity of this system is reflected in the large number of cell types, each with unique gene expression patterns. Therefore, it is of central importance to capture the anatomical localization of gene expressions in the brain. Recent advances in bioimaging technologies, such as the high-throughput in situ hybridization (ISH) technique, have made it possible to capture the spatial expression patterns in the adult mouse brain (). Consequently, genomic-scale expression atlases in the form of digital images have been produced at increasing speed and resolution. The marriage of image processing tools and advanced computational methods opens the door for unraveling the functional brain circuitry and the generation of high-level cognitive functions on top of it. The Allen Brain Atlas (ABA) () contains 3D atlas of gene expression in the adult mouse brain and is one of the most comprehensive datasets for spatial expression patterns in the mammalian CNS. It provides cellular resolution 3D expression patterns in the male, 56-day-old C57BL mouse brain. In this atlas, genome-wide coverage is available in sagitally oriented sections. In addition, coronal sections at a more refined scale are available for a set of about 4000 genes showing restricted expression patterns. The image data are generated by in situ hybridization using genespecific probes, followed by slide scanning, 3D image registration to the Allen Reference Atlas (ARA) () and expression segmentation (). This results in a set of spatially aligned 3D volumes of size 674158, one for each gene, that document the spatial expression patterns of genes in the mouse brain. Efficient and effective analysis of these highthroughput data can shed light on the global function of mammalian CNS (). On the other hand, the sheer volume and complexity of these data pose significant challenges for efficient computational analysis. Hence, computational understanding of these data is limited to unsupervised techniques, which cluster the brain regions into co-expressed groups (). In this article, we employ advanced computational techniques to model the anatomical and genetic organizations in the mouse brain as networks. First, to reduce the size of data and accelerate efficient analysis and storage, we propose to apply tensor factorization techniques to reduce the data volumes (). This tensor formulation treats the stack of 3D volumes as a 4D data array, thereby preserving the mouse brain geometry. Based on the reduced data, we model the anatomical and genetic organizations as graphical models in which each vertex represents a spatial location or a gene, and the edges between vertices encode the correlations between locations and genes (). To improve the efficiency of network modeling, we employ an approximate formulation for Gaussian graphical modeling, which involves a series of sparsity regularized regression problems (). The efficiency of this approximate formulation enables us to employ a robust estimation technique known as stability selection (), which estimate and combine multiple models based on resampling. We apply the data reduction and network modeling techniques to learn the anatomical and genetic networks underlying the mouse