Motivation: Enzymes are complex catalytic machines, which perform sequences of elementary chemical transformations resulting in biochemical function. The building blocks of enzymes, elementary functional loops (EFLs), possess distinct functional signatures and provide catalytic and binding amino acids to the enzymes active sites. The goal of this work is to obtain primordial prototypes of EFLs that existed before the formation of enzymatic domains and served as their building blocks. Results: We developed a computational strategy for reconstructing ancient prototypes of EFLs based on the comparison of sequence segments on the proteomic scale, which goes beyond detection of conserved functional motifs in homologous proteins. We illustrate the procedure by a CxxC-containing prototype with a very basic and ancient elementary function of metal/metal-containing cofactor binding and redox activity. Acquiring the prototypes of EFLs is necessary for revealing how the original set of protein folds with enzymatic functions emerged in predomain evolution.
INTRODUCTIONCurrent evolution of proteins takes place via mutation and recombination of protein domains, leading to both divergence and convergence. It is rather obvious, however, that evolution of protein structure and function did not start from full protein folds (), and the latter has to have been formed in a predomain stage of evolution. Therefore, one of the most important tasks in studies of the evolution of protein function is to find how the first set of folds with the most basic biochemical functions was formed and to determine the set of ancient functional peptides that gave rise to the above repertoire of folds (). Previous studies have demonstrated that closed loops of 2530 amino acid residues are universal building blocks of protein folds (). According to the same studies, the closed loops * To whom correspondence should be addressed. emerged from ring-like peptides, primitive proteins or proteinlike molecules in prebiotic evolution, and served as building blocks of the first protein folds. Similarly to folds that are built from closed loops as structural units, the enzymatic functions can also be decomposed into combinations of elementary units of protein function. The latter are closed loops that possess one or a few functional residues and bring them to the active site (), which we call Elementary Functional Loops (EFLs;). The functional signatures of some EFLs are shared between (super)families of proteins with different biochemical functions and even between different folds. Their prototypes presumably underwent recombination at the predomain stage of protein evolution. Recently, we have developed a computational procedure for finding sequence profiles of widely spread EFLs with characteristic functional signatures (). In this procedure, we obtained sequence profiles from complete proteomes. Many of the profiles correspond to their originating protein families [such as those described in PFAM () or CDD (and represent family-specific functional signatures [as in Prosite, (, while others reveal connections between different folds and functions. Here, we would like to proceed further and find a way to obtain ancient prototypes of EFLs. Therefore, we developed a procedure for reconstructing prototypes, which served as basic units of the first folds/domains with enzymatic functions. The procedure for obtaining prototypes is very different to that of ancestor reconstruction. The latter typically requires a phylogenetic tree built from the alignment of related (super)family members and an evolutionary model with particular mutation and amino acid substitution rates (). Here, on the contrary, we work with short sequence fragments belonging to phylogenetically unrelated proteins from remote (super)families, which presumably were involved in the design of the first enzymes in predomain evolution (). We illustrate the computational strategy that we have developed by reconstructing an ancient prototype with redox-active/metalbinding elementary function. The most generic signature of this prototype reads Cys-Xaa-Xaa-Cys (-CxxC-for brevity). We start with a minimal set of non-redundant profiles from which we reconstruct the prototype and its derivatives. Using these profiles in a profile-sequence search over complete proteomes and the protein databank, we detect a diversity of EFLs with metal/metal-containing cofactor binding and redox activity in different folds and show that they take part in different biochemical functions.Page: 2369 23682375