Motivation: With the booming of interactome studies, a lot of interactions can be measured in a high throughput way and large scale datasets are available. It is becoming apparent that many different types of interactions can be potential drug targets. Compared with inhibition of a single protein , inhibition of protein–protein interaction (PPI) is promising to improve the specificity with fewer adverse side-effects. Also it greatly broadens the drug target search space, which makes the drug target discovery difficult. Computational methods are highly desired to efficiently provide candidates for further experiments and hold the promise to greatly accelerate the discovery of novel drug targets. Results: Here, we propose a machine learning method to predict PPI targets in a genomic-wide scale. Specifically, we develop a computational method, named as PrePPItar, to Predict PPIs as drug targets by uncovering the potential associations between drugs and PPIs. First, we survey the databases and manually construct a gold-standard positive dataset for drug and PPI interactions. This effort leads to a dataset with 227 associations among 63 PPIs and 113 FDA-approved drugs and allows us to build models to learn the association rules from the data. Second, we characterize drugs by profiling in chemical structure, drug ATC-code annotation, and side-effect space and represent PPI similarity by a symmetrical S-kernel based on protein amino acid sequence. Then the drugs and PPIs are correlated by Kronecker product kernel. Finally, a support vector machine (SVM), is trained to predict novel associations between drugs and PPIs. We validate our PrePPItar method on the well-established gold-standard dataset by cross-validation. We find that all chemical structure, drug ATC-code, and side-effect information are predictive for PPI target. Moreover, we can increase the PPI target prediction coverage by integrating multiple data sources. Follow-up database search and pathway analysis indicate that our new predictions are worthy of future experimental validation. Conclusion: In conclusion, PrePPItar can serve as a useful tool for PPI target discovery and provides a general heterogeneous data integrative framework.
IntroductionSystems biology emphasizes to understand the complex biological systems from interactions beyond the single molecules. This paradigm shift pushes the generations of large sets of interactions called interactome. One typical example is to measure proteinprotein interaction by yeast-two-hybrid and mass spectrometry. Protein protein interactions (PPIs) are building blocks for the majority of biological processes in the living cell. Beyond the single protein, they are natural to serves as the basic elements to be perturbed by drugs in the treatment, cure, prevention, or diagnosis of disease. Indeed, targeting PPIs with small molecular inhibitors is of increasing interests both in academia as well as in the pharmaceutical industry (). Many different types of interactions can be inhibited using drug-like small molecules (). Searching potential drug PPI targets can serve both therapeutic purpose and useful chemical tool for basic science (). Compared with inhibition of a single protein, inhibition of PPIs is promising to broaden the drug target search space. Moreover, drugs targeting such interactions are more specific and likely to act with fewer side-effects than conventional medication influencing whole cell functions (). However, it's challenging to find PPI target by wet experiment since it suffers from the dynamics of PPIs and the particular problem of more exposed and less defined binding sites (). Computational methods are then highly desired to provide candidates for further experimental verification and then accelerate the mapping of PPI targets on a large scale. The initial challenge is the discovery of specific PPIs and in turn identification of those molecules that are 'druggable' (). To address this issue, computational techniques were developed to identify small molecules as PPI inhibitors through a rationalization of the PPI inhibitor chemical space () and the design of PPI-focused compound libraries (), which deposited the structures of PPIs as protein complexes and their ligands. Following the identification of a suitable PPI, the next step involves study of the binding interface and ligand design. Within a binding interface, only a small number of highly conserved amino acid residues: 'hot spots', are crucial for the interaction. Thus the key problem in PPI inhibitors discovery becomes looking for the location of 'hot spots' from large surface area of the PPI interface. Previous work mainly focused on fragment-based methods, which attempted to discover the compounds that are druggable and ligandable by matching three-dimensional structure of molecules with the surface area of PPI interface (). Structure information is required in fragment-based methods, however, only a small fraction of proteins have well-established structures, thus this class of methods is restricted in small-scale. With the rapid development of high-throughput experimental methodologies, genome-wide PPIs in some model organisms, including Escherichia coli (), Helicobacter pylori (), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (), Caenorhabditis elegans (), Drosophila melanogaster (), and Homo sapiens (), have been established. Meanwhile, some curated databases deposit high quality drug targets data, including Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG), Biomolecular Relations in Information Transmission and Expression (BRITE) (), BRENDA (), SuperTarget (), and DrugBank (). These valuable information sources together provide a great opportunity to understand the mechanism of PPI targets from the viewpoint of interactome. That is, drug-PPI associations could be constructed based on genome-wide PPIs and high quality drug targets data. Most importantly, the understandable rules for drug-PPI associations can be learned by a statistical predictor based on these associations. Here, we develop a machine learning framework to Predict PPIs targets (PrePPItar) by dissecting the drug-PPI associations in a largescale manner. We observed that the current available data sources describe drug's biological function in living cell from different levels and different aspects. For example, drug's chemical structure provides information by the 'structure determines function' paradigm. ATC-code annotation provides the therapeutic effect at molecular level, and side-effect hints the unwanted effect at phenotype level. One straightforward assumption is that drugs similar in one or more data source metrics will interact with similar PPIs. We demonstrate that drugs with similar chemical structures, ATC-codes, or sideeffects indeed associate with similar PPIs. Then we propose the idea to integrate heterogeneous chemical structure, ATC-code, and sideeffect information sources. Specifically, drug and PPI are first characterized by their similarity-based profiles, and a kernel function is then defined to correlate them. Finally, the potential drug-PPI associations are inferred by training a machine learning model, i.e. support vector machines (SVM), which is motivated by statistical learning theory () and has been successful on many different classification problems in bioinformatics (). PrePPItar overcomes the main difficulty to integrate these data sources from structure, ATC classification, and side-effect level, which are highly heterogenous. To make the learning feasible and validate PrePPItar by cross validation, we construct a well-established dataset from scratch. In total, 227 associations among 63 PPIs and 113 FDA-approved drugs are collected from HPRD () and DrugBank (). We find that all chemical structure, ATC-code annotation, and side-effect information are predictive in different ways. Moreover, drug-PPI associations can be uncovered by combination of these three properties. In addition, database search and pathway analysis indicate that our new predictions are worthy of future experimental validation. Compared with single protein target prediction, PPI target prediction can discover some dissimilar targets, that is, it is promising to broaden the drug target search space.