Motivation: Underrepresentation of racial groups represents an important challenge and major gap in phenomics research. Most of the current human phenomics research is based primarily on European populations; hence it is an important challenge to expand it to consider other population groups. One approach is to utilize data from EMR databases that contain patient data from diverse demographics and ancestries. The implications of this racial underrepresentation of data can be profound regarding effects on the healthcare delivery and actionability. To the best of our knowledge , our work is the first attempt to perform comparative, population-scale analyses of disease networks across three different populations, namely Caucasian (EA), African American (AA) and Hispanic/Latino (HL). Results: We compared susceptibility profiles and temporal connectivity patterns for 1988 diseases and 37 282 disease pairs represented in a clinical population of 1 025 573 patients. Accordingly, we revealed appreciable differences in disease susceptibility, temporal patterns, network structure and underlying disease connections between EA, AA and HL populations. We found 2158 significantly comorbid diseases for the EA cohort, 3265 for AA and 672 for HL. We further outlined key disease pair associations unique to each population as well as categorical enrichments of these pairs. Finally, we identified 51 key hub diseases that are the focal points in the race-centric networks and of particular clinical importance. Incorporating race-specific disease comorbidity patterns will produce a more accurate and complete picture of the disease landscape overall and could support more precise understanding of disease relationships and patient management towards improved clinical outcomes. Contacts:
IntroductionDesign, comparison and analytics of disease networks can inform epidemiology and disease biology (). Comparative network analyses and network inference have helped in understanding the relative risk of various diseases and characterize their shared disease architectures (). Global disease network analyses utilizing biological databases and patient data from electronic medical records(EMR) have emerged as a powerful modality for understanding the complexity of disease relationships (). Incorporating findings from disease networks has been used to inform disease repurposing (), develop therapeutics () and improve patient safety (). Phenomics () aim to map and understand the system of phenotypes and their interactions where in clinical studies a phenotype can include a trait (e.g. height), lab test (e.g. cholesterol levels) or disease (e.g. rheumatoid arthritis). The catalog of phenome-wide associations, which evaluate phenomic correlations of genotypes, is rapidly growing and currently being leveraged for drug development and drug repositioning (). We recently used EMR-wide phenomic information to identify: shared genetic architectures of various diseases (), sub-types of type-2 diabetes (), drug repurposing for various indications (), disease progression patterns through data stream visualization (), disease risk estimations (), and genomics-informed, personalized therapy (). Similar to the current situation in genomics research, racial groups and related factors remain understudied in phenomics. Most of the current human phenomics research is based primarily on populations of European background. Thus, compiling and analyzing data from EMR databases that contains patient data from diverse demographics and racial groups remains a priority. It is clear that racial background represents an overt source of variability in disease risk and mortality (). Traditionally, clinicians are required to 'bridge the inferential gap', or make clinical decisions for one racial group based on data from another, due to lack of knowledge. Accordingly, the implications of this racial underrepresentation of data can be profound with regard to healthcare delivery and actionability. For example, a previous study found that African American women were twice as likely, and Hispanic women were 50% as likely, to be readmitted to the hospital within 30 days of vaginal or cesarean delivery, even when controlling for socioeconomic status (). Systematic analysis of phenomic data represented in a racially and demographically diverse patient population could reveal precise patterns and further understanding of disease relationships, risk and comorbidity. Previous studies put forth several approaches for the phenomic study of clinical populations.utilized data from the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services (CMS) Databases, multiple hospitals across the United States, and the population registry of Denmark (n  110 million) to discover comorbidity patterns across complex and Mendelian diseases. This work, however, was mainly focused comparing certain types of diseases (i.e. Mendelian and complex diseases) and did not fully investigate the disease space.created a more expansive phenotype disease network (CMS data, n  30 million) that incorporated demographic factors, such as sex and race into the analytics. The authors revealed disparate disease patterns and network connectivity that was due to race, but only between Caucasian and African American populations.extended the field of disease network research by using timescale data to define temporal disease trajectories in a Danish clinical cohort (n  6.2 million). The researchers were successfully able to identify clusters of diseases that consistently manifested in particular order (i.e. disease trajectories). These trajectories, however, were built specifically on European population data and may not extend to other racial groups.These studies, while powerful and pioneering, did not sufficiently address the issue of racial diversity in their disease networks partially due to limitations of their datasets. As such, a particular concern is a lack of representation of Mexican Americans and other Hispanic Americans in healthcare analytics (L opez). As indicated by Hidalgo et al., there is a significant disparity in network structure between racial populations. However, prior phenomic studies have not evaluated racially diverse populations in depth. In the current study, we propose to combine many of the powerful approaches developed in the previous studies and leverage a racially diverse hospital population to compare disease network structure and connectivity between Caucasian, African American and Hispanic/Latino populations. To the best of our knowledge, our work is the first attempt to perform comparative, population-scale analyses of disease networks across three different populations within the same hospital cohort.
DiscussionThe results from the current study provide illustrative examples of the extent disease susceptibility and connectivity patterns differ between race cohorts, formalizing the need for race-specific risk assessment. Overall, the cross-race individual disease profiles are consistent with known data and expectations (), which is important for implications that can inform follow-up studies. More importantly, our results are in line with findings from related studies. In particular, our findings for the disease temporal patters in the EA cohort are consistent with the disease trajectories identified by. Direct comparison of results between our study and theirs is difficult, however, namely due to use of non-identical statistical methodologies and ontological disease mappings (ICD-9 versus ICD-10). Regardless, several similarities are apparent: firstly, the raw number of disease pairs with significant temporal directionality is consistent between the two studies: there were 4014 disease pairs with significant temporal directionality in their study and 2333 in ours; the small difference of which can partially be explained by sample size discrepancies. Furthermore, the authors identified related clusters of trajectories that are akin to hubs of the current study. While there are discrepancies, many focal disease points overlap: Type 2 Diabetes (T2D), for instance, was involved in many trajectories in their study and was a central hub in our EA cohort with 101 Bonferroni-corrected sequellae. Outcome diseases in the Jensen et al. T2D network included 'retinal disorder' which corresponds to many target diseases found in ours, including dry-eye syndrome, retinal drusen, peripheral retinal degeneration, and retinal edema. 'Chronic renal failure' and 'Unspecified renal failure' were also outcome diseases, which overlap with target diseases such as impaired renal function disease, benign hypertensive renal disease and secondary hyperparathyroidism of renal origin found in our network. Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, another cluster disease, was found to have similar temporal patterns as well, including 'Angina' as a predictor disease (angina pectoris in our results) and 'Unspecified chronic bronchitis' as an outcome disease (bronchitis in ours). Comparing our results to those of the Hidalgo et al. study using network approaches to study human phenotype serves as a source to validate our AA and EA networks. In their study, they found certain disease combinations that were differentially comorbid in black (AA) and white (EA) populations, many of which are validated in our findings. They demonstrate that heart diseases, including 'mitral valve disorders' and 'mitral and aortic valve stenosis' were more comorbid in white males than black males. Similarly, we found both aortic valve disease and mitral valve disease to be hubs in only the EA network. Interestingly, they show that 'other peripheral vascular disease' was connected to diseases across networks for both races and we also identified that the same disease is a hub for both these populations. Hidalgo et al. further demonstrate that 'diabetes' and 'hypertension' were more comorbid in black males than white males. While, in our study, both diseases were found to be hubs for both EA and AA networks, they were more highly connected (diabetes mellitus: 102 connections for EA versus 187 for AA andFor each population, we determined which temporally related disease pairs had Bonferroni-corrected significant connectivity (P  1.42  10 06 ). We present particular disease pairs of interest from among the top-25 associations for each population, ranked by effect size. Effect size, or b, can be interpreted as the odds ratio of disease 2 occurring given disease 1, holding age and sex constant.Population-scale phenomic data in electronic medical records i107 hypertension: 233 connections for EA versus 377 for AA) in our AA cohort than the EA network. 'Respiratory abnormality' was also more comorbid for black males in their study, which can be seen as corresponding to asthma-related disorder categorical enrichments in our identified AA hubs. Taken together, the concordance of results between these two studies and ours is extremely encouraging and provides support for the methodologies employed in the current paper and the ensuing HL cohort network discovery.