Motivation: It is commonplace to predict targets of transcription factors (TFs) by sequence matching with their binding motifs. However, this ignores the particular condition of the cells. Gene expression data can provide condition-specific information, as is, e.g. exploited in Motif Enrichment Analysis. Results: Here, we introduce a novel tool named condition-specific target prediction (CSTP) to predict condition-specific targets for TFs from expression data measured by either microarray or RNA-seq. Based on the philosophy of guilt by association, CSTP infers the regulators of each studied gene by recovering the regulators of its co-expressed genes. In contrast to the currently used methods, CSTP does not insist on binding sites of TFs in the promoter of the target genes. CSTP was applied to three independent biological processes for evaluation purposes. By analyzing the predictions for the same TF in three biological processes, we confirm that predictions with CSTP are condition-specific. Predictions were further compared with true TF binding sites as determined by ChIP-seq/chip. We find that CSTP predictions overlap with true binding sites to a degree comparable with motif-based predictions, although the two target sets do not coincide. Availability and implementation: CSTP is available via a web-based interface at
INTRODUCTIONGene expression is regulated at different levels, and one important level is transcriptional regulation (). Transcription factors (TFs) bind to promoter regions of genes and induce or repress expression of the target gene. This may further drive downstream cellular processes (). Understanding of regulatory processes at the transcriptional level is essential in understanding the regulation of biological processes. It remains a great challenge for computational biologists to develop effective methods for identifying transcriptional regulatory interactions, given available sequences and expression data. To investigate transcriptional regulation, one popular strategy is, for a given TF, to find genes with the binding motif in their promoters and those genes are supposed to be regulated by the TF. Many computational tools, such as MATCH (), TFBS (Lenhard and) and TRAP (), have been developed based on this strategy. These tools rely on the description of the TF binding sites in the form of a position weight matrix (PWM). PWM-based methods have been widely used in recovering transcriptional targets in many biological processes. The shortcomings of PWM-based methods become apparent when comparing their results with experimental data like gene expression measurements or TF location as determined by chromatin immunoprecipitation with subsequent array hybridization or sequencing (ChIPchip/Chip-seq). All types of discrepancies can be observed: PWM matches may not appear to be bound as determined by). Targets predicted based on the PWM method may not be affected in the studied biological process (). On the other hand, TFs may bind in places where there is no binding motif and expression may change even though a gene's promoter lacks a binding site. All this is not surprising, though, given the fact that PWM-based prediction is a static sequence-based prediction that remains ignorant of the condition of the cell. Thus, the problem of prediction of transcriptional targets is an ill-posed one as long as it only considers sequence and ignores the condition of the cell. One way to include the condition of the cell, in a rudimentary manner, is by determining common regulatory factors of coexpressed genes. Here, the condition of the cell enters through the co-expression. This approach forms the basis of what is called 'overrepresentation analysis' or 'motif-enrichment' (). In overrepresentation analysis, TF binding motifs are searched in the promoter of each of the co-expressed genes and then the fraction of genes possessing a certain TF binding motif is judged based on statistical considerations. A TF that is significantly enriched is assumed to regulate its targets among the co-expressed genes. An underlying assumption is that co-expressed genes are co-regulated. One caveat, of course, is that due to the cascades of gene regulation, a co-expressed group may be due to many TFs acting serially, rather than one TF being responsible for all observed expression changes. In this article, we extend overrepresentation analysis and put forward a strategy 'CSTP' to perform condition-specific target prediction within a specific biological process. In CSTP, we determine the co-expressed genes for each studied gene and then apply overrepresentation analysis to predict their potential regulators. Based on a philosophy of guilt by association, we make a key assumption that a regulator for the co-expressed *To whom correspondence should be addressed. group will in particular regulate its centroid gene, which is called core gene. Thus, the result of a CSTP prediction is a set of predicted TFtarget relationships between TFs that have been identified by overrepresentation analysis and core genes that are used as the centroid of co-expressed groups. Because the regulators are inferred from such a group of co-expressed genes, there is no strict requirement that the predicted target actually possesses the respective binding site in its promoter. Thus, one can in principle predict regulatory interactions even in the absence of a binding motif in the promoter. The prediction also reflects the condition of the cell via the co-expression patterns. CSTP has been implemented as a web-based tool that takes user-provided expression data and outputs regulatory interactions between predicted TFs and genes.