Motivation: With the growing availability of high-throughput protein– protein interaction (PPI) data, it has become possible to consider how a proteins local or global network characteristics predict its function. Results: We introduce a graph-theoretic approach that identifies key regulatory proteins in an organism by analyzing proteins local PPI network structure. We apply the method to the yeast genome and describe several properties of the resulting set of regulatory hubs. Finally, we demonstrate how the identified hubs and putative target gene sets can be used to identify causative, functional regulators of differential gene expression linked to human disease. Availability: Code is available at
INTRODUCTIONThe availability of high-throughput proteinprotein interaction (PPI) datasets () has led to investigations into network structure (). Although interactome data for most experimental organisms is incomplete, initial analyses suggested that interaction networks are typically scale free (), consisting of a relatively small fraction of highly connected 'hubs' and many nodes of low degree. This assumption has more recently been called into question (), but interest in the functional role of high-degree proteins persists. In particular, many attempts have been made to infer function from network structure (). One such approach is to characterize the relative importance of hubs in protein interaction networks. Hubs have been shown to be more likely than random proteins to be essential (). Another approach relies on the notion of 'betweenness' (), which characterizes nodes by how often they occur on the shortest path between two other nodes in the graph. Bottlenecks identified in this way are even more likely to be essential than their degree would * To whom correspondence should be addressed. suggest (). Abstraction of global connectivity by the formation of 'guilds' of genes has also been used to predict protein function (). Here, we propose using PPI data to identify sets of putative regulatory proteins. To do so, we model noisy and incomplete PPI data using a probablistic graph. We then assess the connectedness of the graph neighborhood of each highly connected, or hub, protein, and we compute the likely number of connected components in that neighborhood. Specifically, we show that we can bound the likelihood of disconnecting each PPI neighborhood, and that doing so separates likely regulatory hubs from hubs that are merely highly connected participants in protein complexes. Although our approach could be applied to all proteins in the network, we choose to focus on highly connected proteins so that the PPI neighborhoods are sufficiently large. Our work allows us to identify candidate regulators whose interactions may determine responses to changing conditions or environmental stimuli. Finding such 'bifurcation points' may provide novel insights into the molecular mechanisms of cellular behavior. However, unlike the work of, which identifies bifurcation events from dynamic, time-series expression data, our approach uses static protein interaction data to identify a set of proteins that are key decision makers in a dynamic setting. We also distinguish our work characterizing neighborhood connectivity from the related notion of the clustering coefficient (), which measures the density of edges in the network neighborhood of a node. While our measure deals with similar data, we show that our focus on the structure of the neighborhood produces different results. Our approach also differs from that of measuring node 'betweenness' in that we rely only on the immediate neighborhood of the candidate regulatory protein, whereas the betweenness of a node may be heavily influenced by the global structure of the network. In addition, our method includes a probabilistic model of noise in the PPI data and identifies not only regulators but also multiple candidate target sets for each. In this way, our work is perhaps more akin to that of, who examine the functional characteristics of hubs with single versus multiple binding interface sites. However, that approach relies on the availability of structural information (), whereas ours uses only the protein interaction network. In addition to providing general insights into functional network analysis, our method is easily applied to the interpretation of gene expression data. Analysis of microarray experiments typically produces lists of differentially expressed genes (). Functional analyses of these lists are now standardprocedure (), but they generally do not distinguish between the molecular changes responsible for causing a disease phenotype and those that are downstream consequences of the phenotype. Here, we demonstrate how our identified hubs and their putative target gene sets can be used to identify causative, functional regulators of differential gene expression. Our work may therefore provide new insights into the molecular causes of disease states and may help in identifying new therapeutic targets.