Motivation: With the advent of meta-omics data, the use of metabolic networks for the functional analysis of microbial communities became possible. However, while network-based methods are widely developed for single organisms, their application to bacterial communities is currently limited. Results: Herein, we provide a novel, context-specific reconstruction procedure based on metapro-teomic and taxonomic data. Without previous knowledge of a high-quality, genome-scale metabolic networks for each different member in a bacterial community, we propose a meta-network approach, where the expression levels and taxonomic assignments of proteins are used as the most relevant clues for inferring an active set of reactions. Our approach was applied to draft the context-specific metabolic networks of two different naphthalene-enriched communities derived from an anthropogenically influenced, polyaromatic hydrocarbon contaminated soil, with (CN2) or without (CN1) bio-stimulation. We were able to capture the overall functional differences between the two conditions at the metabolic level and predict an important activity for the fluorobenzoate degradation pathway in CN1 and for geraniol metabolism in CN2. Experimental validation was conducted , and good agreement with our computational predictions was observed. We also hypothesize different pathway organizations at the organismal level, which is relevant to disentangle the role of each member in the communities. The approach presented here can be easily transferred to the analysis of genomic, transcriptomic and metabolomic data.
IntroductionMicrobes are shaping the world and, by forming communities, are causal of geochemical cycles (), human health (), and biotechnological processes (). Thus, it is not surprising to find increasing interest in studying how these consortia lead to function (). The analysis of microbial communities begins by assessing the structure of the population, which is currently often achieved using metagenomic data (). The next step consists of characterizing the metabolic capacity of the microbial community, but this has proven to be a considerable challenge, even when using metatranscriptomic data (). This need has led to the development of metaproteomics, by which at least the abundance of metabolically active molecules can be detected (). In parallel, methods for analysing these data have arisen and evolved. From the outset, computational methods have been essential for capitalizing on data to obtain clear and novel insights (). Traditional approaches described in the literature typically map data for genes, proteins or metabolites onto well-known pathways or Gene Ontology (GO) terms (). This enables identifying molecular functions of identified proteins in light of metabolic pathways. However, the high connectivity among biological pathways has shifted the focus to networks (), which allows us to capture more global properties (). Molecular networks integrate different pathways and constitute a more general framework for interpreting 'omics' data (). On the single-species level, different computational methods have been developed to analyse 'omics' data using genome-scale metabolic networks. In particular, a number of approaches have been specifically designed to incorporate gene and protein expression data () as well as metabolite and flux levels () to characterize context-specific metabolic phenotypes. Based on these methods, novel insights into the metabolic organization of organisms have been obtained () and more practical questions have arisen, such as how to improve the efficiency of industrial biosynthetic processes (). These approaches start from genome-scale metabolic networks, which are reconstructed from the annotated genome of an organism () and a reference metabolic database as input information. Thiele anddescribed the steps for accurately building a metabolic network, which can be time-consuming, easily taking from 6 months to 2 years. With the aim of easing this process, the Model SEED provides an integrative and automatic approach that substantially speeds up the time required to obtain a first network draft (). For microbial communities, the reconstruction of metabolic networks is more complicated and faces new challenges. Ideally, each organism can be represented by its own metabolic network and its input/output metabolites define its possible interaction with other members of the consortia. Should this information be available, recently developed constraint-based modelling approaches could be applied. In this situation, methods mentioned above to incorporate 'omics' data for single organisms could be extended to deal with bacterial communities. However, in complex bacterial communities the number of organisms could be extremely high, most typically lacking a high-quality, genome-scale metabolic network, which makes the identification of shared components between organisms even more complicated. For this reason, current approaches have been applied to well-known microbial consortia, including only a limited number of organisms, typically 2 or 3 (dos). To overcome this issue, the use of a supraorganism or metanetwork has been proposed (), which ignores boundaries for each organism, but models community-level metabolism. In an early work (), using a graph theoretical approach, metagenomic data were used to reconstruct the human gut microbiome metanetwork in different conditions, finding key variations in patients with obesity and inflammatory bowel disease. In this study, we exploit this metanetwork strategy and present a novel computational procedure for obtaining a context-specific metabolic network for a bacterial community using metaproteomic data. In contrast with the work presented in, we did not use a graph-theoretical approach, but a constraint-based one, which takes into account stoichiometric relationships. In particular, our approach takes some ingredients from the mathematical optimization model presented in the Model SEED (). However, our approach is fundamentally different: it is designed for bacterial communities, not for a single organism, and focuses on the usage of metaproteomic data, which directly leads to a contextualized network that gives cohesion to identified proteins. We also use the taxonomic assignment of the identified proteins to favour the inclusion of enzymes annotated in the genomes of those organisms in cases where such information is available. Our approach is applied to draft the metabolic networks of two different, naphthalene-enriched communities () derived from an anthropogenically influenced, polyaromatic hydrocarbon (PAH)-contaminated soil with (CN2) or without (CN1) bio-stimulation with calcium ammonia nitrate, NH 4 NO 3 and KH 2 PO 4 and the commercial surfactant Iveysol V R . Naphthalene, a model PAH compound, is a common, persistent pollutant in crude oil and industrial chemical manufactures that can be released into the environment (i.e. soils) through anthropogenic activities (). Current treatments for naphthalene-and other PAH-contaminated sites involve the use of bio-surfactants and additional electron acceptors as well as nitrogen sources (nitrate and ammonia) to improve the bioavailability and bioremediation of these compounds. It has also been observed that many bacteria are capable of degrading and growing on naphthalene (), and their activities might only be limited by environmental conditions. Thus, gaining insight into the mechanisms underlying naphthalene degradation can aid in the design of better remediation strategies.
ConclusionIn this study, we present a novel computational procedure for obtaining a context-specific functional metabolic network for a bacterial community using metaproteomic data. Our approach was based on the mathematical optimization model presented in the Model SEED (). However, we adapt this model to incorporate metaproteomic data and obtain a context-specific metanetwork in which the identified proteins from the multiple organisms making up the community are coexpressed. To this end, we also include important technical differences. In particular, we use a 3-step iterative procedure based on linear programming and mixed integer linear programming. Our approach is an alternative to previously reported methods (dos), where the role of each organism is explicitly represented in a different metabolic compartment and, therefore, their relationships can be directly analysed. These methods require the genome-scale metabolic network of each organism in the community as input data, which, in consortia involving a high number of species as we have here, is typically not available; therefore, we turn to a metanetwork approach, which involves several assumptions. First, we need a consensus biomass equation that represents the metabolic requirements of the community to support growth. With metametabolomics approaches being developed, it is expected that consensus biomass equations will be refined in the near future. Second, a free exchange of metabolites between species is allowed, as boundaries between individual organisms are not defined. However, a metanetwork could serve as a basis to disentangle the role of each organism in the community, as suggested in Section 3.4. More sophisticated approaches need to be developed for this task, for example, analysing the role of a single organism in the context of the entire metanetwork. Our approach was applied to draft the context-specific metabolic networks of two different naphthalene-enriched communities (). Analysis of the resilience to single-reaction elimination and the ability to grow on different sources suggests that CN2 metabolism is more varied than CN1. Then, we used KEGG maps to obtain a global picture of the reconstructed draft networks. We were able to capture the overall functional differences between. Growth curve of CN1 and CN2 enrichment cultures in Bushnell Hass minimal medium in the presence of 0.1% (w/v) 3/4-fluorobenzoate and geraniol, respectively, at 30 C and 250 rpm. As shown, within the examined time frame, no appreciable growth was observed in cultures of the CN1 and CN2 consortia in the presence of geraniol and fluorobenzoate, respectively. Heatmap showing the contributions of the most relevant bacterial members of CN1 and CN2 to the KEGG maps. Relative contributions of each of the 13 distinct species found to constitute the CN1 and CN2 communities () are differentiated by a colour code. A high-resolution image can be found in Supplementary Material V CN1 and CN2 at the metabolic level. We showed that CN1 and CN2 utilize different metabolic pathways to synthesize essential metabolites for growth. In particular, we hypothesized an important role for the fluorobenzoate degradation pathway in CN1 and for geraniol metabolism in CN2. Experimental validation was conducted and good agreement with our computational predictions was observed. On the other hand, we showed that these metabolic differences lead to a different pathway organization at the organismal level. For example, while naphthalene degradation (map00626) seems to be supported by Achromobacter in both CN1 and CN2, Mesorhizobium septentrionale and Pseudoxanthomonas japonensis may be involved in an alternative pathway in CN1. In addition, while metagenomic sequences outlined the broad metabolic capabilities of the abundant populations present in an adapted community, proteomics-guided metabolic reconstructions allowed us to focus on the pathways that were actually expressed and refine the assignment of roles for community members not only in naphthalene degradation but also in the assimilation of the low molecular weight compounds produced from it. These results show that network-based methods represent a promising strategy for exploiting the value of data and the available bioinformatics tools, allowing us to obtain a better understanding of biological systems. As the available meta-omics data from scientific studies at different levels are increasing, reconstruction procedures will play an important role in disentangling contexts-specific metabolic phenotypes. The approach presented here can be extended to meta-genomic and meta-transcriptomic data and will clearly benefit from the availability of meta-metabolomic data, mainly to address the failure to detect all different enzymes (ECs) that catalyze different reactions. Amending our approach to include these data is straightforward.