COREGNET is an R/Bioconductor package to analyze large-scale transcriptomic data by highlighting sets of co-regulators. Based on a transcriptomic dataset, COREGNET can be used to: reconstruct a large-scale co-regulatory network, integrate regulation evidences such as transcription factor binding sites and ChIP data, estimate sample-specific regulator activity, identify cooperative transcription factors and analyze the sample-specific combinations of active regulators through an interactive visualization tool. In this study COREGNET was used to identify driver regulators of bladder cancer. Availability: COREGNET is available at http://bioconductor.org/packages/CoRegNet
IntroductionRecent advances in genomics enabled the profiling of thousands of tumors by large consortia and individual laboratories. While the amount of data holds great promise for our understanding of tumorigenesis, these datasets necessitate efficient methodologies to extract valuable knowledge from them. Transcriptomics is the most commonly available type of tumor large-scale data. The transcriptome reflects the genetic, epigenetic and environmental states of a tumor tissue and determines a great extent the phenotype of cells. Therefore, one of the first step towards the construction of a mechanistic model underlying cancer is the identification of the sets of transcription factors (TF) that actively maintain a malignant phenotype. This requires methodologies to model the tissue specificity of gene regulation by inferring trustful context-specific networks. More importantly, these models must take into account the complexity of mammalian gene regulation often involving the coordinated action of several TF (). To identify tumor-driving active regulatory circuits, we propose a Bioconductor () package named COREGNET to (i) reconstruct a large-scale co-regulatory network from gene expression data and by integrating additional regulatory evidences such as TF Binding site and ChIP data, (ii) estimate the activity of each TF of the network in any given sample, (iii) predict sets of cooperative TF and (iv) identify sample-specific combination of active and driver TF using an interactive visualization tool integrating genomic aberrations. The proposed methods can be used as independent modules with alternative inputs such as networks inferred by other methods, experimentally defined networks or a different transcriptomic data for TF activity prediction and visualization (e.g. cell lines of same tissue). The following sections outline the functions of the COREGNET package and its application to the characterization of the driver regulators of bladder cancer subtypes.