Motivation: Current sequencing technologies produce a large number of erroneous reads. The sequencing errors present a major challenge in utilizing the data in de novo sequencing projects as assemblers have difficulties in dealing with errors. Results: We present Coral which corrects sequencing errors by forming multiple alignments. Unlike previous tools for error correction, Coral can utilize also bases distant from the error in the correction process because the whole read is present in the alignment. Coral is easily adjustable to reads produced by different sequencing technologies like Illumina Genome Analyzer and Roche/454 Life Sciences sequencing platforms because the sequencing error model can be defined by the user. We show that our method is able to reduce the error rate of reads more than previous methods. Availability: The source code of Coral is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONNext-generation sequencing technologies, such as Illumina Genome Analyzer, Applied Biosystems SOLiD and Roche/454 Life Sciences DNA sequencing platforms, produce a vast amount of reads in a single run. Vagaries of the reads produced by each sequencing machine are still being discovered. Correction of errors in short reads is a critical task in bioinformatics. The variety of errors and biases of the current sequencing platforms must be addressed if the data is to be used to maximum effect. Error correction aims to revert these mistakes made by a sequencing platform by exploiting the redundancy of the data and judging each base in a read as correct or incorrect (and then ideally correcting it). Error correction helps to achieve high data use in de novo assembly. Furthermore, the computational demands of assembly algorithms are reduced significantly if reads are first corrected. Although we evaluate here the impact of error correction on de novo assembly, the technique could also be useful in other applications because error correction can potentially increase the mappability of reads in resequencing as well as in other applications of high-throughput sequencing. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Error characteristics of the different platforms are complex, making error correction a difficult task. For instance, the Roche/454 sequencing platform produces reads with indel errors, due mainly to homopolymers, whereas the SOLiD and Illumina platforms are prone to substitution errors.investigate quality score evolvement, error characteristics and biases of short sequencing reads. The first error correction method that is aimed at short read datasets is built into the assembly tool Euler SR (). It uses the spectral alignment method, which first establishes a spectrum of trusted k-mers from the input data and then corrects each read so that it contains only sequences from the spectrum. Shrec byfollowed, a stand-alone error correction method. Shrec is based on a parallelized suffix-trie data structure that holds a set of reads and corrects errors with a majority voting scheme. Shrec was extended by Salmela (2010) to accommodate hybrid sets of reads from various sequencing technologies, with different read lengths and error characteristics. HiTEC byuses a suffix array of the reads to count how many times short sequences are present in the read set and use these counts to correct the reads. The approach byrevisits the idea of Chaisson and Pevzner by overlaying reads with trustworthy tiles (pairs of k-mers), and correcting differences between the reads and the tiles to obtain error corrected read sets. Quake byis another recent method that relies on spectral alignments to correct reads. In this article, we present Coral (=CORrection with ALignments), a novel approach, which relies on multiple alignments of short reads to correct errors in the data. The idea of using multiple alignments for correcting sequencing reads is not new. For example, the preprocessing in the Arachne assembler () and the MisEd error correction tool () use multiple alignments to correct reads from the older Sanger technology (). Our new tool is the first to apply this approach to short read data. Most of the recent error correction tools are aimed at reads from the Illumina Genome Analyzer platform and therefore they are limited to correcting substitutions which is the dominant error type in Illumina reads. Coral is easily adjustable to different error models of the various sequencing platforms. Furthermore, adjusting the error model is easily accessible to the end user who only needs to set the familiar parameters of multiple alignments, gap penalty and mismatch penalty, to appropriate values according to the error model. For example, for Illumina reads one needs to set the gap penalty to a high value effectively disallowing indels, whereas one