Motivation: The interaction between transcription factor (TF) and transcription factor binding site (TFBS) is essential for gene regulation. Mutation in either the TF or the TFBS may weaken their interaction and thus result in abnormalities. To maintain such vital interaction, a mutation in one of the interacting partners might be compensated by a corresponding mutation in its binding partner during the course of evolution. Confirming this co-evolutionary relationship will guide us in designing protein sequences to target a specific DNA sequence or in predicting TFBS for poorly studied proteins, or even correcting and rescuing disease mutations in clinical applications. Results: Based on six, publicly available, experimentally validated TF–TFBS binding datasets for the basic Helix–Loop–Helix (bHLH) family, Homeo family, High-Mobility Group (HMG) family and Transient Receptor Potential channels (TRP) family, we showed that the evolutions of the TFs and their TFBSs are significantly correlated across eukaryotes. We further developed a mutual information-based method to identify co-evolved protein residues and DNA bases. This research sheds light on the dynamic relationship between TF and TFBS during their evolution. The same principle and strategy can be applied to co-evolutionary studies on protein–DNA interactions in other protein families. Availability: All the datasets, scripts and other related files have been made freely available at: http://jjwanglab.org/co-evo.
INTRODUCTIONThe term co-evolution was first conceptualized by Charles Darwin (1862) in his study on the two species, pollinators and orchids. At the molecular level, co-evolution has been studied in the context of proteinprotein interaction (). A change in one of the binding protein's interaction surface is compensated by an appropriate change in the interface of the partner protein. Studies have shown the co-evolution of interacting proteins (), as well as of interacting protein and ligand (). These studies have had great impact in this area of research, such as in proteinprotein interaction and drug design (). A protein can bind to more than one DNA sequence, and these corresponding binding sites are usually represented by a binding profile called Position Weight Matrix (PWM) (). Methods have been developed to compare the similarity of different PWMs (). By comparing the pairwise similarities of all PWMs from a protein family, we can study the evolution of DNA binding sites for this protein family. Thus far, the co-evolutionary relationship between a transcription factor (TF) and transcription factor DNA binding site (TFBS) has not been systematically studied. The interaction between TFs and their TFBSs is essential for many biological processes. For instance, the interaction at the core promoter regions determines the assembly of the pre-initiation complex and the initiation of transcription (), whereas, interactions in the distal promoter/enhancer region determine the rate of transcription in cell type-, tissue-and developmental stage-specific manner (). Therefore, study of TFTFBS interaction is critical to our understanding of the transcriptional regulatory network of gene expression (). In this study, we hypothesize that the evolutions of TFs and their TFBSs are correlated. We used the basic helixloop helix (bHLH), Homeo, high-mobility group (HMG) and transisent receptor potential channels (TRP) protein families to illustrate this principle of co-evolutionary relationship. We first performed the analysis based on the bHLH family. The bHLH family is an ancient component of transcriptional regulation with more than 100 members found in humans (). This protein family has a strong selection force and plays critical roles in diverse biological processes from cell proliferation to carcinogenesis (e.g. the oncogene and iPSC reprogramming factor, cMyc). It has evolved into 125 members in humans, and 94 of them are conserved in mice
DISCUSSIONWe used the bHLH, Homeo, HMG and TRP family TFs and their TFBSs to test the hypothesis that the evolutions of TFs and their binding sites are correlated. For bHLH family, we used three datasets: the mammalian dataset and eukaryote dataset from the JASPAR database and the CAEEL dataset from thein the bHLH protein's basic region is significantly co-evolved with the central two positions of E-box binding sites. (a) On the left is one segment containing the basic region of bHLH proteins from the Pfam multiple sequence alignment of the eukaryote bHLH dataset. Interacting residues annotated by the BIPA database are highlighted and the critical position 13 is marked. On the left is the schematic alignment of DNA binding profiles corresponding to the bHLH TFs on the right. The central two positions of the E-box binding motif (CANNTG), which vary from different bHLH subgroups, are also marked. (b) The position 13 of the bHLH protein's basic region and central two positions of E-box binding sites can be closely compared with each other. Here, the positions on DNA binding profiles are presented as our novel clustered sequences derived from the base composition in PWMs. Significant co-varying patterns are shown with the corresponding calculated high MI scores. UniProbe database. In all families and datasets that we tested, the coevolutionary relationship between TF and TFBS can be seen clearly, showing that the observations were not dependent on the platform used to obtain the TFBSs. Moreover, irrespective of whether the TFs are among different species (bHLH family mammalian and eukaryotes) or within one species (bHLH family, C.elegans), we have observed similar co-evolution relationship. This observation strengthens our hypothesis that such an co-evolutionary relationship exists between TFs and their TFBSs. We applied multiple statistical tests to quantify the statistical significance of any co-evolutionary relationship and all tests were Page: 2977 29722978