Cytoscape Web is a web-based network visualization tool–modeled after Cytoscape–which is open source, interactive, customizable and easily integrated into web sites. Multiple file exchange formats can be used to load data into Cytoscape Web, including GraphML, XGMML and SIF. Availability and Implementation: Cytoscape Web is implemented in Flex/ActionScript with a JavaScript API and is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONIncreasing amounts of high-throughput data are being collected, stored, shared and analyzed on the web, highlighting the need for effective web-based data visualization. Network visualization components are especially valuable to help researchers interpret their data as part of data analysis tools. However, current webbased network visualization components lack many useful features of their desktop counterparts. Medusa () is a Java applet originally used in the STRING database () and by many other web sites for network visualization, but lacks advanced features, such as detailed customization of the network view. jSquid () expands Medusa's functionality, but does not provide an easy way for the client web site to change and interact with the network view after it has been rendered. TouchGraph (http://www.touchgraph.com/navigator .html) is another Java applet for network visualization, but provides only one mode of network interaction designed for exploration and is not easily customizable. yFiles Flex (http://www.yworks.com/ en/products_yfilesflex_about.html) is a rich Internet application with a feature-rich user interface, an architecture that balances client/server work and supports efficient data communication. This commercial software is customizable within the bounds of the code already written, but is not open source. Cytoscape (http:// www.cytoscape.org/) is an open source Java network visualization and analysis tool that provides a large array of useful features (), but is not specifically designed for use on the web except via Java WebStart or as a library to generate static network images for web display. The field of network visualization is * To whom correspondence should be addressed.lacking an interactive, easily customizable, open source, web-based visualization component. Cytoscape Web is an interactive, web-based network visualization tool, modeled after the popular Cytoscape software (). Using basic programming skills, Cytoscape Web can be customized and incorporated into any web site. Cytoscape Web is not intended as a replacement for the Cytoscape desktop application, for example, it contains none of the plugin architecture functionality of Cytoscape; instead it is intended as a low overhead tool to add network visualization to a web application.