Motivation: The size and complex nature of mass spectrometry-based proteomics datasets motivate development of specialized software for statistical data analysis and exploration. We present DanteR, a graphical R package that features extensive statistical and diagnostic functions for quantitative proteomics data analysis, including nor-malization, imputation, hypothesis testing, interactive visualization and peptide-to-protein rollup. More importantly, users can easily extend the existing functionality by including their own algorithms under the Add-On tab. Availability: DanteR and its associated user guide are available for download free of charge at http://omics.pnl.gov/software/. We have an updated binary source for the DanteR package up on our website together with a vignettes document. For Windows, a single click automatically installs DanteR along with the R programming environment. For Linux and Mac OS X, users must install R and then follow instructions on the DanteR website for package installation.
INTRODUCTIONAnalysis of proteomics data, such as based on liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry, presents special challenges due to a number of factors, including sample variation and missing peptide abundances, as well as the need to perform protein-level significance analysis on peptide-level data (). Existing non-commercial software for proteomics analysis, such as GProX (Rigbolt, 2011, http:// bit.ly/PkBSWj) and DanTE (), uses multiple programming languages (e.g. R and C#) that make additional development and maintenance difficult. Moreover, these tools lack the flexibility and extensibility needed to allow end users to add new functionality. DanteR is a graphical R package for quantitative bottomup proteomics data analysis designed to overcome these limitations; implementation entirely in R makes for an independent and readily extensible data analysis platform. Although the software can be installed and used as a stand-alone program, user-defined algorithms can be easily integrated to extend data analysis and visualization.
DESCRIPTIONDanteR incorporates algorithms for preprocessing and normalizing peptide abundances, statistical analysis, multi-dimensional visualization and for creating publication analysis summaries. These features build on earlier DAnTE software (), but with additional functionalities such as EigenMS normalization (i.e. normalization using singular value decomposition), model-based filtering of low-quality peptides, likelihood model-based imputation of missing values and improved significance analysis at peptide and protein levels.