Motivation: RNA editing is a phenomenon, which is responsible for the alteration of particular nucleotides in RNA sequences relative to their genomic templates. Recently, a large number of RNA editing instances in humans have been identified using bioinformatic screens and high-throughput experimental investigations utilizing next-generation sequencing technologies. However, the available data on RNA editing are not uniform and difficult to access. Results: Here, we describe a new database DARNED (DAtabase of RNa EDiting) that provides centralized access to available published data related to RNA editing. RNA editing locations are mapped on the reference human genome. The current release of the database contains information on approximately 42 000 human genome coordinates corresponding to RNA locations that undergo RNA editing, mostly involving adenosine-to-inosine (A-to-I) substitutions. The data can be queried using a range of genomic coordinates, their corresponding functional localization in RNA molecules [Exons, Introns, CoDing Sequence (CDS) and UnTranslated Regions (UTRs)] and information regarding tissue/organ/cell sources where RNA editing has been observed. It is also possible to obtain RNA editing information for a specific gene or an RNA molecule using corresponding accession numbers. Search results provide information on the number of expressed sequence tags (ESTs) supporting edited and genomic bases, functional localization of RNA editing and existence of known single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs). Editing data can be explored in UCSC and Ensembl genome browsers, in conjunction with additional data provided by these popular genome browsers. DARNED has been designed for researchers seeking information on RNA editing and for the developers of novel algorithms for its prediction. Availability: DARNED is accessible at http://
INTRODUCTIONRNA editing is a biological phenomenon of changing RNA sequence relative to its corresponding DNA template by inserting, deleting or substituting one or a few nucleotides (). It is distinct from other nucleotide modifications in which nucleotides retain their identities during decoding or sequencing. For instance, a change of adenosine-toinosine (A-to-I) is considered as RNA editing, since inosines are recognized as guanosines by polymerases and the translationary * To whom correspondence should be addressed. machinery, while methylation of adenosines is not considered an editing event, since the identity of the nucleotide remains the same. RNA editing has been found across all kingdoms of life, including viruses (). There are several molecular mechanisms responsible for RNA editing. It can occur co-transcriptionally, for example, due to slippage of a growing nascent RNA chain relative to its template resulting in insertion or deletion of nucleotides (). Alternatively, it can be a result of enzymatic modification, e.g. deamination of cytidines and adenosines that leads to the formation of uridines and inosines, respectively (). Earlier, RNA editing was known to be particularly abundant in plant organelles () and was also identified in a few human genes, where it contributes to diversification of corresponding protein products, such as those encoding the ApoB protein and the glutamate and serotonin receptors (). The abundance of RNA editing in humans, however, has only recently come to light. Most RNA editing instances found so far in humans involve A-to-I conversions that are carried out by ADARs (Adenosine Deaminase that Acts on RNAs). ADARs bind to double-stranded regions of RNA molecules and catalyze deamination of adenosines, converting them to inosine residues (). Therefore, the majority of RNA editing instances occur in regions where long RNA stemloop structures can be formed and are particularly abundant among Alu repeats (). RNA editing plays a variety of functional roles in gene expression. RNA editing of a nucleotide within the CoDing Sequence (CDS) may change the identity of a particular encoded amino acid or could generate significantly altered protein sequences if editing leads to the formation of a stop codon (e.g. the ApoB case mentioned earlier). Editing occurring within introns can affect splicing, effectively resulting in the generation of alternatively spliced products (). Hyper-editing of UnTranslated Regions (UTRs) leads to retention of mRNA inside the nucleus, consequently down-regulating synthesis of the encoded protein by preventing transport of its mRNA to the cytoplasm (). An interesting role of RNA editing is in diversification of miRNA sequences that consequently change their target repertoire (). Abnormal RNA editing has also been associated with a number of diseases, including several neurological disorders and cancers (). A large number of recently discovered RNA editing instances have been found by means of bioinformatic screens of discrepancies between genomic sequences and corresponding RNA products, and by applying statistical filters to distinguish RNA editing fromPage: 1773 17721776