Motivation: Genome-wide measurement of transcript levels is an ubiquitous tool in biomedical research. As experimental data continues to be deposited in public databases, it is becoming important to develop search engines that enable the retrieval of relevant studies given a query study. While retrieval systems based on meta-data already exist, data-driven approaches that retrieve studies based on similarities in the expression data itself have a greater potential of uncovering novel biological insights. Results: We propose an information retrieval method based on differential expression. Our method deals with arbitrary experimental designs and performs competitively with alternative approaches, while making the search results interpretable in terms of differential expression patterns. We show that our model yields meaningful connections between biological conditions from different studies. Finally, we validate a previously unknown connection between malignant pleural mesothelioma and SIM2s suggested by our method, via real-time polymerase chain reaction in an independent set of mesothelioma samples. Availability: Supplementary data and source code are available from
INTRODUCTIONDNA microarrays are a frequently used high-throughput tool for measuring gene expression, which is reflected in the continuously increasing amount of data available in public repositories such as the Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO) () or ArrayExpress (). The thousands of gene expression studies in these repositories make it increasingly challenging to retrieve datasets that are relevant to the user. At the same time, the availability of these collections gives us the opportunity to develop retrieval methods that take into account the gene expression data from these studies to deliver biologically meaningful results and provide insights into the molecular mechanisms at work in the deposited studies. There are two possible types of solutions for the task of retrieving relevant studies from databases. Knowledge-driven approaches are based on the metadata used to describe the deposited gene expression studies. Various forms of string matching algorithms have been applied to retrieve studies based on a textual query (). Advanced solutions incorporate controlled vocabularies or ontologies for semantic query expansion (). Given high-quality annotations, the likelihood of biological relevance of the results is high, but methods using this paradigm are limited to retrieving studies annotated with a known label. Moreover, these approaches are fundamentally limited by the fact that the text-based description of a study and its results contains only a fraction of the information in the actual gene expression data. Data-driven or content-based approaches to information retrieval or meta-analysis () have a high potential for discovering novel and biologically meaningful relationships between the studied tissues, organisms and biological conditions, since similarities between studies are derived from shared expression patterns.Page: 247 246253Differential expression is a natural encoding for a study, as it describes the biological variation between the studied conditions. It is also a very useful basis for data-driven retrieval in heterogeneous collections of gene expression studies, and meta-analysis in general, as it addresses issues such as inter-platform incommensurability. Data-driven information retrieval or meta-analysis methods typically consist of the following four components: (i) a decomposition of the experimental design of studies into differential expression (pairwise comparison) of genes or gene sets; (ii) a method to measure the significance of differential expression [e.g. foldchange, t-test or gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA);, which serves as a basis for encoding the studies; (iii) a method to extract biological patterns of interest from the encoded studies; and (iv) a relevance measure between studies, conditions or microarrays. Supplementarydescribes the various existing approaches for each of the components. Depending on their scope, most existing methods include only a subset of the components. For instance, the well-known meta-analysis module map method () does not include an approach for computing the relevance between studies. Conversely, several information retrieval methods do not make use of any method to extract shared expression patterns (). Three challenges that are particularly significant in the context of large and highly heterogeneous gene expression repositories but that so far have not been addressed are the decomposition of studies with an arbitrary experimental design, facilitation of the biological interpretation of the retrieval results and the systematic evaluation of the retrieval performance. For instance, most methods are designed to deal only with studies comparing case versus control. Other methods are able to handle studies with arbitrary designs, but decompose studies into comparisons in ways that induce study-specific bias and hinder the interpretation of the retrieval results. As an example, comparing two phenotypes (e.g. normal versus disease) in a multifactorial study while ignoring additional experimental variables may introduce confounding factors. In this article, we propose REx (data-driven Retrieval of Experiments), which extends our earlier data-driven information retrieval method (). An overview of the key steps of the method is provided in. First, for the decomposition of studies into pairwise comparisons, we introduce an approach that takes into account the fact that a comparison depends not only on the phenotypes being compared, but also on the phenotypes which are held constant in the comparison, i.e. the context. In each comparison, the other experimental factors need to have the same values in order to avoid confounding factors. Unlike in our previous work, this approach is applicable to any type of experimental factor. The underlying data-driven modeling has also been extended. Our proposed unsupervised learning model enables the detection of associations between studies and the interpretation of these associations in terms of recurrent patterns of differential expression. The new model additionally takes into account correlations in the activity of gene expression patterns; moreover, while the earlier method worked purely on the level of gene sets, we now additionally model the activity of the specific genes in the sets to increase accuracy and enable more specific interpretations. Finally, we propose a novel ontology-based approach for evaluating the retrieval results, to deal with the wide range of biological and medical subject areas spanned by the studies in the repository. We apply REx to a collection of 1092 studies taken from the ArrayExpress repository, involving three species (human, mouse and rat) and corresponding to a total of 6925 phenotype comparisons (in our previous feasibility study, we applied our method to 800 comparisons derived from human studies). We show that the inferred differential expression patterns correspond to functionally coherent core intersections of gene sets. We also demonstrate that the numerical retrieval performance of our method is competitive with existing approaches. In a series of case studies, we point out that connections between conditions found by our method have been confirmed in independent studies. These case studies illustrate how conditions can be connected on a molecular level, and provide evidence for the validity of our approach. In an experimental validation study, we explored a connection found by our method that hints at a potential role of the basic helix loophelix transcription factor Single-minded homolog 2, short isoform (SIM2s) in malignant pleural mesothelioma (MPM), which has not been previously described in the literature. Using realtime polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR), we were able to detect significant SIM2s underexpression in an independent set of MPM tumors, indicating that SIM2s may effectively have a role in MPM. This shows that our data-driven information retrieval approach can indeed be used to obtain novel biological insights from large and heterogeneous collections of transcriptomics data. Page: 248 246253