Motivation: Synonymous mutations (SMs), which changed the sequence of a gene without directly altering the amino acid sequence of the encoded protein, were thought to have no functional consequences for a long time. They are often assumed to be neutral in models of mutation and selection and were completely ignored in many studies. However, accumulating experimental evidence has demonstrated that these mutations exert their impact on gene functions via splicing accuracy, mRNA stability, translation fidelity, protein folding and expression, and some of these mutations are implicated in human diseases. To the best of our knowledge, there is still no database specially focusing on disease-related SMs. Results: We have developed a new database called dbDSM (database of Deleterious Synonymous Mutation), a continually updated database that collects, curates and manages available human disease related SM data obtained from published literature. In the current release, dbDSM collects 1936 SM-disease association entries, including 1289 SMs and 443 human diseases from ClinVar, GRASP, GWAS Catalog, GWASdb, PolymiRTS database, PubMed database and Web of Knowledge. Additionally, we provided users a link to download all the data in the dbDSM and a link to submit novel data into the database. We hope dbDSM will be a useful resource for investigating the roles of SMs in human disease. Availability and implementation: dbDSM is freely available online at
IntroductionPoint mutations can be classified as either non-synonymous or synonymous based on whether they change the amino acid sequence of a protein (). Historically, synonymous mutations (SMs) have been consistently overlooked because they do not alter the protein sequence and are thus considered functionally irrelevant. Many studies completely ignore SMs, whereas others use them to build background models for the estimation of deleterious mutations (). But 'synonymous' is different from 'same', and accumulating evidence suggested that SMs could have functional consequences (). Over 50 diseases have been associated with SMs in human genes so far (). Studies analyzing the consequences of SMs have revealed that they play an important role in multiple biological processes, such as mRNA splicing (), mRNA folding (), protein translation and folding () and microRNAmRNA interaction (). In summary,). Currently, there are many databases that focus on point mutation, such as dbNSFP () and miRNASNP (). However, to the best of our knowledge, there is no database that can provide comprehensive resources for the diseaserelated SMs. To fill this gap, we developed a literature-based disease-related SMs database called dbDSM (database of Deleterious Synonymous Mutation), which is proposed to assist with investigating the mechanism of SM-disease association and facilitate translational research on disease genetics. We hope it will be a useful resource for the SM research community.