S-glutathionylation, the reversible protein posttranslational modification (PTM) that generates a mixed disulfide bond between glutathione and cysteine residue, critically regulates protein activity, stability and redox regulation. Due to its importance in regulating oxi-dative/nitrosative stress and balance in cellular response, a number of methods have been rapidly developed to study S-glutathionylation, thus expanding the dataset of experimentally determined glutathiony-lation sites. However, there is currently no database dedicated to the integration of all experimentally verified S-glutathionylation sites along with their characteristics or structural or functional information. Thus, the dbGSH database has been created to integrate all available data-sets and to provide the relevant structural analysis. As of January 31, 2014, dbGSH has manually collected 42200 experimentally verified S-glutathionylated peptides from 169 research articles using a text-mining approach. To solve the problem of heterogeneity of the data collected from different sources, the sequence identity of the reported S-glutathionylated peptides is mapped to UniProtKB protein entries. To delineate the structural correlations and consensus motifs of these S-glutathionylation sites, the dbGSH database also provides structural and functional analyses, including the motifs of substrate sites, solvent accessibility, protein secondary and tertiary structures, protein domains and gene ontology. Availability and implementation: dbGSH is now freely accessible at
INTRODUCTIONS-glutathionylation is a redox-dependent posttranslational modification (PTM) that involves the covalent attachment of glutathione (GSH) to the thiol group of cysteine residues, and regulates based on the physiological GSH level and the GSH/GSSG ratio through spontaneous or enzymatic reaction (). In addition to regulating redox signaling, S-glutathionylation also serves to modulate cancer migration, cell death and survival, energy metabolism and glycolysis, as well as protein folding and degradation in several species, ranging from bacteria to human (). The various targets of S-glutathionylation also participate in pathogenesis of many diseases, such as neurodegenerative diseases, metabolic disorders and cancers (). Due to the importance of S-glutathionylation in clinical biological processes, numerous methods have been developed, directed toward mass spectrometry-based S-glutathionomics using various biological systems to investigate and identify S-glutathionylated targets and sites (). As the number of experimentally identified S-glutathionylated peptides grows, a structured database is desirable for the further investigation of the biological functions of S-glutathionylated proteins and the substrate specificities of S-glutathionylation sites. Although a number of databases have been developed for PTMs, such as dbPTM (), PhosphoSitePlus (), RegPhos (), dbOGAP () and dbSNO (), limited resources have been dedicated to S-glutathionylated proteins and their corresponding substrate sites (). Thus, a new database (dbGSH) containing the experimentally verified S-glutathionylated peptides from research articles is proposed to facilitate the functional analysis of S-glutathionylated proteins and to assist with the structural investigation of substrate sites. literature (PubMed ID) reference. In addition, a small number of protein S-glutathionylation sites in UniProtKB are integrated into dbGSH with the corresponding literature references. As of January 31, 2014, a total of 169 S-glutathionylation-associated articles covering 16 organisms have been retrieved from PubMed. In the dbGSH database, there are 2257 S-glutathionylated cysteines from 1314 S-glutathionylated proteins. Supplementaryshows the statistics for the S-glutathionylation data for each organism. For a given protein, the biological function can be obtained from the annotation in UniProtKB. To provide more effective information about protein functional and structural annotations relevant to S-glutathionylated cysteines, a variety of biological databases, such as InterPro (), Gene Ontology (GO), Protein Data Bank (PDB) () and KEGG Pathway (), are integrated. The information regarding the molecular function, cellular components and biological process for S-glutathionylated proteins can be accessed by a cross-linking to the corresponding entry from GO via a UniProtKB accession number. In addition, the InterPro BioMart, which is a web service that provides the ability to build custom queries on the InterPro database, is used to extract the information about protein domains and functional sites for the S-glutathionylated proteins in dbGSH. Additionally, the molecular interaction and signaling network of S-glutathionylated proteins can be accessed by a cross-link that refers to the corresponding entries from KEGG pathway. To study the structural characteristics of S-glutathionylation sites within the protein tertiary structure, all the experimentally identified S-glutathionylation sites are mapped to the corresponding positions in the protein entries in PDB. The solvent accessibility and secondary structure around the substrate sites are also investigated. However, due to the limited information on protein structures in PDB, only 1% of the GSH sites have corresponding tertiary structures. With reference to a previous study investigating the structural characteristics of PTMs () in proteins without known tertiary structures, two effective tools, RVP-net () and PSIPRED (), are used to predict the solvent accessibility and secondary structure, respectively.