Motivation: Both gene expression levels (GEs) and copy number alterations (CNAs) have important biological implications. GEs are partly regulated by CNAs, and much effort has been devoted to understanding their relations. The regulation analysis is challenging with one gene expression possibly regulated by multiple CNAs and one CNA potentially regulating the expressions of multiple genes. The correlations among GEs and among CNAs make the analysis even more complicated. The existing methods have limitations and cannot comprehensively describe the regulation. Results: A sparse double Laplacian shrinkage method is developed. It jointly models the effects of multiple CNAs on multiple GEs. Penalization is adopted to achieve sparsity and identify the regulation relationships. Network adjacency is computed to describe the interconnections among GEs and among CNAs. Two Laplacian shrinkage penalties are imposed to accommodate the network adjacency measures. Simulation shows that the proposed method outperforms the competing alternatives with more accurate marker identification. The Cancer Genome Atlas data are analysed to further demonstrate advantages of the proposed method. Availability and implementation: R code is available at
IntroductionBoth gene expression levels (GEs) and copy number alterations (CNAs) have important biological implications. GEs are partly regulated by CNAs (). In the recent multidimensional studies, GE and CNA measurements have been collected on the same subjects, making it possible to study their regulation relationships (). Analysing the regulation of GE by CNA is challenging. In general, a CNA is positively associated with the expression level of its corresponding gene. Multiple studies have conducted bivariate analysis and focused on the dependence between a GE and its corresponding CNA. For example,proposed a procedure based on a modified correlation coefficient to search for driver genes of which both GEs and CNAs display strong equally directed abnormalities.). Thus, if we consider a regression framework, it should be multiple GEs against multiple CNAs. As we need to search for the regulation relationships among a large number of GEs and CNAs, with the often low sample sizes, regularized estimation and marker selection are needed. The analysis gets more complicated with correlations among GEs and among CNAs. Specifically, high correlations among CNAs have been observed in both coding and non-coding regions (). Co-regulated genes can have highly correlated expression levels. Recent studies under simpler settings have shown that accounting for correlations is critical for analysing genetic data (). A few studies have addressed the correlations among measurements. For example, Kim et al.(2009) developed the graph-guided fused Lasso method to address the dependency structure among responses.proposed the remMap method to identify master CNAs which affect most GEs. A common limitation of these studies is that correlation is only accounted for in one side of the regression model, and hence the analysis is not 'complete'. In addition, ineffective estimation approaches have been adopted. The goal of this study is to more effectively analyse GE and CNA data so as to better understand their relationships. To account for the fact that multiple CNAs can affect the expression level of a gene, we simultaneously model the joint effects of multiple CNAs. For the identification of important CNAs associated with a GE, an effective penalization approach is adopted. The most significant advancement is that networks are adopted to describe the correlations among GEs and among CNAs. When the correlations among GEs are taken into consideration, the analysis becomes a 'multiple GEs against multiple CNAs' regression problem. That is, both the responses and predictors are highdimensional. To accommodate the network structures, we propose a sparse double Laplacian shrinkage (SDLS) approach, which combines the power of penalized variable selection and Laplacian shrinkage. To the best of our knowledge, this study is the first to effectively accommodate correlations in both sides of the GE-CNA regression. It is noted that although our analysis focuses on GEs and CNAs, the proposed method is potentially applicable to other types of genetic measurements.
DiscussionMultiple types of genetic, epigenetic, and genomic changes can happen on the human genome. It is important to understand their relationships. Using GE and CNA as an example, we have developed aSDLS method. This method uses effective penalization for marker selection and regularized estimation. Significantly advancing from the existing studies, it adopts two Laplacian penalties to accommodate the interconnections among GEs and among CNAs. It has an intuitive formulation and can be realized using an efficient CD algorithm. Simulations show that it has comparable performance as the alternatives when there are only weak correlations among GEs and CNAs. However with moderate to strong correlations, as has been commonly observed in practical data, it has significantly better identification and prediction performance. In data analyses, it identifies associations different from those using the alternatives. The estimated regression coefficient matrix has a higher level of row and column similarity. Manually examining the analysis results for a few representative genes suggests reasonable analysis results. To better accommodate finer data structures, the proposed method introduces new penalties with new tunings. The computational cost is thus higher than the alternatives, which is the price paid for better modeling data. However, as the Laplacian penalties are differentiable, the computational complexity is acceptable. To reduce computational cost, one may set k 2  k 3 , resulting in only two tunings. Our numerical experience suggests that three tuning parameters are also acceptable. As the main objective is to develop the new method, we have adopted only one adjacency measure. We acknowledge that there may exist other perhaps better adjacency measures. However, it is not our goal to compare and draw conclusions on the relative performance of different adjacency measures. Under multiple simulation settings, the proposed method has been shown to be superior. More extensive simulations may be conducted in the future. In data analyses, the proposed method identifies associations different from the alternatives. Simple examinations suggest that the results are reasonable. More extensive analyses are needed to fully validate the findings.For the marginal approach, a '' represents an identified association.