Motivation: Elementary flux mode (EFM) is a fundamental concept as well as a useful tool in metabolic pathway analysis. One important role of EFMs is that every flux distribution can be decomposed into a set of EFMs and a number of methods to study flux distributions originated from it. Yet finding such decompositions requires the complete set of EFMs, which is intractable in genome-scale metabolic networks due to combinatorial explosion. Results: In this article, we proposed an algorithm to decompose flux distributions into EFMs in genome-scale networks. It is an iterative scheme of a mixed integer linear program. Unlike previous optimization models to find pathways, any feasible solutions can become EFMs in our algorithm. This advantage enables the algorithm to approximate the EFM of largest contribution to an objective reaction in a flux distribution. Our algorithm is able to find EFMs of flux distributions with complex structures, closer to the realistic case in which a cell is subject to various constraints. A case of Escherichia coli growth in the Lysogeny broth (LB) medium containing various carbon sources was studied. Essential metabolites and their syntheses were located. Information on the contribution of each carbon source not obvious from the apparent flux distribution was also revealed. Our work further confirms the utility of finding EFMs by optimization models in genome-scale metabolic networks.
INTRODUCTIONImmediately after the success in genomics, the next step is to fill the gap between genotypes and phenotypes to have a full picture of biological systems. The genome-scale metabolic network has been playing this role and has been found useful in answering biological questions (). During the past decade, various methods have been proposed to analyze metabolic networks and the constraint-based modeling approach is exceptionally prominent (). One object of particular importance and increasing interest in the approach is the elementary flux mode (EFM). EFM is an important theoretical concept as well as a practical tool in metabolic pathway analysis. Theoretically, it is the minimal operational unit * To whom correspondence should be addressed. at steady state in metabolic networks satisfying the thermodynamic constraint regarding the reversibility of each reaction (). Practically, EFMs have been applied in a variety of studies: investigating network structures like network robustness (), dynamic properties of pathways (), pathway efficiency () and modularity (), exploring new pathways () and hence suggesting rational strain design (;), predicting mutants' behavior (), identifying interactions with other networks (), etc. (reviewed in). An important interpretation of EFMs is that every flux distributioncan be decomposed as a positive sum of a subset of EFMs {e j } with the 'no cancelation' property that all e j have a particular component being zero wherever v has that component being zero (). That is,) for all j where Z(v) ={i|v i = 0} is the index set for the zero components of v. The 'no cancelation' property is unique compared to other generating sets of the flux space like extreme pathways (EPs) (). In many studies, flux distributions are analyzed by similar decompositions. The first attempt is the spectrum to determine the range of attainable weights for each EP (). This approach is also applicable to EFMs. Later, decomposing flux distributions with minimum sum of weights has been proposed () and applied to study yeast glycolysis (). Decompositions with respect to other objectives have also been adopted to investigate particular cases, for instances, maximum number of active EFMs (), minimum relative error (), maximum yield rate () and maximum entropy (). There are also other studies analyzing flux distributions by decompositions into EFMs (e.g.). These approaches based on decomposing flux distributions, despite the insights they have provided, have their capabilities limited because the calculation always requires the complete set of EFMs in prior given a metabolic network, whose computation is notoriously hard due to the combinatorial explosion when the network size grows. This drawback was first studied in Klamt and Stelling (2002) and has been mentioned in many literatures (e.g.).Page: 2257 22562262
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we presented an algorithm which solves MILPs iteratively to decompose a flux distribution into EFMs in genomescale metabolic networks. One advantage of the algorithm is the elementarity of solutions independent of the optimality of MILPs. The objective function can then be used for other purposes and we suggested approximating the largest contributing EFMs in flux distributions. We demonstrated the ability of the algorithm to decompose flux distributions into EFMs and approximate EFMs with largest Page: 2262 22562262