Motivation: Medical Subject Headings (MeSH) indexing, which is to assign a set of MeSH main headings to citations, is crucial for many important tasks in biomedical text mining and information retrieval. Large-scale MeSH indexing has two challenging aspects: the citation side and MeSH side. For the citation side, all existing methods, including Medical Text Indexer (MTI) by National Library of Medicine and the state-of-the-art method, MeSHLabeler, deal with text by bag-of-words, which cannot capture semantic and context-dependent information well. Methods: We propose DeepMeSH that incorporates deep semantic information for large-scale MeSH indexing. It addresses the two challenges in both citation and MeSH sides. The citation side challenge is solved by a new deep semantic representation, D2V-TFIDF, which concatenates both sparse and dense semantic representations. The MeSH side challenge is solved by using the learn-ing to rank framework of MeSHLabeler, which integrates various types of evidence generated from the new semantic representation. Results: DeepMeSH achieved a Micro F-measure of 0.6323, 2% higher than 0.6218 of MeSHLabeler and 12% higher than 0.5637 of MTI, for BioASQ3 challenge data with 6000 citations.
IntroductionMedical Subject Headings (MeSH) is a comprehensive controlled vocabulary, which has been developed and maintained by National Library of Medicine (NLM), resulting in already 27 455 MeSH main headings (MHs) (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/pubs/factsheets/mesh.html) by 2015. One important usage of MeSH is to index citations in MEDLINE (NCBI Resource), to catalog documents, books as well as audiovisuals recorded in NLM. Currently one citation in MEDLINE is indexed by approximately 13 MHs on average. MeSH has also been used in many other applications in biomedical text mining and information retrieval, such as query expansion (), document clustering (and document searching (). Thus accurate MeSH indexing of biomedical documents is crucial for the biomedical researchers in formulating novel scientific hypothesis and discovering new knowledge. Currently, human curators in NLM assign most relevant MeSH headings to documents, resulting in that 806 326 MEDLINE citations were indexed in 2015 (http://www.nlm.nih.gov/bsd/bsd_key. html). This work is very precious but clearly laborious, since to index an article, curators need to review the full text of the corresponding MEDLINE article, which is time consuming and prohibitively expensive For example, the average cost of annotating one MEDLINE article is estimated to be around $9.4 (), meaning a huge total cost for indexing around one million V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.