A new edition of the DelPhi web server, DelPhi web server v2, is released to include atomic presentation of geometrical figures. These geometrical objects can be used to model nano-size objects together with real biological macromolecules. The position and size of the object can be manipulated by the user in real time until desired results are achieved. The server fixes structural defects, adds hydrogen atoms and calculates electrostatic energies and the corresponding electrostatic potential and ionic distributions. Availability and implementation: The web server follows a client– server architecture built on PHP and HTML and utilizes DelPhi software. The computation is carried out on supercomputer cluster and results are given back to the user via http protocol, including the ability to visualize the structure and corresponding electrostatic potential via Jmol implementation. The DelPhi web server is available from
INTRODUCTIONElectrostatics play a profound role in molecular biology due to biological macromolecules being made of thousands/millions of atoms, with different size and partial charge situated at short distances. The importance of electrostatic interactions and energies is illustrated by the fact that many biological phenomena are predominantly electrostatic in origin as is salt-dependence of binding () and folding (), pHdependence () and pKa shifts in proteins () and RNAs (). The main obstacle in modeling electrostatics in biological systems is the presence of water (). Here we utilize a particular resource, DelPhi (), version 5, which is based on the continuum approach and solves the PoissonBoltzmann equation (PBE) via the Finite-Difference algorithm. We developed a DelPhi web server which is aimed to provide easy access to performing electrostatic calculations in biological systems without prior knowledge and without having a computational infrastructure in place (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.In addition, with the progress of nano-technology, researchers frequently aim at modeling hybrid systems comprised of nanoobjects and biological macromolecules as proteins deposited on a dielectric plate, membranes probed with the tip of an atomic force microscope, interactions of amino acids with spherical nanoparticles and many others. However, currently there is no available software and web server capable of modeling such hybrid systems [a web server utilizing APBS to solve PBE in systems comprising of protein and water was recently reported (. To address this need, we have developed the next generation of DelPhi web server v2, which allows the users to create nano-objects, change their position and shape in real time, and carry out electrostatic calculations in the presence of biological macromolecules.