Motivation: A system-wide approach to revealing the underlying molecular state of a cell is a long-standing biological challenge. Developed over the last decade, gene expression profiles possess the characteristics of such an assay. They have the capacity to reveal both underlying molecular events as well as broader phenotypes such as clinical outcomes. To interpret these profiles, many gene sets have been developed that characterize biological processes. However, the full potential of these gene sets has not yet been achieved. Since the advent of gene expression databases, many have posited that they can reveal properties of activities that are not evident from individual datasets, analogous to how the expression of a single gene generally cannot reveal the activation of a biological process. Results: To address this issue, we have developed a high-throughput method to mine gene expression databases for the regulation of gene sets. Given a set of genes, we scored it against each gene expression dataset by looking for enrichment of co-regulated genes relative to an empirical null distribution. After validating the method, we applied it to address two biological problems. First, we deciphered the E2F transcriptional network. We confirmed that true transcriptional targets exhibit a distinct regulatory profile across a database. Second, we leveraged the patterns of regulation across a database of gene sets to produce an automatically generated catalog of biological processes. These demonstrations revealed the power of a global analysis of the data contained within gene expression databases, and the potential for using them to address biological questions. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONThe state of a cell is reflected in its transcriptional profile. Both molecular events (such as the activation of a cell surface receptor, loss of function of a tumor suppressor or initiation of the cell cycle) and functional attributes (sensitivity to therapeutics or propensity to metastasize) are evident in gene expression (). They can be measured on a DNA * To whom correspondence should be addressed. microarray and recognized by computational algorithms. Because such a diverse range of molecular activities can be identified from the same gene expression profiles (), we argue that gene expression contains the complete (or nearly complete) compendium of the underlying cellular activities. In other words, a gene expression profile embodies the state of a cell. Currently, a major challenge is to interpret gene expression profiles. A common approach is to construct narratives based on the functions of the genes showing changes in gene expression. This is made difficult, however, by a limited understanding of what the genes do, compounded by pleiotropy in gene function. One solution to these problems is to consider that biological processes are brought about by the activation of many genes. Thus, taking into account the co-ordinated activities of sets of genes yields insight into processes that are not evident from the expression of single genes. To capitalize on this idea, many have generated gene expression signatures that evince a biological activity. Although signatures can take different forms, the vast majority consists simply of lists of genes that are involved in biological processes. This type of signature is also called a gene set, and MSigDB is the largest database (). To predict the activation of signatures from gene expression profiles, many computational algorithms have been developed (). While these algorithms operate on single datasets, many have anticipated methods that can tap into gene expression databases ever since their development a decade ago (). The expectation was that such resources contain rich biological phenotypes that could be mined for value. To do this, a wealth of approaches have been developed that can search gene expression databases based on associated metadata, but there are fewer options for searching the gene expression profiles themselves (). To date, there have been two systems. The first, SPELL, was developed to predict Gene Ontology (GO) terms for yeast genes based on patterns seen across a gene expression database (). Although it does score the datasets, the focus is on the annotation of single genes, and it does not provide a statistical significance. A more recently developed algorithm does provide the significance, but requires as input a weighted list of genes and thus cannot be applied to gene sets, which are unweighted (). Therefore, there is not yet an ability to fully capitalize on the data within gene expression databases. To address the need for a method to mine gene expression databases, we have developed a novel approach to identify the