A tool to predict the effect that newly discovered genomic variants have on known transcripts is indispensible in prioritizing and categorizing such variants. In Ensembl, a web-based tool (the SNP Effect Predictor) and API interface can now functionally annotate variants in all Ensembl and Ensembl Genomes supported species. Availability: The Ensembl SNP Effect Predictor can be accessed via the Ensembl website at http://www.ensembl.org/. The Ensembl API (http://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/api/ api_installation.html for installation instructions) is open source software. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONAs costs of resequencing and genotyping fall, increasing amounts of variation data are being produced that cannot be annotated effectively without access to considerable computational resources and genomic annotation databases. Often the most valuable information to know about a variant is the effect the observed alleles have on transcripts, which may aid selection of variations for genotyping studies and in turn have a part to play in the discovery of new drug targets and other biologically significant loci. Deriving this information manually is laborious and error-prone, impractical for large sets of data and impossible without access to suitable genomic annotation resources. Of critical interest is the existence of any novel variant positions within a dataset, and what information is available for known variant loci. Although these answers are available through dbSNP (), the process of submitting the data to the NCBI to be processed and annotated can often take months and requires the data to be made public. Even before the developments reported in this article, Ensembl () could also be used to derive similar annotation by setting up a full local Ensembl database containing the variant information and running scripts from the Ensembl Variation database production pipeline. Other tools available for the annotation of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in humans are comprehensively reviewed in Karchin (2008).Variation API () exists to retrieve variation data such as SNPs, insertions and deletions from Ensembl databases. Entities such as variants are represented as objects, created by adaptors that act as factories for generating specific objects. Example code demonstrating the use of the API to derive consequences for a list of variant positions is shown in Supplementary. Documentation on the API is found at http://www.ensembl.org/info/docs/Pdoc/ensemblvariation/index.html. Given a variant position, the API retrieves overlapping transcripts from the Ensembl Core database and determines where in the transcript structure the variant falls. If the variant falls within an exon, new codons for each variant allele are derived and compared to the reference codon. The location of the variant relative to regulatory regions is also assessed using the Ensembl Functional Genomics database where available. The results, including amino acid changes and relative positions in the cDNA and peptide sequences, are stored in the resulting transcript variation objects, along with one or more named consequence types. At present Ensembl provides only a Perl API, but enabled by the open source nature of the project Python (PyCogent, http://pycogent.sourceforge.net/examples/query_ensembl.html; PyGr, http://code.google.com/p/pygr/wiki/PygrOnEnsembl) APIs have been created. As yet, these do not encompass the full scope of Ensembl, and hence do not include consequence prediction functionality.