Motivation: To discover and study periodic processes in biological systems, we sought to identify periodic patterns in their gene expression data. We surveyed a large number of available methods for identifying periodicity in time series data and chose representatives of different mathematical perspectives that performed well on both synthetic data and biological data. Synthetic data were used to evaluate how each algorithm responds to different curve shapes, periods, phase shifts, noise levels and sampling rates. The biological datasets we tested represent a variety of periodic processes from different organisms, including the cell cycle and metabolic cycle in Saccharomyces cerevisiae, circadian rhythms in Mus musculus and the root clock in Arabidopsis thaliana. Results: From these results, we discovered that each algorithm had different strengths. Based on our findings, we make recommendations for selecting and applying these methods depending on the nature of the data and the periodic patterns of interest. Additionally, these results can also be used to inform the design of large-scale biological rhythm experiments so that the resulting data can be used with these algorithms to detect periodic signals more effectively.
INTRODUCTIONMany methods for detecting periodicity or patterns in biological time series data exist, and these methods often come from scientific fields outside of biology. Although these methods may perform well for their original area of intended use, it is often unclear how well they will perform on a given biological dataset. In this study, we investigate the utility of four algorithms. Ours is not the first effort to tackle this question of algorithm selection:In de, they compared the performance of their new method with five existing methods (visual inspection, Fourier and correlation scores, partial least squares regression, single-pulse model, cubic spline model and Bayesian model) on three cell cycle datasets from Saccharomyces cerevisiae by. They demonstrated that their new method outperformed these other methods at identifying genes from benchmark gene sets, which was attributed to including a measure of amplitude in their scoring. As in many such studies, they found that no single method performed the best across all their benchmark sets.analyzed the performance of five algorithms [phase consistency, address reduction, cyclohedron test, stable persistence and LombScargle (LS)] on the outputs of the segmentation clock in Mus musculus. They compared the top results of the algorithms with benchmark sets of known cyclic genes. They then looked at the algorithm's top genes that were not in the benchmark sets to see if they had a biological connection to known cyclic behaviors. Some methods performed better in the first task, others performed better in the second.analyzed the performance of three closely related spectral analysis schemes (LS, Capon and missing-data amplitude and phase estimation (MAPES)) on a cell cycle dataset in S.cerevisiae. For their benchmarks, they used the list of genes involved in the cell cycle fromand the list of genes not involved in the cell cycle from de. Their results showed that LS outperformed the other methods. Each of these studies measured the performance of algorithms by how well they can identify known sets of genes for a given periodic process (cell cycle, somitogenesis, etc.). To avoid the potential biases and challenges in this approach, we augmented our study of biological data (Section 2.2) with a study on synthetic datasets (Section 2.1) so that we could quantify an algorithm's performance against known ground truth. We used synthetic data to characterize algorithm performance for different signal shapes, noise levels and sampling rates that are present in different organisms and technologies. Synthetic data were also *To whom correspondence should be addressed. used to investigate the algorithm's ability to recover period, phase and amplitude. Previous studies generally focused on one type of periodic signal or one type of organism. Our goal is to study how algorithms perform across a variety of organisms and periodic processes. We used algorithms to analyze experimental data from several systems: the cell cycle () and metabolic cycle () in S.cerevisiae, circadian rhythm () in M.musculus and the root clock () in Arabidopsis thaliana. We focused on microarray datasets and designed the synthetic data to capture the characteristics of these data types. After evaluating a large collection of algorithms, de Lichtenberg (DL) (), LS (), JTK_CYCLE (JTK) () and persistent homology (PH) () were selected for comparison. Several other algorithms were evaluated but not included in further analysis because of similarity to tested algorithms, being too general, using pre-processing algorithms, lesser performance or no available implementation. These included, but were not limited to, COSOPT (), ARSER (), LSPR () and address reduction (). The four algorithms were chosen because they derive from four different mathematical methods for identifying periodicity. They were also selected for their ability to work on datasets with limited numbers of periods, as the microarray datasets we examine contain 23 periods. Each defines periodicity differently, weights aspects of rhythmicity differently (e.g. amplitude, profile shape) and responds differently to noise, irregular intervals and missing data. Periodic signals are often described using the properties of cosine curves: period, amplitude and phase shift. Period is the length of one cycle or, alternatively, the distance before a pattern repeats. Amplitude is one half the peak-to-trough height. Phase shift is the distance that the signal has been shifted in time. Each of these algorithms returns a list of P-values or scores for each of the time series evaluated based on some combination of periodicity and/or amplitude. The LS method was developed in the field of astrophysics () as a Fourier style method, but was designed to deal with data that exhibit irregular sampling, which is typical of observational data in astronomy. It measures the correspondence to sinusoidal curves and determines their statistical significance (). JTK has its origins in statistics but was adapted for biological data in. It correlates pairs of points and then computes the significance of the correlation to that of a reference curve. The algorithm described by de Lichtenberg (DL) () was constructed specifically for the yeast cell cycle and thus comes directly from biology. It measures the periodicity of a signal, but also takes into account a measure of the amplitude. It uses permutations to generate a background distribution for measuring significance. PH comes from the field of computational topology, an area that lies at the intersection of mathematics and computer science (). PH examines persistence pairings of minima and maxima along the curve. A single minima and maxima is considered to be the ideal perfect oscillation; additional smaller oscillations create more minima and maxima that are interpreted as a less perfect curve.
DISCUSSIONOur findings suggest that curve shape has the largest impact on the scoring of biological signals by these periodicity detection algorithms, especially under conditions of higher noise or lower sampling rate. Algorithms such as LS, DL and JTK rely on comparing data with reference curves (LS and DL assume a sinusoidal curve, JTK can use a user-specified curve); therefore, they will perform most accurately when the data match the assumptions specified by the reference curves. Additionally, as noise increases or sampling rate decreases, the ability of these algorithms to classify non-standard curve shapes degrades much more rapidly than for true cosine shapes. This is helpful when a specific type of shape is being sought and any other types should be filtered out, but is limited in a more exploratory setting when it is unknown what curve shapes a periodic process might produce. This also brings up the question of preprocessing the data to remove factors external to the expression levels (noise, systematic error, population averaging effects, etc). To perform preprocessing, the type of external factor must be identified and quantitatively characterized in way that an algorithm can correct for it. Additionally, computationally fitting and resampling data at a higher rate can make a dataset more amenable to computational approaches, but in the case of LS and JTK, would alter the resulting P-values. Although these could increase performance of periodicity detection algorithms, caution should be exercised to avoid altering the underlying signal.The applicability of the recommendations will vary depending on how well the characteristics in the data are known and how well the assumptions of these tests match these characteristics. In cases where the characteristics of noise, the number of cycles or shape are not known in the dataset, these recommendations should be relaxed and we suggest using several algorithms. Additionally, if the characteristics of the data are not similar to the synthetic signals (e.g. profiles are more similar to a square wave), then the recommendations may not perform as desired. Given their different underlying ideas of periodicity, these algorithms could be used together to recover a more comprehensive set of periodic signals within a dataset. This is especially useful when the signal attributes are not known beforehand. Additionally, these algorithms also contain components for measuring phase shift and amplitude that could be used separately, and supplemented with other methods. Amplitude could be a useful measure of regulation, and phase shift is an important measure of timing. Being able to accurately estimate phase shifts between transcripts can allow us to reconstruct timing and suggest regulatory relationships. Another issue is how to interpret and compare the P-values or scores that are returned by these methods. The work ofand Futschik andsuggests that the significance of the results is generally overestimated in statistical methods where the null model may have more randomness than exists in the data. This causes the significance values to be excessively optimistic and overestimates the number of periodic genes. Additionally, LS and JTK return P-values, and these P-values change if the sampling density changes. Therefore, the periodicity of two identical profiles, one with twice as many time points as the other, is not directly comparable using the final P-values from these algorithms. As we have seen in this study, there are several algorithms that could be run against biological datasets that will return results of interest. To improve these results, there must be an understanding of what information is available in the data, what answers are being sought in the data and which algorithms will be best able to bridge the gap between these two points.