Motivations: High-throughput sequencing has made it possible to sequence DNA methylation of a whole genome at the single-base resolution. A sample, however, may contain a number of distinct methylation patterns. For instance, cells of different types and in different developmental stages may have different methyl-ation patterns. Alleles may be differentially methylated, which may partially explain that the large portions of epigenomes from single cell types are partially methylated, and may have major effects on transcriptional output. Approaches relying on DNA sequence polymorphism to identify individual patterns from a mixture of heterogeneous epigenomes are insufficient as methylcytosines occur at a much higher density than SNPs. Results: We have developed a mixture model-based approach for resolving distinct epigenomes from a heterogeneous sample. In particular, the model is applied to the detection of allele-specific methylation (ASM). The methods are tested on a synthetic methylome and applied to an Arabidopsis
INTRODUCTIONThe advancement of high-throughput sequencing has opened up many important areas of applications, one of which is epigenome sequencing. DNA methylation may repress or activate transcription, and is known to be involved in embryogenesis, genomic imprinting and tumorigenesis in mammals, and transposon silencing in plants (). To understand the regulation and dynamics of DNA methylation, the locations of the modified cytosines need to be identified. The first single-base resolution mappings of DNA methylation were produced for the whole Arabidopsis thaliana genome () and for selected subsets of sites in the mouse genome () using various bisulfite sequencing technologies. DNA methylation is the modification of DNA base cytosine (methylcytosine). A map of DNA methylation at single-base resolution is referred to as methylome or epigenome. Cells of different types and in different developmental stages may have different methylation patterns. It has been observed that large portions of the Arabidopsis methylomes are partially methylated (). This may be as a result of the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. sample containing a number of distinct methylomes. Aberrant methylation is also a general feature of cancer genomes. A better understanding of methylation patterns in cancer genomes may lead to both new diagnostic markers and therapies based on the detection of methylation changes occurring early in tumorigenesis (). In a tumor tissue particularly of an early stage, however, cancerous cells and normal cells are often mixed together. DNA methylation patterns can also act as markers for tracing stem cell expansion and tumor growth (). Making use of methylation patterns in this way requires determining methylation patterns associated with individual cells or cells from the same clone. When comparing human fibroblast cell IMR90 and H1 embryonic stem cell (ESC) lines, it is observed that IMR90 has a lower level of methylation than H1 ESC (). Both IMR90 and H1 are of a single cell type. While it is expected that large portions (80%) of the X chromosome are partially methylated as the IMR90 cell line is from a female and the DNA methylation is known to play an important role in X chromosome inactivation (), it is unexpectedly observed that around 38% of IMR90 autosomes are identified as partially methylated domains (PMD). What is the nature of partial methylations in a single cell type? Might allelic differences contribute to the partial methylations? Answering these questions requires detecting allele-specific methylation (ASM) patterns. The methylcytosine is sometimes referred to as the fifth DNA base (). Applying methods for detection of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) to methylation, however, may present difficulties. Methylcytosine is much more dynamic than nucleotides and observations generally suggest that methylation of a cytosine site is a statistical event. Unlike SNPs where a nucleotide occurs at a rate of 0, 50 or 100% in a diploid individual (if sequencing errors may be ignored), the methylation level at a particular site may fall anywhere in the range from 0% to 100%. Whether a methylcytosine is allele-specific therefore cannot be determined by the site alone. It needs supporting evidence from the neighboring nucleotides. If a partially methylated cytosine is in the close vicinity of a SNP such that reads are long enough to cover both sites, then it is straightforward to determine from which allele the reads are originated thus determining the methylation level of the respective alleles. Some studies have shown that ASM is associated with SNPs (). The density of methylation across the whole genome, however, is much higher than that of DNA sequence polymorphism. For instance, while there are close to 3 million SNPs discovered in the human genome 62 million and 45 million methylcytosines were detected in H1 and IMR90 cells (). It has also been observed that changes in cytosine methylation occur at a frequency much greater than that of the DNA sequence mutations (). As a result, SNPs are absent in large portions of the methylomes. We will describe a method in this article that detects ASM without the assistance of SNPs. In addition, even though the functionalities of ASM are not well understood except that they play an important role in imprinting (), it seems that the methylation level of an individual cytosine is less important than the overall levels of methylations within a region, which is also in contrast to the SNPs. We, therefore, focus our effort in detecting regions of ASM. The remainder of the article is organized as follows. A mixture model is described in Section 2 for modeling the outcome of a methylation sequencing experiment where the sample may contain a mixture of heterogeneous epigenomes. It aims at predicting methylation levels for each cytosine in each individual epigenome. Section 3 lays out the details for detecting regions of ASM based on the mixture model and validates the methods on a synthetic methylome. The methods are then applied to an Arabidopsis root cell methylome and the results are listed in Section 4. Section 5 discusses the results and offers some future directions.