Motivation: Biological rhythms, such as rhythms in gene expression controlled by the cell cycle or the circadian clock, are important in cell physiology. A common type of experiment compares rhythmicity in tissues or cells either kept under different conditions or having different genotypes. Such investigations provide insights into underlying mechanisms as well as functions of rhythms. Results: We present and benchmark a set of statistical and computational methods for this type of analysis, here termed differential rhythmicity analysis. The methods detect alterations in rhythm amplitude, phase and signal to noise ratio in one set of measurements compared to another. Using these methods, we compared circadian rhythms in liver mRNA expression in mice held under two different lighting conditions: constant darkness and light-dark cycles, respectively. This analysis revealed widespread and reproducible amplitude increases in mice kept in light-dark cycles. Further analysis of the subset of differentially rhythmic transcripts implied the immune system in mediating ambient light-dark cycles to rhythmic transcriptional activities. The methods are suitable for genome-or proteome-wide studies, and provide rigorous P values against well-defined null hypotheses. Availability and Implementation: The methods were implemented as the accompanying R software package DODR, available on CRAN.
IntroductionBiological rhythms in metabolites or mRNA and protein expression include circadian (daily) rhythms, cell cycle dependent rhythms and various ultradian rhythms, the latter with periods of at most a few hours (). Our research focus is on circadian rhythms, which have been extensively studied at the whole transcriptome level especially in mouse liver and Drosophila. In mouse liver, thousands of transcripts exhibit rhythmic abundances, which lead to rhythmic variations in numerous activities and aspects of cell physiology (L ck and). When investigating mRNA or protein expression on a genomewide scale, rhythmic or not, a task is often to compare samples harvested from subjects kept under different conditions, undergoing different treatments, or having different genotypes (all these hereafter termed groups). From each sample, thousands of transcript or protein abundances may be estimated using technologies such as microarray expression profiling, RNA sequencing, or mass spectrometry. On the data analysis side, this routinely leads to the wellknown differential expression problem (). In a basic differential expression problem, the researcher compares transcriptome-, metabolome-or proteomewide expression profiles or abundances of two groups, each consisting of a few biological replicates. The objective is to identify metabolites, transcripts or proteins whose concentrations or expression levels are significantly different between the two groups. For studies on biological rhythms on a transcriptome-, metabolome-or proteome-wide scale, samples are typically harvested from animals at different time points over a time span covering one or more period lengths. When studying circadian rhythms, this entails, for instance, harvesting samples every 2, 3 or 4 h over a time span of 24 or 48 h. Samples are often taken from animals either synchronized to 12 h light/12 h dark cycles, or they may be taken from animals kept in constant darkness. The former condition allows detection of rhythms that are generated by the cellular core circadian clock (a small network of transcription factors influencing their own expression present in all cells), by the central circadian system acting upon the tissue (in mammals the central system consists of the suprachiasmatic nuclei in the hypothalamus), or directly by the light cues via various mechanisms (). The latter condition allows the isolation of rhythms generated by the intrinsic circadian clock, either the cellular clock or the central circadian system. In this way, thousands of time series of features are obtained. These time series have to be analyzed statistically to isolate features whose levels vary in a circadian fashion. Suitable statistical tests, such as parametric harmonic regression method (), spectral based methods (), or nonparametric methods such as JTK_CYCLE () or RAIN (), are employed for this purpose. Many other methods exist, as reviewed previously (). These tests result in a P value for each feature (e.g. transcript) for the null hypothesis that its expression level does not vary in a rhythmic fashion. P values are then corrected for multiple testing, and the investigator may then isolate a set of rhythmic transcripts of interest with a specified false discovery rate (FDR). Parametric methods are able to detect weaker rhythms (they are more powerful) than non-parametric methods. However, parametric methods rely on stricter assumptions: often, measurement errors must have Gaussian distributions, and the methods are sensible to outliers. Non-parametric methods sacrifice some degree of power in order to gain robustness against outliers, and they make fewer assumptions about measurement errors (). Often, transcriptome-or metabolome-wide circadian rhythm studies compare two groups, which leads to the subject matter of the present article. One example is comparison of wild type animals to mutant animals with various deletions of core clock transcription factor genes (). Such studies may allow isolating the contributions to the circadian transcriptome from various sources. Another example is comparative studies of animals subjected to various nutritional challenges (). These studies all have a certain analytical task in common: to detect changes in rhythmicity in many metabolites or transcripts. Here, we will refer to this task as the differential rhythmicity problem. To detect e.g. differentially rhythmic transcripts, researchers have the typically isolated rhythmic transcripts in both groups, using P value or FDR cutoffs against the null hypothesis of no rhythmicity in each group. Transcripts with P values falling under the cutoff in one group and over the cutoff in the other group are then considered differentially rhythmic (). In principle, the two cutoffs may also be chosen differently for each group, in order for the procedure to be more conservative. For example, in order to detect transcripts whose rhythms have been lost in mutant animals, one may require a P value smaller than 0.001 for wild type animals, and a P value greater than 0.3 in mutant animals. Additional criteria might be employed too, such as fold changes between peaks and troughs. Another approach to the differential rhythmicity problem was taken by investigators researching core clock transcripts in two different rat strains (). Amplitudes were estimated with 95% confidence intervals for each transcript and strain using a non-parametric method (). Transcripts for which the confidence intervals did not overlap were classified as differentially rhythmic. Unfortunately, FDRs or P values for these approaches against reasonable null hypotheses (i.e. no change in rhythmicity between the groups) have not been presented or computed routinely, since a comprehensive framework for this task has been lacking in the field. Changes of phase (peak time) may also be of interest, as was the case for a study on the effects of high fat diet on the circadian transcriptome and metabolome (), although a rigorous method to estimate and assign P values to phase shifts is lacking. Here, we report a unified framework for the estimation and detection of changes in rhythmicity, both amplitudes and phases. We present both parametric methods for the task, as well as rank based methods that are robust to outliers and non-Gaussian variations and measurement error. These methods were implemented as an accompanying R package called DODR. The procedures were thoroughly benchmarked, and compared to P value cutoff methods. We also report an application of DODR to mRNA expression profiles of livers of mice kept in 12 h light/12 h dark conditions, and in constant darkness, respectively. By doing this, we were able to quantify the lightgoverned circadian transcriptome, and to implicate the transcription factor IRF7 in relaying light cues to the liver.