Differential Identification using Mixtures Ensemble (DIME) is a package for identification of biologically significant differential binding sites between two conditions using ChIP-seq data. It considers a collection of finite mixture models combined with a false discovery rate (FDR) criterion to find statistically significant regions. This leads to a more reliable assessment of differential binding sites based on a statistical approach. In addition to ChIP-seq, DIME is also applicable to data from other high-throughput platforms.
INTRODUCTIONChIP-seq, chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) assay followed by sequencing technology, is gaining popularity as the experiment to analyze genome-wide proteinDNA interactions at high resolution. ChIP-seq experiment produces millions of short sequences that needs to be aligned to a reference genome. The location where a significant number of short reads overlapped on the genome (sometimes referred to as a peak) has been shown to coincide with chromatin immunoprecipitation enrichment, indicating the binding site of the protein of interest. A number of methods have been proposed to identify peaks in ChIP-seq data, such as FindPeaks, MACS and CisGenome. For more details on these and other existing algorithm including their comparisons, see. These softwares focus on identifying the peaks in one sample or in comparison with a matching input DNA. Whereas in DIME, we focus on identifying differential binding sites of a specific protein under two different biological conditions. The input to DIME is normalized differences of ChIP-seq counts, as in our recent work (). Specifically, in that paper, we proposed a method to normalize and classify the enrichment regions that are significantly different between two ChIP-seq samples (). Since then we have thoroughly compared the fitting of ours with another mixture model in the literature (), proposed an ensemble approach to synthesize advantages from different where data is an R list as described above. Optional input parameters are available to control the fit and classification process. In the example above, two convergence criteria can be specified by users: gng.max.iter assigns the maximum number of iterations for fitting GNG model (default = 2000) and gng.tol (default = 1e-5) specifies the L 2 norm of differences in the GNG parameter estimates in the current and previous iterations. Thus, the algorithm will stop whenever eitherPage: 1570 15691570
DISCUSSIONWe have developed an R package (DIME) to model and make inference on ChIP-seq experiments under two different conditions. The algorithm effectively selects the model that provides the best fit to the normalized data, which lead to statistical inferences with high sensitivity and specificity. DIME can be easily combined with other R or Bioconductor packages to perform upstream and downstream analysis of ChIP-seq data. Furthermore, even though DIME isdeveloped to fit and classify ChIP-seq data, it is highly applicable to other high-throughput data as well especially given its ensemble nature.