Motivation: DNA copy number gains and losses are commonly found in tumor tissue, and some of these aberrations play a role in tumor genesis and development. Although high resolution DNA copy number data can be obtained using array-based techniques, no single method is widely used to distinguish between recurrent and sporadic copy number aberrations. Results: Here we introduce Discovering Copy Number Aberrations Manifested In Cancer (DiNAMIC), a novel method for assessing the statistical significance of recurrent copy number aberrations. In contrast to competing procedures, the testing procedure underlying DiNAMIC is carefully motivated, and employs a novel cyclic permutation scheme. Extensive simulation studies show that DiNAMIC controls false positive discoveries in a variety of realistic scenarios. We use DiNAMIC to analyze two publicly available tumor datasets, and our results show that DiNAMIC detects multiple loci that have biological relevance. Availability: Source code implemented in R, as well as text files containing examples and sample datasets are available at
INTRODUCTIONDNA copy number aberrations (CNAs) are commonly found in tumor tissue, and can range from losses (deletions) of one or both copies of chromosomal regions to gains of numerous additional copies (amplifications). The size of these aberrations can range from entire chromosome arms to less than 100 kb (). A variety of platforms are used to detect CNAs, and provide quantitative signals that reflect the underlying discrete copy number (). Much of the statistical effort in analyzing CNAs has focused on discerning copy number at each location within individual tumors (), and in handling the potential contamination of normal tissue in tumor samples (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.In contrast to heritable copy number variation, CNAs are the result of genomic instability in somatic tumor tissue (). From the earliest days of modern cancer genetics, it was recognized that such instability could unmask or promote the effects of tumor suppressors and oncogenes (). However, surveys of a number of tumor types (e.g.) demonstrate that sporadic gains and losses can also occur throughout the genome, likely representing generic genomic instability, with little effect on tumor progression. The phenomenon of recurrent CNAs, which affect the same region in multiple tumors, is of great interest, as such CNAs may highlight genes or regions that are directly involved in tumor progression. Past studies have detected recurrent CNAs in a wide range of tumor types, with an extensive catalog of these findings in the Mitelman Database () and the Genetic Alterations in Cancer (GAC) database (). Despite the apparent successes in the field, there is no clear basis for a general approach for sensitive detection of recurrent CNAs, as many regions important for tumor progression may affect only a minority of tumors. The task of distinguishing between sporadic and recurrent CNAs is thus largely a statistical issue. The instabilityselection model introduced byprovides a statistical framework specific to loss of heterozygosity (LOH) data, but even for this specific data type difficulties remain in assessing significance over multiple markers (). The problem of assessing significance for general copy number data has received relatively little attention until recently (). Few of the existing methods (reviewed below) provide an explicit description of the null hypothesis being tested, or fully acknowledge the inherent correlation structure of copy number data. For these reasons, it has been difficult to place the techniques in a traditional statistical framework or to understand error rates on a genome-wide scale. The purpose of this article is to introduce an explicit testing scheme for recurrent CNAs that preserves correlations inherent to the data. Before proceeding to our testing framework, we review the current methods for copy number calling/segmentation, which can serve as a useful intermediary to the detection of recurrent CNAs. Numerous technologies are available to measure DNA copy number, ranging from array comparative genomic hybridization () at tens of thousands of probes, to highdensity SNP platforms (up to 1 million probes or more,). Reviews of the technologies are provided elsewhere (), but a common feature is that a quantitative signal is extracted at each probe that reflects underlying
DISCUSSIONThe analysis of DNA copy number data has proven to be a valuable tool for the study of cancer. Segmentation methods can be used to detect loci where copy number changes occur for a single subject, but different approaches are needed if we wish to assess the statistical significance of DNA copy number changes present in multiple subjects. Here we have introduced DiNAMIC, a new permutationbased method that can be used by researchers to detect statistically significant recurrent CNAs. When compared to existing methods, DiNAMIC has a number of advantages. First, since DiNAMIC makes no distributional assumptions, it can analyze a variety of input datacontinuous, continuous segmented or discrete segmented. In addition, DiNAMIC can analyze genome-wide data, as well as data from a single chromosome or chromosome arm. Finally, it does not require any tuning parameters, such as user-defined thresholds for gain or loss, that are potentially arbitrary.