Motivation: Clusters of protein–DNA interaction events involving the same transcription factor are known to act as key components of invertebrate and mammalian promoters and enhancers. However, detecting closely spaced homotypic events from ChIP-Seq data is challenging because random variation in the ChIP fragmentation process obscures event locations. Results: The Genome Positioning System (GPS) can predict protein– DNA interaction events at high spatial resolution from ChIP-Seq data, while retaining the ability to resolve closely spaced events that appear as a single cluster of reads. GPS models observed reads using a complexity penalized mixture model and efficiently predicts event locations with a segmented EM algorithm. An optional mode permits GPS to align common events across distinct experiments. GPS detects more joint events in synthetic and actual ChIP-Seq data and has superior spatial resolution when compared with other methods. In addition, the specificity and sensitivity of GPS are superior to or comparable with other methods. Availability: http://cgs.
INTRODUCTIONThe precise physical description of where transcription factors, histones, RNA polymerase II and other proteins interact with the genome provides an invaluable mechanistic foundation for understanding gene regulation. ChIP-Seq (Chromatin immunoprecipitation followed by high-throughput sequencing) has become an indispensable tool for genome-wide profiling of protein-DNA interactions (). Computational methods are necessary to predict the location of proteinDNA interaction events from ChIP-Seq data because random variation in the ChIP DNA fragmentation process obscures the actual location of interaction events. Thus while ChIP-Seq DNA sequence reads are mapped to precise bases in the genome, these reads do not manifestly indicate the location of the proteinDNA * To whom correspondence should be addressed. interaction events that caused them. We define spatial resolution to be the difference between the computationally predicted location of a proteinDNA binding event and the midpoint of its actual location. An ideal computational method for analyzing ChIP-Seq data would accurately localize protein-DNA interaction events (high spatial resolution), would include no false events (high specificity), would include all true events (high sensitivity), and would be able to resolve closely spaced DNA-protein interactions (joint event discovery). Joint event discovery is important because it can capture cooperative biological regulatory mechanisms in proximal genomic locations (). Homotypic clusters of transcription factor binding sites (TFBS) have been extensively studied in Drosophila (). Such regulatory mechanisms may be common in mammalian genomes as 4060% of certain ChIP-Seq defined protein-DNA interaction regions contain more than one motif within 200 bp (). Furthermore, homotypic clusters of TFBS occupy nearly 2% of the human genome and may act as key components of almost half of the human promoters and enhancers (). Thus, homotypic event discovery is necessary to fully reveal the transcription factor regulatory interactions present in ChIP-Seq data. Existing ChIP-Seq computational methods () do not simultaneously consider multiple events as the cause for observed reads in the context of a probabilistic model at mammalian genome scale. To detect binding events, PeakSeq extends the length of mapped reads to create peaks (), MACS shifts the mapped position of reads a fixed distance towards their 3-ends (), FindPeaks aggregates overlapping reads (), SISSRs identifies positive to negative strand transition points at read accumulations (), cisGenome scans for the center of modes of the 5 and 3 peaks (), and QuEST () and spp () use kernel density estimation methods. All of these methods use statistical detection criteria such as overlapping read counts or read distribution strand symmetry to estimate the location of a proteinDNA interaction event. A recent method named CSDeconv deconvolves proximal binding events using a computed spatial read distribution (), although it is at present computationally impractical on entire mammalian genomes. In addition, recent evaluations showed that while all these methods identified binding sites with a highly significant overlap with the corresponding sequence motif (), and exhibited similar sensitivity and specificity, there are pronounced differences in their spatial resolution ().Page: 3029 30283034
DISCUSSIONGPS is a novel computational method that uses a probabilistic mixture model to predict the most likely positions of binding events at single-base resolution based on a characteristic spatial distribution of reads. Our analysis with synthetic and actual ChIP-Seq data demonstrates the value of our approach in resolving closely spaced joint events and improving event spatial resolution. GPS's ability to resolve homotypic events from ChIP-Seq data will facilitate the genome-wide study of cooperative binding on gene expression under specific biological conditions. Homotypic binding sites have been shown to act as key components of invertebrate and mammalian promoters and enhancers (). In addition, modeling based approaches have demonstrated that identifying homotypic binding is important for the faithful reproduction of biological behaviors (). GPS also provides improved spatial resolution, specificity, and sensitivity when compared with contemporary methods. The high spatial resolution of GPS can be used to produce a positionspecific prior () that can be used by motif discovery methods to limit motif search to tight genomic regions around events (Supplementary Notes, Supplementary), or can exclude event locations for co-factor motif discovery. In addition, we expect that alternative empirical read distributions can be used for different kinds of events, such as histone location, as the GPS framework is inherently adaptable to other empirical read distributions.