Motivation: Identifying drug–drug interactions (DDIs) is a critical process in drug administration and drug development. Clinical support tools often provide comprehensive lists of DDIs, but they usually lack the supporting scientific evidences and different tools can return inconsistent results. In this article, we propose a novel approach that integrates text mining and automated reasoning to derive DDIs. Through the extraction of various facts of drug metabolism, not only the DDIs that are explicitly mentioned in text can be extracted but also the potential interactions that can be inferred by reasoning. Results: Our approach was able to find several potential DDIs that are not present in DrugBank. We manually evaluated these interactions based on their supporting evidences, and our analysis revealed that 81.3% of these interactions are determined to be correct. This suggests that our approach can uncover potential DDIs with scientific evidences explaining the mechanism of the interactions.
INTRODUCTIONOne of the challenges in drug administration and drug development is the need to identify and avoid potential drugdrug interactions (DDIs). When several drugs are being administered, there is a possibility of adverse drug reactions as one drug can increase or decrease the effect of another drug. During the course of drug development, it is vital to identify possible drug interactions with the new drug compound that is being investigated. Revealing the mechanism behind the drug interactions can provide the necessary scientific evidences for further investigation of the drug compound. The ability to find DDIs and their scientific evidences efficiently and economically can have an impact on the current approach in drug administration and drug development. A common source of finding DDIs is through the use of commercial databases such as the Thomson Micromedex DrugDex System (Micromedex) or online freely available drug databases such as DrugBank (). While such databases provide extensive lists of DDIs, it is typical that scientific evidences are not provided as part of the information for DDIs. This becomes an issue when a recent study showed that there are 25% of disagreements between two drug compendia (). The lack of scientific evidences complicates the process of verifying * To whom correspondence should be addressed. the discrepancies. An ideal resource not only should provide a comprehensive list of DDIs in a cost-efficient manner but also the mechanism behind the interactions. Text mining of Medline abstracts is a logical choice to identify DDIs, as much of the scientific information is frequently available in biomedical articles. In addition, text mining has the potential of finding large number of DDIs from text in a cost-effective manner. In this article, we propose a novel approach of discovering DDIs through the integration of 'biological domain knowledge' with 'biological facts' from Medline abstracts and curated sources. Our work is one of the few that utilizes biological domain knowledge in their applications, such as the generation of metabolic networks based on stoichiometric constraints (), hypothesis generation in signaling pathways () and synthesis of pharmacokinetic pathways (). In this work, the biological domain knowledge includes the mechanism of how drug A influences the effect of drug B through the induction or inhibition the enzymes that are responsible for the metabolism of B. With the domain knowledge, the other component is to find the biological facts to support specific DDIs. Examples of biological facts from Medline abstracts include the identification of which enzymes are induced or inhibited by drugs as well as the enzymes that are responsible for the metabolism of drugs. Curated sources such as UniProt (http://www.uniprot.org) and Gene Ontology (GO) annotations (http://www.geneontology.org) are utilized to identify protein families such as enzymes and transcription factors. Integrating the biological domain knowledge with the biological facts allows us to derive DDIs. This step is achieved through the use of logic representation of the domain knowledge and automated reasoning. It is important to note that our approach differs from typical extraction approach, which focuses on the extraction of interactions that are stated explicitly in the text. In our approach, various properties can be extracted from different publications so that the system utilizes the extracted properties to derive potential DDIs. This enables us to discover potential DDIs that are yet to be annotated in comprehensive resources about DDIs such as DrugBank. The rest of the article is outlined as follows. We describe the basic properties of DDIs that we encode in our system in Section 2. In Section 3, the processes of acquiring the necessary facts and interactions from existing knowledge bases and Medline abstracts are described. In addition, the reasoning component is illustrated in how the properties of drug metabolism are encoded in order to derive DDIs. In Section 4, we describe the possible scenarios of applying our approach to drug administration and drug design. We demonstrate the feasibility of our approach by illustrating the