Motivation: Recent large-scale chromatin states mapping efforts have revealed characteristic chromatin modification signatures for various types of functional DNA elements. Given the important influence of chromatin states on gene regulation and the rapid accumulation of genome-wide chromatin modification data, there is a pressing need for computational methods to analyze these data in order to identify functional DNA elements. However, existing computational tools do not exploit data transformation and feature extraction as a means to achieve a more accurate prediction. Results: We introduce a new computational framework for identifying functional DNA elements using chromatin signatures. The framework consists of a data transformation and a feature extraction step followed by a classification step using time-delay neural network. We implemented our framework in a software tool CSI-ANN (chromatin signature identification by artificial neural network). When applied to predict transcriptional enhancers in the ENCODE region, CSI-ANN achieved a 65.5% sensitivity and 66.3% positive predictive value, a 5.9% and 11.6% improvement, respectively, over the previously best approach. Availability and Implementation: CSI-ANN is implemented in Matlab. The source code is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONCis-acting regulatory DNA elements, such as promoters, enhancers and insulators play an essential role in establishing precise temporal and tissue-specific gene expression patterns. Systematic and precise mapping of these regulatory DNA elements, especially enhancers, is a prerequisite for understanding gene expression programs in both healthy and diseased cells. Experimentally, enhancers can be mapped using the powerful technique, chromatin immunoprecipitation coupled with microarray chip (ChIP-Chip) () or short-read sequencing (ChIP-Seq) (). However, this approach is limited by the availability of a large number of chIP-grade antibodies specifically recognizing the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. transcription factors (TFs) of interest. On the other hand, enhancers can be computationally predicted based on the observation that they often contain dense clusters of TF binding sites (TFBS) in a short stretch of DNA (1000 bp) and are often conserved. Methods relying on clustering of TFBS () require prior knowledge of the binding specificities of the TFs involved which is still quite limited. Methods based on sequence conservation () require precise alignment of regulatory DNA sequences from multiple species, which is not necessarily true for all elements. Histone proteins in chromatin are subject to a number of covalent modifications, primarily at their N-terminal tails, including methylation, acetylation, phosphorylation, ubiquitylation and ADP-ribosylation. These chromatin modifications have profound influences on gene expression (). Numerous genome-wide ChIP-Chip/Seq studies have provided data on the distribution of histone modifications in various model organisms and cell types. A picture is now emerging in which distinct genomic regions such as enhancers, promoters and gene bodies (both protein coding and non-coding RNA genes) have distinct histone modification signatures (). For example, high levels of histone 3 lysine 4 methylation have been found at gene promoters and at many enhancers (). In addition, it has been shown that many regulatory elements carry these epigenetic modifications only in specific cell/tissue types or according to environmental conditions, which cannot be determined by comparative genomics based on sequence alone. Collectively, these observations suggest that epigenetic signatures could be an alternative and powerful way to pinpoint regulatory DNA elements in the genome. Given the rapid growth of genome-wide chromatin modification data from different species and cell types, there is now a pressing need for computational tools capable of integrating various histone modification maps to discover regulatory DNA elements. Recently, several groups have started to develop computational tools to address this need.were the first to develop a computational tool for predicting promoters and enhancers in HeLa cells using six histone modification maps covering 1% of the human genome. Their algorithm predicts promoters and enhancers based on correlation to the average histone modification profiles trained on known examples. In spite of the success of the profilebased method, it is limited in two aspects: (i) the contribution of each histone modification mark to the classification method
DISCUSSIONWe introduced a novel computational framework to identify enhancers using chromatin histone modification signatures. An important component of this novel approach is the introduction of data transformation and feature extraction to epigenomic data analysis. Although these concepts are not new in the field of pattern recognition, to the best of our knowledge, they have not been applied to epigenomic data. Unlike genomic sequences that are sequences of discrete alphabets (four nucleotides), epigenomic signals could be described as a continuous real-valued signal (analog nature). It bears a striking similarity to physiological signals such as electroencephalographic signals and NMR spectra. Thus, it could be beneficial if we use data transformation techniques to reveal hidden patterns in complex and high-dimensional epigenomic data. For instance, raw histone modification signal in an input window can be described using its mean, skewness and kurtosis that are different mathematical functions. These functions allow us to capture different aspects of chromatin modification signals many of which may be missed by previous approaches that only use arithmetic mean. For example, different shapes of histone modification peaks, e.g. symmetric versus asymmetric, could be captured by the skewness measure. These differences in peak shape might reflect yet undiscovered differences in the underlying molecular mechanisms that create the modifications in the first place. Besides data transformation, feature extraction is arguably the most important component of a pattern recognition system. By combining all histone modifications features, we are exploiting a data space where irrelevant features are discarded and noise is decreased. To demonstrate the utility of data transformation and feature extraction for analyzing epigenomic data, we showed that CSI-ANN outperformed two existing methods in the task of identifying functional DNA elements using histone modification data.In this study, we compared the performance of HMM with that of ANN. Although a powerful framework for biological sequence analysis, HMMs assume that states are independent, which may not hold true for histone modification data given the combinatorial nature of histone tail post-translational modification (). Also, the maximum likelihood criterion of the training algorithm leads to poor discrimination, i.e. it maximizes the probability of a given model generating the observed sequence, but does not minimize the probability of the other models generating the same sequence. Because ANNs can be trained with a discriminative criterion, these systems could perform better than those based on HMMs. In addition, given its nature, ANNs offer a potential of providing massive parallelism, adaptation and efficient algorithms for solving classification problems, which could be very beneficial when analyzing multi-dimensional and huge datasets such as epigenomic data. Nonetheless, there still is room from improvement. First, in this study, we processed histone modification data using only two mathematical functions (mean and energy). Additional functions from domains such as statistics and information theory could be added to create additional features using raw histone modification data. Second, although a linear feature extraction method such as FDA produced satisfactory results, we would expect a nonlinear combination method to provide better results than that from linear transformations. Third, for this study we only used chromatin histone modification data. Other data sources such as nucleosome positioning, TFBS and gene expression profiling can also be included. We could input all those different data sources into a feature extraction step to create even better informative feature(s) for the classifier.