Motivation: Time course gene expression experiments are performed to study time-varying changes in mRNA levels of thousands of genes. Statistical methods from functional data analysis (FDA) have recently gained popularity for modelling and exploring such time courses. Each temporal profile is treated as the realization of a smooth function of time, or curve, and the inferred curve becomes the basic unit of statistical analysis. The task of identifying genes with differential temporal profiles then consists of detecting statistically significant differences between curves, where such differences are commonly quantified by computing the area between the curves or the l 2 distance. Results: We propose a general test statistic for detecting differences between gene curves, which only depends on a suitably chosen distance measure between them. The test makes use of a distance-based variance decomposition and generalizes traditional MANOVA tests commonly used for vectorial observations. We also introduce the visual l 2 distance, which is shown to capture shape-related differences in gene curves and is robust against time shifts, which would otherwise inflate the traditional l 2 distance. Other shape-related distances, such as the curvature, may carry biological significance. We have assessed the comparative performance of the test on realistically simulated datasets and applied it to human immune cell responses to bacterial infection over time. Availability: R scripts are freely available for download at
INTRODUCTIONIn longitudinal microarray experiments, the temporal evolution of expression levels in thousands of genes are monitored in an attempt to understand the dynamic processes that regulate them (). Repeated measurements of mRNA are taken at a relatively small number of time-points for all the available biological replicates. A common aim of such studies is to compare gene expression profiles observed in different populations or under different experimental conditions, and to identify those genes whose temporal profiles differ significantly. The data produced by such longitudinal studies, however, present several challenges for * To whom correspondence should be addressed. statistical analysis. Statistical tests developed for cross-sectional data, such as the t-test and its many modifications, are inadequate because they are only able to detect differential expression at individual time-points and they ignore the temporal dependencies that are typical of the experimental data (). Models from classical time series analysis are also limited in scope as the time courses are generally very short, sampled at irregularly spaced time-points, and often contain missing data. Over the last few years, these issues have led to an increasing interest in the application of functional data analysis (FDA) techniques (). In FDA, the longitudinal observations are treated as noisy realizations of an underlying smooth curve, which represents the true continuous evolution of a gene's expression level over time. Once these underlying curves have been inferred from the observed data, they become the basic unit of statistical analysis, on which a wide variety of tasks can be performed such as dimensionality reduction and visualization (), clustering () and differential analysis (). A recent review of developments in this area can be found in. We consider the problem of detecting differences between gene curves representative of two or more groups when several biological replicates are available for each group. A number of test statistics have been proposed to test for equality between curves, including maSigPro (), EDGE (), PACE () and functional Bayes approaches (). The underlying problem of detecting differences between curves has also been extensively considered in non-parametric statistics, and various tests have been developed that could be used for the analysis of gene expression temporal profiles, including the functional F-statistic () and the more recent TN statistic (). The underlying assumption shared by these methods is that, under the null hypothesis of equality between curves, the area between them is zero. Our work is motivated by the observation that although the area between two curves, as captured by the l 2 distance, often provides an intuitive and easily interpretable measure of difference between them, existing methods only capture this specific type of difference. Thus, potentially interesting differences between gene curves that may carry biological relevance may be missed. For instance, the l 2 distance may fail to capture specific shape-related features that would otherwise be detected by the expert eye, such as the number and location of 'peaks' and 'troughs' or their respective curvatures. Furthermore, time-shifted curves, considered different when using the standard l 2 distance, might be considered similar using anPage: 3136 31353141