Motivation: Atomic resolution modeling of large multimolecular assemblies is a key task in Structural Cell Biology. Experimental techniques can provide atomic resolution structures of single proteins and small complexes, or low resolution data of large multimolecular complexes. Results: We present a novel integrative computational modeling method, which integrates both low and high resolution experimental data. The algorithm accepts as input atomic resolution structures of the individual subunits obtained from X-ray, NMR or homology modeling, and interaction data between the subunits obtained from mass spectrometry. The optimal assembly of the individual subunits is formulated as an Integer Linear Programming task. The method was tested on several representative complexes, both in the bound and unbound cases. It placed correctly most of the subunits of multimolecular complexes of up to 16 subunits and significantly outper-formed the CombDock and Haddock multimolecular docking methods. Availability and implementation: http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/DockStar Contact:
IntroductionMany cellular processes are performed by multimolecular protein complexes (). A cell consists of hundreds of different functional complexes, such as the RNA exosome, the proteasome and the nuclear pore complex (). Detailed structural characterization of such complexes is a primary goal of structural biology. However, structural characterization of large complexes by high resolution experimental techniques, such as X-ray crystallography or NMR spectroscopy, is challenging, whereas electron microscopy or mass spectrometry (MS) produce low resolution data (). It is becoming clear that integration of data derived from a variety of bio-physical techniques at multiple levels of resolution is essential for the structural analysis of large complexes (). In the last couple of decades significant progress has been achieved in computational modeling of binary proteinprotein complexes as has been showcased in the CAPRI (Critical Assessment of Prediction of Interactions) challenge (). However, only a handful of methods has been developed for the modeling of multimolecular complexes. The better performing ones have been limited to symmetric homo-oligomers (). For the non-symmetric case, we have previously developed CombDock (), which formulates the multimolecular complex detection task as a search for an optimally scoring spanning tree of the complex subunit interactions graph. The optimization is done by a branch and bound technique. The multimolecular version of Haddock () is driven by experimental and bioinformatics data, but limits the number of subunits to six, apparently due to computational complexity constraints. Multi-LZerD () builds the multimolecular assembly applying a stochastic search driven by a genetic algorithm.construct the multimolecular complex iteratively, where at each iteration the subassembly is grown by one subunit.model the complexes at a coarse grained resolution, where proteins are represented by single spheres. Experimental MS-based data is translated into spatial restraints and integrated into the scoring function using the IMP platform (). The generation of candidate models is done by an exhaustive Monte Carlo search of the conformational space. The large multimolecular assembly task can be divided into two subtasks: (a) Detection of the protein-protein interaction graph between the individual subunits; (b) Detection of a globally consistent pose of the subunits, so that there are no steric clashes between them and the binding energy of the whole complex is optimized. Low resolution experimental data obtained from MS is especially suitable to assist in subtask (a). In particular, native MS of intact protein complexes and their subcomplexes can determine the stoichiometry of the complex subunits and deduce the interaction graph of the multimolecular complex (). Chemical cross-linking combined with MS (XL-MS) provides distance constraints between surface residues both on the same and on neighboring subunits (), thus providing information both for the detection of the interaction graph as well as constraints on the relative spatial poses of neighboring subunits. Such constraints have been successfully exploited in the modeling of the 26S proteasome (), the proteasome lid (), the TRiC/CCT chaperonin (), the RNA polymerase IITFIIF complex () and more. Here, we introduce DockStar, a novel protein assembly modeling algorithm which integrates MS-based data. We assume knowledge of the subunit interaction graph [subtask (a)] and focus on a global solution to the '3D-puzzle assembly' task. Our algorithm performs a search for assemblies, optimizing satisfaction of cross-linking restraints as well as a knowledge-based interaction potential between neighboring subunits. The optimization is performed by formulating the task as an Integer Linear Program (ILP), thus not depending neither on greedy type iterative algorithms, which tend to miss solutions with low scoring intermediates, nor on time consuming Monte Carlo type search. This enables efficient handling of relatively large assemblies. To validate this method, DockStar was tested on a set of examples, where both high resolution structures of the full complex and cross-linking data between neighboring subunits was available. The modeling was performed both in bound and unbound scenarios and compared with the state of the art Haddock () and CombDock () multimolecular assembly algorithms. DockStar proved to be significantly more time efficient than the other methods, while exhibiting better performance.