Motivation: Many drug discovery projects fail because the underlying target is finally found to be undruggable. Progress in structure elucidation of proteins now opens up a route to automatic structure-based target assessment. DoGSiteScorer is a newly developed automatic tool combining pocket prediction, characterization and druggability estimation and is now available through a web server. Availability: The DoGSiteScorer web server is freely available for academic use at http://
INTRODUCTIONRating the attractiveness of a drug target is one of the major challenges in the early stages of drug discovery. Besides attractivity assessment based on medical rationale and commercial viability, the properties of the target and its ability to be modulated by small drug-like compounds (further referred to as druggability) have to be analyzed. Due to the large amount of available crystal structures, the automatic collection of target information gains importance. In a first step, binding pockets have to be detected on the protein surface. Some methods fulfilling this task are available through web services, e.g. QSite-Finder, CASTp, SCREEN, PocketDepth, MetaPocket and Fpocket (servers are referenced in). The next step on the path toward target classification or druggability prediction is the annotation and comparison of target-specific pocket properties. Some servers exist that allow besides binding site predictionfor their analysis and functional classification, e.g. FINDSITE (), SplitPocket (), fPOP (), ProBis () and SiteComp (). Many of these approaches search for structural similarities, which can help to predict side effects of known drugs or to identify the role of yet uncharacterized proteins. Although methods for fully automatic structure-based druggability predictions such as SiteMap (), Fpocket () and DLID () exist, none of these methods is available online for predictions on new targets. Fpocket allocates a web service where druggability scores and information can be requested () but only for precalculated data points.
CONCLUSIONDoGSiteScorer web server provides an easy to use interface to predict pockets and subpockets of a protein structure of interest. Furthermore, key properties characterizing the pocket and druggability estimations are supplied.