Motivation: Recognition of poly(A) signals in mRNA is relatively straightforward due to the presence of easily recognizable polyadenylic acid tail. However, the task of identifying poly(A) motifs in the primary genomic DNA sequence that correspond to poly(A) signals in mRNA is a far more challenging problem. Recognition of poly(A) signals is important for better gene annotation and understanding of the gene regulation mechanisms. In this work, we present one such poly(A) motif prediction method based on properties of human genomic DNA sequence surrounding a poly(A) motif. These properties include thermodynamic, physico-chemical and statistical characteristics. For predictions, we developed Artificial Neural Network and Random Forest models. These models are trained to recognize 12 most common poly(A) motifs in human DNA. Our predictors are available as a free web-based tool accessible at http://cbrc.kaust.edu.sa/dps. Compared with other reported predictors, our models achieve higher sensitivity and specificity and furthermore provide a consistent level of accuracy for 12 poly(A) motif variants.
INTRODUCTIONThe polyadenylic acid tail or poly(A) tail is a stretch of A nucleotides added to RNA during the RNA processing mainly to protect the primary RNA stability (). In mammals, the poly(A) tail is added close and downstream of the characteristic poly(A) signal, most often AAUAAA. The problem of prediction of poly(A) signals has received considerable attention. Since the distance of poly(A) signal from the poly(A) tail is approximately 1030 nt (), recognizing such tails in mRNA is relatively simple. A more challenging problem is to find a motif in primary genomic sequence that corresponds to poly(A) signal site in the transcribed RNA. The process of predicting poly(A) motifs in DNA depends on successfully identifying relevant properties of the surrounding sequence of such motifs. We now present a brief survey of reported work in this field so far. Statistical properties of nucleotide sequences were used, for example, to reveal putative poly(A) signals in yeast () or in Arabidopsis (). A program PROBE was developed to identify cis elements that potentially play regulatory roles in mRNA polyadenylation (). Several tools are developed for predicting poly(A) motifs in human. Polyadq tool for predicting poly(A) motifs in a DNA sequence is reported inwhere sequences of 100 nt downstream of a candidate poly(A) motif were used to derive the feature set for prediction. The ERPIN program () utilizes 300 nt flanking sequence upstream and downstream of the candidate poly(A) motifs. A method based on application of support vector machines (SVMs) was reported byin which 100 nt flanking sequence upstream and downstream around poly(A) candidate motifs were utilized. PolyApred system was introduced in. The 100 nt flanking sequence upstream and downstream around candidate poly(A) motif sequence were utilized. A method POLYAR for recognition of polyadenylation sites is reported recently (). The reported results of these tools are summarized in, together with the performance of publicly available ones achieved on our datasets. In this study, we present a web-based tool that implements two types of predictive models, one based on Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) and the other based on Random Forest (RF) (). Our models cover 12 main variants of human poly(A) motifs with accuracies from 82.06% to 94.4%.
CONCLUSIONWe developed a web tool for the recognition of poly(A) motifs in human genomic DNA that demonstrates improved prediction accuracy over the existing publicly available poly(A) predictors. We hope that our tool will find good use in the studies of human gene properties.