Many drug or single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP)-related resources and tools have been developed, but connecting and integrating them is still a challenge. Here, we describe a user-friendly web-based software package, named Drug-SNPing, which provides a platform for the integration of drug information (DrugBank and PharmGKB), protein–protein interactions (STRING), tagSNP selection (HapMap) and genotyping information (dbSNP, REBASE and SNP500Cancer). DrugBank-based inputs include the following: (i) common name of the drug, (ii) synonym or drug brand name, (iii) gene name (HUGO) and (iv) keywords. PharmGKB-based inputs include the following: (i) gene name (HUGO), (ii) drug name and (iii) disease-related keywords. The output provides drug-related information , metabolizing enzymes and drug targets, as well as protein– protein interaction data. Importantly, tagSNPs of the selected genes are retrieved for genotyping analyses. All drug-based and protein–pro-tein interaction-based SNP genotyping information are provided with PCR-RFLP (PCR-restriction enzyme length polymorphism) and TaqMan probes. Thus, users can enter any drug keywords/brand names to obtain immediate information that is highly relevant to gen-otyping for pharmacogenomics research. Availability and implementation: Drug-SNPing and its user manual are freely available at
INTRODUCTIONPharmacogenomics is a type of personalized medicine that studies drug therapy in terms of efficacy or adverse events with respect to each patient's genetic variation such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) (). SNP profiling in terms of significantly informative SNPs is an important factor when carrying out drug selection, assessing dosages and deciding on a therapeutic approach. Associating drug responses with a patient's SNP genotype for genes related to the drug metabolism and targeting is straight forward if the relevant pharmacogenomics information is readily available. DrugBank () and PharmGKB () are two notable databases for pharmacogenomics-related information. Although many SNP technologies associated with drug discovery have been widely discussed (), experimental information that allows widespread SNP genotyping is unavailable in DrugBank and PharmGKB. Recently, many SNP-related tools, such as SNP500Cancer (), SNP-RFLPing (), Seq4SNPs (), SNP ID-info (), PineSAP (), Seq-SNPing (), MapNext () and CandiSNPer () have been developed. However, these lack the ability to allow communication between SNP genotyping information and drug targeting/metabolism/transporter/carrier. Moreover, SNPSNP and proteinprotein interactions are not considered in these SNP-related tools. In contrast, a powerful mining tool for proteinprotein interaction named STRING () has been developed, but no SNP-related information is included. Therefore, it is still difficult to integrate cheminformatics with SNP interactivity and genotyping for pharmacogenomics purposes (). To overcome these problems, we developed an integrated pharmacogenomics-based and protein interaction-based platform for SNP genotyping information. TagSNPs retrieved from HapMap (), which can provide narrowed down informative SNP genotypes, have been integrated in the proposed Drug-SNPing system. This study presents a novel and user-friendly web-based pharmacogenomics tool that allows the study of drug-related SNP interactions and related genotyping.
DISCUSSIONSNP-based association studies are common indicators used in personalized medicine, especially for pharmacogenomics. Although many pharmacogenomics resources () and chemoinformatics databases () have been developed, these are generally focused on data-mining for basic drug information rather than on information that allows SNP genotyping. Many high-throughput SNP-genotyping techniques have been developed (), such as SNP array (), pyrosequencing() and TaqMan (). However, the materials for SNP array analysis and the machine for pyrosequencing are more expensive than the TaqMan method. Therefore, we selected the TaqMan probe information for implementation in the Drug-SNPing. Currently, two major resources for SNP-related TaqMan probe information are available, namely SNP500Cancer and dbSNP in NCBI (ABI), but neither can provide TaqMan probe information for all SNPs. Furthermore, TaqMan probes are sometimes unsuitable for genotyping of some SNPs (). To compensate for such problems, we also implemented a RFLP genotyping module in Drug-SNPing. When implementing RFLP genotyping, some SNPs do not have natural primers (regular PCR-RFLP primers). As an alternative, we introduced mutagenic primers whereby the module computationally introduces mismatched nucleotides into the forward (F) primer sequence to artificially generate a new restriction enzyme site for SNP genotyping. The lack of natural primers can be overcome by the use of mutagenic primers, as can be seen for rs1051740 in. Other examples are presented in the user manual. Although DrugBank () contains a versatile search function for many inputs, its gene name input for 'drug target' is limited to the full name rather than the HUGO official gene symbol. For example, FABP7 (fatty acid-binding protein, brain), PADI4 (protein-arginine deiminase type 4) and PTGS2 (prostaglandin G/H synthase 2) are listed in the 'drug cards' of DB00132, DB00155 and DB00154 in DrugBank, respectively. But for gene name (HUGO) inputs, such as FABP7, PADI4 and PTGS2, the appropriate drug records related to. Representative outputs for SNP genotyping information in Drug-SNPing. (A) Natural primers for rs2740171. (B) Mutagenic primers for rs1051740. SNP genotyping information such as (a1): SNP fasta sequence, (a2/b1): TaqMan probe from SNP500Cancer/NCBI, (a3/b2): natural/mutagenic RFLP primers and (a4/b2): restriction enzymes for natural/mutagenic RFLP primers are shown these genes can not be found, e.g. http://www.drugbank. ca/search/search?queryFABP7, http://www.drugbank.ca/sea rch/search?queryPADI4 and http://www.drugbank.ca/search/ search?queryPTGS2. In contrast, Drug-SNPing allows input based on the HUGO gene name, which improves the gene-centric search for drugs with input drug targets. This is demonstrated in the user manual for Drug-SNPing. In Drug-SNPing, we also integrated PharmGKB () for annotation of important genes related to drug responses and pathways as a complement to DrugBank. The contributions in Drug-SNPing, PharmGKB and DrugBank are shown in. The importance of SNPSNP interactions in association studies is increasing, but most studies only focus their data analysis on limited and known SNPs (). To fill this gap, we incorporated a widely used proteinprotein interaction tool, STRING (), in Drug-SNPing. We perform SNPSNP interaction analysis based on the proteinprotein interaction data from STRING via online retrieval. In the current version of Drug-SNPing, however, many other proteinprotein interaction tools are not yet included, such as GWIDD () for genome-wide protein docking database, STITCH 2 () for an interaction network database for small molecules and proteins, Gene Interaction Miner () for data mining contextual information for proteinprotein interaction analysis, Path () to facilitate pathway-based genetic association analysis and Polymorphism Interaction Analysis (PIA) () as a method for investigating complex genegene interactions, and proteinprotein interaction databases (). Similarly, more drug-related chemoinformatics resources are also not yet included in the current version of Drug-SNPing, such as DCDB () as a drug combination database, drug-binding databases (), SuperSite (Andre) as a dictionary of metabolite and drug-binding sites in proteins and the drug adverse reaction target database (DART) () for proteins related to adverse drug reactions. In future, we intend to integrate the available ftp data released in these tools in order to add more value to the Drug-SNPing product. The performance of the Drug-SNPing was assessed by at least 50 different inputs (see the section of 'Assessment of DrugSNPing' at http://bio.kuas.edu.tw/drug-snping/user_manual. jsp), and all of them were functional to get the output by Drug-SNPing. Moreover, the operating time for integration in Drug-SNPing can save time compared with non-integration.
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we developed a novel integrated web-based interface, Drug-SNPing, that provides user-friendly connections between the tools DrugBank for chemoinformatics, pharmGKB for pharmcogenomics, STRING for proteinprotein interaction, genotyping information for TaqMan probes and PCR-RFLP. Moreover, gene-centric inputs can also be used as a means of finding corresponding drugs for drug targeting and metabolism. This tool thus provides all the drug-orientated and gene-centric inputs which are needed to mine all possible metabolic enzymes and targets for these drugs, as well as bench mark information that allows SNP genotyping to be performed. This platform will be helpful for the development of pharmacogenomics as part of personalized medicine.