Many statistical problems in bioinformatics and genetics can be formulated as the testing of associations between a categorical variable and a continuous variable. A dynamic slicing method was proposed for non-parametric dependence testing, which has been demonstrated to have higher powers compared with traditional methods such as Kolmogorov–Smirnov test. We introduce an R package dslice to facilitate the use of dynamic slicing method in bioinformatic applications such as quantitative trait loci study and gene set enrichment analysis.
IntroductionOften in biological studies, we need to test whether the underlying distributions of two or more populations are different from each other on the basis of independent samples from these populations. The K-sample test problem is equivalent to testing whether the value of an observation is independent of its label indicator (i.e. which sample it comes from). Traditional methods such as the t-test and the rank-sum test can only test differences in means or medians. On the other hand, classic omnibus testing methods such as KolmogorovSmirnov test have limited power in detecting differences between distributions of different types.proposed an omnibus K-sample testing method based on regularized likelihood-ratio test and dynamic slicing (here we refer to the test statistic as 'DS-statistic') and demonstrated its statistical power compared with some existing well-known methods through extensive simulation studies. Here, we introduce an R package dslice that implements this novel dynamic slicing ('DS') method for nonparametric tests and makes it a versatile statistical tool for applications in quantitative trait loci (QTL) study and gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA).
DiscussionTesting of associations between a categorical variable and a continuous response is a frequently encountered statistical problem in bioinformatics. R package dslice implements a recently proposed nonparametric dependency detection method. Although we use QTL and gene set analysis as examples to demonstrate the use of dslice, it can be applied to other biological problems such as protein