Motivation: Biomedical researchers often search through massive catalogues of literature to look for potential relationships between genes and diseases. Given the rapid growth of biomedical literature, automatic relation extraction, a crucial technology in biomedical literature mining, has shown great potential to support research of gene-related diseases. Existing work in this field has produced datasets that are limited both in scale and accuracy. Results: In this study, we propose a reliable and efficient framework that takes large biomedical literature repositories as inputs, identifies credible relationships between diseases and genes, and presents possible genes related to a given disease and possible diseases related to a given gene. The framework incorporates name entity recognition (NER), which identifies occurrences of genes and diseases in texts, association detection whereby we extract and evaluate features from gene-disease pairs, and ranking algorithms that estimate how closely the pairs are related. The F1-score of the NER phase is 0.87, which is higher than existing studies. The association detection phase takes drastically less time than previous work while maintaining a comparable F1-score of 0.86. The end-to-end result achieves a 0.259 F1-score for the top 50 genes associated with a disease, which performs better than previous work. In addition, we released a web service for public use of the dataset. Availability: The implementation of the proposed algorithms is publicly available at http://gdr-web.rwebox.com/public_html/index.php?page=download.php. The web service is available at
IntroductionRecent scientific discoveries have revealed the molecular, cellular and genetic components of diseases. Researchers have gained many new insights into cellular signaling pathways, genetic alterations and their consequences. Combined with diagnostic breakthroughs, there have been increasing efforts and successes in identifying patient segments defined by biomarkers that are more susceptible to certain diseases or will maximally benefit from certain treatments. Traditionally, oncology was the disease area where the majority of such research was focused. However, in the last decades, there have been considerable advancements in other disease areas, such as respiratory diseases, infectious diseases and inflammatory diseases. All of these new findings are contained in the vast amount of biomedical literature. The effective extraction of gene-disease associations from biomedical literature will potentially enable the discovery and development of new therapeutic targets and patient segment biomarkers. However, it has remained a daunting task because of the massive volume and the textual complexity of biomedical literature. Given the strong demand for gene-disease relation extraction from the biomedical literature, over the years ample studies have attempted to tackle it or part of it. The task of gene-disease relation extraction can be broken down into three phases. The first is gene and disease recognition in free text, which can be categorized as a Named Entity Recognition (NER) problem. Machine learning-based methods are one of the approaches used to identify biomedical entities in free text. B Settles () proposed a conditional random field model ABNER to recognize biomedical named entities based on orthographic and semantic features. Z) used SVM to recognize biomedical named entities such as proteins and genes in biomedical literature. There are rule-based and pattern-based methods as well.) developed a rule-based method to recognize genes and proteins in biomedical text. Singer and Collins () discussed the pattern-based method for name entity recognition in
DiscussionIn the named entity recognition phase, the dictionary-only method, which is similar to the method BeFree () and CoPub (In the relation extraction phase, we achieved an F-score of 0.863 using both the local lexical features and global syntactic features. Using the local lexical features or the global syntactic features alone gives a lower F-score, which indicates that, both the local and the global features are effective and necessary. While the F-score of our method is nearly as good as that of BeFree (), our speed is more than 10 times faster. It is because we utilized fewer but more representative features than BeFree so that we can achieve this advantage in speed while maintaining the F-score.Furthermore, our end-to-end results showed that our system extracted much more genes related to a given disease than BeFree () and CoPub () did. This is due to the large scale of our input and the good performance of our NER method and relationship extraction method.
ConclusionIn this paper, we proposed a framework for the automatic extraction of gene-disease relation from biomedical literature. For the gene and disease recognition, we built large gene and disease libraries by combining and cross referencing existing biomedical knowledge bases. We enriched our dictionary by identifying new synonyms using search engines. For association detection, we designated effective features and built an efficient SVM classifier. For the ranking, we considered the weight of papers and the other contributions by the same authors and proposed three different algorithms for ranking. In addition, we launched a web service for public access to our results. Overall, our system created a diseasegene association dataset that is several times larger than any previously reported dataset of similar nature, achieved a good balance between accuracy and computation time, and outperformed existing state-of-theart systems on similar tasks. The system has been made available online for free public access, which will potentially enable the discovery and development of new therapeutics and breakthrough in diagnostics.