Motivation: Most approaches used to identify cancer driver genes focus, true to their name, on entire genes and assume that a gene, treated as one entity, has a specific role in cancer. This approach may be correct to describe effects of gene loss or changes in gene expression ; however, mutations may have different effects, including their relevance to cancer, depending on which region of the gene they affect. Except for rare and well-known exceptions, there are not enough data for reliable statistics for individual positions, but an intermediate level of analysis, between an individual position and the entire gene, may give us better statistics than the former and better resolution than the latter approach. Results: We have developed e-Driver, a method that exploits the internal distribution of somatic missense mutations between the pro-teins functional regions (domains or intrinsically disordered regions) to find those that show a bias in their mutation rate as compared with other regions of the same protein, providing evidence of positive selection and suggesting that these proteins may be actual cancer drivers. We have applied e-Driver to a large cancer genome dataset from The Cancer Genome Atlas and compared its performance with that of four other methods, showing that e-Driver identifies novel candidate cancer drivers and, because of its increased resolution, provides deeper insights into the potential mechanism of cancer driver genes identified by other methods. Availability and implementation: A Perl script with e-Driver and the files to reproduce the results described here can be downloaded from https://
INTRODUCTIONThe landscape of cancer somatic mutations revealed by projects such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) () or the International Cancer Genome Consortium () is overwhelmingly complex, as hundreds of thousands of different mutations, ranging from large genomic rearrangements to point missense mutations, have been identified in different cancer samples (). Several approaches have been developed to identify which genes are likely driving the carcinogenic process (driver genes). Such methods rely on the hypothesis that driver genes should be under positive selection in the cancer environment. Methods in this category include those that try to identify genes with higherthan-expected-by-chance mutation rates, such as MuSiC (), or those that tend to accumulate highly damaging mutations, such as OncodriveFM (Gonzalez). More recently, methods that focus on the internal distribution of mutations along a protein have also been developed. For example, OncodriveCLUST () looks for regions of proteins with higher-than-expected mutation rates, which makes it optimal for the identification of gain-of-function sites that, while being key for the carcinogenic process, would otherwise be missed. Another similar idea is ActiveDriver (), which tries to identify phosphorylation sites that are recurrently mutated in cancer. One of the differences between the two methods is that ActiveDriver tests the mutation frequencies of predefined regions (a phosphorylation site and its neighboring amino acids), whereas OncodriveCLUST first looks for potential seeds of highly mutated clusters and then tries to extend them. Here we present e-Driver, a novel method that identifies protein functional regions (PFRs) that show a bias in their mutation rates. In this context, PFRs can be either domains or intrinsically disordered regions (IDRs). Our method is based on the assumption that different PFRs within the same protein mediate different functions and, thus, might have distinct roles in carcinogenesis. This becomes evident when describing proteins in terms of functional networks. In such networks, nodes represent different proteins, and edges between nodes represent functional relationships between them, such as physical interactions or post-translational modifications. Different edges leading to the same node/protein are usually mediated by different PFRs within that same protein, and mutations in the PFR mediating one edge will have different consequences than mutations in another PFR mediating a different edge. For example, if an enzyme contains a catalytic domain and an IDR that is phosphorylated, it is likely that the consequences of a missense mutation disrupting the catalytic domain will be different from those of a missense mutation affecting the phosphorylation site or a truncating mutation that disrupts both PFRs at the same time. Our method exploits this idea, which has been previously used to analyze mutations associated with Mendelian disorders (), by looking for PFRs that show a bias in their mutation rate. We have applied e-Driver to the cancer genomic dataset from the pan-cancer project of TCGA. This dataset has also been analyzed with four other methods (MuSiC, OncodriveFM, OncodriveCLUST and ActiveDriver), allowing us to compare *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com the results obtained with e-Driver with those obtained by methods relying on other approaches used to identify the signals of positive selection ().