Protein identification by mass spectrometry is commonly accomplished using a peptide sequence matching search algorithm, whose sensitivity varies inversely with the size of the sequence database and the number of post-translational modifications considered. We present the Spectrum Identification Machine, a peptide sequence matching tool that capitalizes on the high-intensity b1-fragment ion of tandem mass spectra of peptides coupled in solution with pheny-lisotiocyanate to confidently sequence the first amino acid and ultimately reduce the search space. We demonstrate that in complex search spaces, a gain of some 120% in sensitivity can be achieved. Availability: All data generated and the software are freely available for academic use at
INTRODUCTIONOne of the goals of shotgun proteomics is to perform large-scale identification and quantitation of thousands of proteins within complex protein mixtures (e.g. biological fluids or whole-cell lysates). The strategy comprises protein digestion, followed by peptide chromatographic separation online with tandem mass spectrometry (MS2) (). The MS2 data are then generally identified using a peptide sequence matching (PSM) tool; examples are SEQUEST () and, most recently, Andromeda (). Briefly, given a peptide's precursor ion mass and MS2, these algorithms pull out, from a peptide-sequence database, peptide sequences whose theoretical mass lies within a given tolerance from the experimental precursor mass. Following that, theoretical spectra are generated for all peptide candidates so that some similarity metric, be it empirical or statistical, can be used to select the most likely candidate. Finally, a list of identifications satisfying some false discovery rate (FDR) is obtained by using a statistical filtering tool such as SEPro (). The sensitivity of a PSM tool varies inversely with the size of the sequence database and the number of post-translational modifications considered (). Consequently, studies addressing complex search spaces are challenging when seen from a computational perspective. Examples are analysing snake venoms for identifying naturally occurring peptides () or performing a meta-proteomic study of a microorganism biota (). The former requires not trypsinizing the samples and thus lifts the constraints of a PSM search engine to only tryptic peptides, which results in an exponential growth of the search space; the latter entails the concatenation of hundreds of sequence databases of different organisms. Nevertheless, the rewards at stake could be discovering a naturally occurring peptide with pharmaceutical properties or the in-depth comprehension of a system's biology. Recently, Sanchez et al.demonstrated the possibility to identify peptides using the N-terminal residue and accurate precursor mass; for this, they coupled peptides in solution with phenylisotiocyanate (PITC). During the activation in the collision cell, these phenylthiocarbamoyl-derivatized peptides dissociate to specifically yield an intense b1 fragment. This unlocks the possibility to confidently determine the N-terminal residue in a single mass spectrum. The authors then demonstrated a peptide identification tool that considered only the b1 fragment ion mass and the high mass accuracy of the precursor and used it to identify peptides in an Escherichia coli tryptic digest. The shortcomings of this method are in the inability to discriminate between peptides with close masses and same first residue. As the remaining MS2 information is not taken into account, the method is blind to peptides not found in the database but also coinciding in mass and first residue, and thus prone to such false positives. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.