We introduce here a novel acquisition and processing methodology for cross-polarization based 1D rotating-frame relaxation dispersion NMR experiments. This easy-to-use protocol greatly facilitates the screening, acquisition, processing and model fitting of large on-and off-resonance R 1q relaxation dispersion NMR datasets in an automated manner for the analysis of chemical exchange phenomena in biomolecules. Availability and Implementation: The Amaterasu package including the spreadsheet, Bruker pulse programs and analysis software is available at
IntroductionProtein and nucleic acid functions are central to all cellular processes. Whereas the function of many biomolecules seems to be explained by a single static structure, many macromolecules such as enzymes are highly dynamic and rely on sampling multiple conformations for their function. Accurate characterization of these dynamic conformations demands methods that can probe energetically excited minor states in solution. Relaxation dispersion NMR spectroscopy (RD NMR) is uniquely suited to probe motion on the biologically important timescale from microseconds to milliseconds, as highlighted by recent research on protein binding (), enzymatic activity () and base mispairing (). Relaxation Dispersion NMR facilitates the extraction of structural (chemical shift, Dx), kinetic (lifetime, 1/k ex ) and thermodynamic (populations, p i ) information about the excited states by quantifying the broadening of resonance lines caused by the chemical exchange process. R 1q RD resolves motion on the unique timescale of several tens of microseconds to milliseconds by screening the spin-lock power (x 1 ) and/or offset (X) dependence of R 1q , the relaxation rate of a nucleus in the rotating frame. The state-of-theart version of this experiment achieves superior temporal resolution by probing one resonance at a time using 1D NMR (); however, it requires the time-consuming acquisition, processing and integration of n * m free-induction decays (FIDs), where n is the number of resonances probed and m is the number of variable spin-lock power (x 1 ) or offset (X) values. Accordingly, even for a biomolecule as small as an SH3 domain ($ 60 amino acids), very large 1D datasets must be acquired, processed and integrated before the R 1q values can be fitted to a theoretical model. We considered that this labor-intensive procedure is limiting the broader applicability of this promising approach. Thus, our aim was to develop an efficient methodology to facilitate the investigation of chemical exchange in biomolecules by R 1q RD.