Motivation: Computational multiscale models help cancer biologists to study the spatiotemporal dynamics of complex biological systems and to reveal the underlying mechanism of emergent properties. Results: To facilitate the construction of such models, we have developed a next generation modelling platform for cancer systems biology , termed ELECANS (electronic cancer system). It is equipped with a graphical user interface-based development environment for multi-scale modelling along with a software development kit such that hierarchically complex biological systems can be conveniently modelled and simulated by using the graphical user interface/software development kit combination. Associated software accessories can also help users to perform post-processing of the simulation data for visualiza-tion and further analysis. In summary, ELECANS is a new modelling platform for cancer systems biology and provides a convenient and flexible modelling and simulation environment that is particularly useful for those without an intensive programming background. Availability and implementation: ELECANS, its associated software accessories, demo examples, documentation and issues database are freely available at http://
INTRODUCTIONThe development and integration of complex multiscale biological models have been a great challenge in the area of cancer systems biology (). However, the lack of a user-friendly and integrative software environment has made it difficult to develop such multiscale models and derive biological insights from them. This has been a problem particularly for experimental scientists and modellers who have a limited software development capability. Therefore, we have developed 'ELECANS' (electronic cancer system), a next generation modelling and simulation platform for cancer systems biology, to overcome such hurdles in multiscale modelling and simulation. ELECANS is equipped with a rich graphical user interface (GUI) studio coupled with a powerful software development kit (SDK). This GUI/SDK combination allows users to conveniently design the extra-cellular environment, cellular phenotypes and tissue models. Cell cycle and sub-cellular components can be modelled, executed and hot switched during simulations. The 2D and 3D discrete or hybrid simulation environments can also be constructed in ELECANS. Lattice types can be selected from predefined ones or customized via SDK. Simulation data can be exported to text or XML files, which can be visualized with ELECANS software accessories. Taken together, ELECANS helps advanced cancer research by providing a powerful and user-friendly modelling and simulation platform for cancer systems biology.