Motivation: Identification of metabolites is essential for its use as biomarkers, for research in systems biology and for drug discovery. The first step before a structure can be elucidated is to determine its elemental composition. High-resolution mass spectrometry, which provides the exact mass, together with common constraint rules, for rejecting false proposed elemental compositions, cannot always provide one unique elemental composition solution. Results: The Multistage Elemental Formula (MEF) tool is presented in this article to enable the correct assignment of elemental composition to compounds, their fragment ions and neutral losses that originate from the molecular ion by using multistage mass spectrometry (MS n). The method provided by MEF reduces the list of predicted elemental compositions for each ion by analyzing the elemental compositions of its parent (precursor ion) and descendants (fragments). MS n data of several metabolites were processed using the MEF tool to assign the correct elemental composition and validate the efficacy of the method. Especially, the link between the mass accuracy needed to generate one unique elemental composition and the topology of the MS n tree (the width and the depth of the tree) was addressed. This method makes an important step toward semi-automatic de novo identification of metabolites using MS n data. Availability: Software available at: http://abs.
INTRODUCTIONMetabolomics is the extensive examination of the metabolic phenotype, the metabolome, under a specific set of conditions. It has emerged as a functional key to understand the behavior of complex biological systems, including cells, tissues and biofluids. Currently, the essential challenges addressed in metabolomics are identification (full coverage of the metabolome with structural characterization) and quantification (accurately measure concentrations at low abundance levels). Metabolite identification to enable proper biological interpretation is the first step in the research of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. biomarkers, systems biology and drug discovery; Kind and. Electrospray ionization (ESI) enabled mass spectrometry (MS) to become the most essential analytical tool used in both quantitative and qualitative metabolomic research (). In combination with liquid or gas chromatography, MS is the widely accepted standard method () for the analysis of metabolomic samples. In this way, each compound in the measured sample is characterized by a retention time and a mass value. However, this characterization is not sufficient for metabolite identification, and the first step toward elucidation of the chemical structure from an unidentified compound is the determination of its elemental composition. An elemental composition expresses which and how many atoms constitute a particular chemical compound. Although each elemental composition has an unique molecular weight (mass), a molecular weight does not have a unique elemental composition. This situation is complicated by the instrumental precision, and the accuracy of the mass measurements limits this viability. Nowadays, mass spectrometry instrumentation such as time-of-flight, ion cyclotron resonance or magnetic sectors are able to measure mass-to-charge ratios (m/z) with a mass accuracy up to 1 ppm (parts per million) meaning that a mass of 100 Da is measured accurately up to four decimal places. In addition, modern desktop computers together with available software tools make it possible to generate and verify instantaneously all theoretical possible chemical elemental compositions for a given mass. Regrettably, several studies have shown that even high mass accuracy (smaller than 1 ppm) does not necessarily result in one unique assigned elemental composition (). The number of possible elemental compositions increases exponentially with the mass and the set of chemical elements taken into account. Generally, available methods that derive the elemental composition from a given mass use the following three steps: generation, filtering and matching. The generation step generates a candidate list with all possible elemental compositions enumerated systematically. The filtering step rejects all the elemental compositions that do not satisfy certain rules. The matching step compares the theoretical isotope patterns with the experimental one. The best match is reflected as the most probable elemental composition. Normally, the elemental composition annotation process starts when the user provides a constraint set consisting of the mass of the ion, the set of chemical elements to include and exclude, the limit range of number of atoms for each element and the mass tolerance (mass error window). There are two different approaches for generating the elemental composition and these depend on thePage: 2377 23762383
CONCLUSIONDue to fast recent instrumentation developments, MS n has become a powerful tool for the characterization of metabolites. A new method was developed that can be applied for the processing and analysis of multistage mass spectrometry (MS n ) data. This method resolves the chemical elemental composition of a compound using constraints extracted from the predicted elemental composition of its fragments and requires a lower mass accuracy than conventional methods. The viability of the MEF method was tested with experiments on real MS n data of several metabolites. The method does not only list the elemental composition of the parent ion, but also of its fragments and the neutral losses. The results presented here show that the method assigns very efficiently the correct elemental composition while reducing the needed accuracy to middle mass tolerance depending on the chemical structure of the metabolite and the topology of the fragmentation tree analyzed. For 5-hydroxylisine, the mass tolerance needed to solve the elemental composition jumps from 16 ppm to 150 ppm when additional fragmentation tree information is added as a constraint. This approach shows that the MS level is a relevant factor to help with the assignment of the elemental composition. If MS n spectra are acquired to a higher level, the maximum mass tolerance to determine the correct elemental composition using the MEF tool is getting higher. To obtain the elemental composition of a protonated molecule (or adduct), this approach lowers the requirements with regards to mass accuracy of a mass spectrometer if MS 2 or higher MS level spectra can be obtained, and can be combined with the isotopic pattern of the protonated molecule (or adduct). This decreasing need for highly accurate data to solve the elemental composition by adding fragmentation tree information could help for those groups which cannot effort an expensive instrument with powerful resolution power. Alternatively, it will reduce the time needed to perform an identification. The output with the fragmentation pattern containing the elemental compositions is stored in a CML () file format waiting for a proximate future for a standard exchange file format specific for metabolites. Currently, the MEF method provides a list of elemental composition candidates ordered according to the difference of the measured mass. In future work, it is planned to implement additional constraint rules into the method and also apply isotope abundance analysis to increase the identification accuracy. As we are able to characterize the fragments and neutral losses with the elemental composition, we are moving toward getting better understanding of the fragmentation patterns and use this information to identify the 'correct structure' of unknown compounds.