Efforts to develop peptide-based vaccines, in particular those requiring site-specific targeting of self-proteins, rely on the ability to optimize the immunogenicity of the peptide epitopes. Currently, screening of candidate vaccines is typically performed through low-throughput, high-cost animal trials. To improve on this we present the program EpIC, which enables high-throughput prediction of peptide immunogenicity based on the endogenous occurrence of B-cell epitopes within native protein sequences. This information informs rational selection of immunogenicity-optimized epitopes for peptide vaccines. Availability and implementation: EpIC is available as a web server at
IntroductionVaccine development efforts are increasingly based on the formulation and delivery of peptides that represent specific priority vaccine targets (epitopes). Recently, applications of immunotherapeutics have expanded beyond infectious diseases and into pathologies where the immune targets are self-molecules, such as cancer, Alzheimer's, amyotrophic lateral sclerosis and prion diseases. Immunotherapy for such pathologies requires precise direction of immune responses against self-molecules, or even against specific regions or conformations of self-molecules. When there is the dual challenge of maintaining specificity while simultaneously overcoming immune tolerance to a selfmolecule, peptide-based vaccines remain a promising option. Although advantaged in terms of cost, ease of production, safety and broad therapeutic applicability, they are often disadvantaged by poor immunogenicity (). Typically, once a protein, or a region of a protein, has been identified as a vaccine target, a panel of peptides is randomly generated that collectively represent the entirety of the protein or region of interest. Often the only criterion used for creation of these peptides is length. More sophisticated investigations may incorporate in silico screening to prioritize, but not typically optimize, different regions based on predicted immunogenicity. Either approach ultimately leads to the creation of a panel of vaccines that are tested for immunogenicity in animal models. These approaches, which typically require iterative rounds of vaccine development and testing, are undesirable from efficiency, financial and ethical perspectives. A more rational approach for in silico optimization of peptide epitopes would provide a more direct route to the development of immunogenic peptide vaccines. Several sequence-based in silico strategies have been developed to predict immunogenic regions of a protein based on a number of variables. These include predicted surface exposure, structural flexibility and occurrence of sequence elements known to correlate with immunogenicity, such as T-and B-cell epitopes (). These methods can facilitate peptide vaccine development by identifying a panel of candidate peptide antigens, enabling the user to effectively generate an immune response against a target protein. However, these methods fall short when antibody neutralization is restricted to a specific region of a protein. Furthermore, consideration of sequences based on surface-accessibility is complicated in the context of conformation-specific targets, where epitope selection is even more restricted. Here, a more appropriate method forgenerating immunogenic epitopes occurs at the level of primary structure through evaluation and selection of naturally occurring sequences containing B-cell epitopes that are predicted to possess enhanced immunogenicity. In our previous efforts to develop peptide-based vaccines to specific regions of the PrP C protein, the inclusion or exclusion of certain residues flanking our epitope of interest profoundly influenced immunogenicity where a single residue alteration resulted in a 100-fold change in associated antibody titres (). This illustrated the challenge associated with peptide epitopes and also the opportunity to optimize epitopes through selection of appropriate expansions within the protein based on defined correlations between peptide sequence and associated immunogenicity. Through such an approach, it may be possible to utilize subtle manipulations of a peptide epitope sequence to improve immunogenicity when the epitope is limited by location constraints. EpIC is a software program that allows the user to easily, quickly and accurately increase immunogenicity through selective inclusion of endogenous B-cell epitopes that exist within the target protein sequence near the epitope of interest. The optimized epitopes can then be fused to a carrier protein possessing T-cell epitopes required for immuno-stimulation.