Motivation: Antibodies are an important class of biological drugs, but with limitations, such as inadequate pharmacokinetics, adverse immunogenicity and high production costs. Synthetic pep-tides for the desired target represent an important alternative to antibodies. However, no computational tool exists to guide the design of these peptides. Results: To identify the interacting residues in a given antibody–antigen (Ab–Ag) interface we used Interface Interacting Residue (I2R), a selection method based on computed molecular interactions. The aggregation of all the molecular interactions between epitope and paratope residues allowed us to transform the 3D Ab–Ag complex structures into interface graphs. Based on these data and the probability of molecular interaction we developed EPI-Peptide Designer tool that uses predicted paratope residues for an epitope of interest to generate targeted peptide ligand libraries. EPI-Peptide Designer successfully predicted 301 peptides able to bind to LiD1 target protein (65% of the experimentally tested peptides), an enrichment of 22% compared to randomly generated peptides. This tool should enable the development of a new generation of synthetic interacting peptides that could be very useful in the biosensor, diagnostic and therapeutic fields. Availability and implementation: All software developed in this work are available at
IntroductionProteinprotein interactions are at the heart of biological processes and protein functions are highly related to their binding properties (). For instance, the immune response relies on antigen recognition by a specific antibody and the antibodyantigen (AbAg) complex represents a specific type of proteinprotein interaction characterized by high affinity and specificity. Identifying the key residues and interaction patterns on the AbAg interface could help improving antibody humanization as well as the design of new antibodies () and peptide ligands based on the antibody properties. The use of peptides for therapeutic purpose instead of antibodies has plenty of advantages such as lower manufacturing costs, less immunogenic profile, greater stability and better organ/tumor penetration. Several chemical approaches have been generated to overcome therapeutic peptides limitations such as low oral bioavailability and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com biodistribution (). Indeed, much research effort is focused on the use of peptide ligands as a viable alternative to antibodies in targeted therapies (). For instance, mimetic peptides derived from the anti-HER2/ERBB antibody can inhibit the tyrosine kinase activity of this receptor and consequently impair tumour growth (). Presently, over 50 peptide drugs are approved for clinical use (). To guide the design and increase the affinity and specificity of these peptide drugs, different tools, based on various methodologies (e.g. directed evolution, high-throughput protein screening or rational design based on proteinpeptide interactions) have emerged (). In silico rational design of peptides based on molecular interactions is also a fundamental proof-of-concept for the current understanding of the physical-chemical basis of molecular recognition. Moreover, this approach could become a powerful complement to the current librarybased screening methods because it allows targeting specific patches on the surface of a protein (). Computational design also gives the opportunity to program proteinprotein interactions for specific applications. However, currently no computational methodology to design this kind of peptides is available. In this work, we propose a computational method to generate libraries of peptide ligands or paratope mimetics based on the epitopeparatope interaction (EPI) patterns and on a target epitope input sequence. This software, called EPI-Peptide Designer, uses a set of AbAg complex structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () and the Blue Star STING server and STING_DB () containing hundreds of interaction descriptors reported in residue by residue fashion to compute the Bayesian probabilities of molecular interactions between epitope and paratope. EPIPeptide Designer generates peptide binder sequences based on the epitope sequence entered by the user and the patterns extracted from the AbAg interfaces. The method was experimentally validated using as target a dermonecrotic protein LiD1 from the brown spider venom. We have synthesized a library of 460 peptides and 65% of them were able to bind to LiD1. In addition, 460 random peptide were designed in which 43% of them were positives. These results indicate an enrichement of 22% in ligand peptides designed using EPI-Peptide Desginer. This is, to our knowledge, the first generator of peptide ligand libraries based on epitopeparatope interface.