Motivation: In recent years, numerous genome-wide association studies have been conducted to identify genetic makeup that explains phenotypic differences observed in human population. Analytical tests on single loci are readily available and embedded in common genome analysis software toolset. The search for significant epistasis (gene–gene interactions) still poses as a computational challenge for modern day computing systems, due to the large number of hypotheses that have to be tested. Results: In this article, we present an approach to epistasis detection by exhaustive testing of all possible SNP pairs. The search strategy based on the Hilbert–Schmidt Independence Criterion can help delineate various forms of statistical dependence between the genetic markers and the phenotype. The actual implementation of this search is done on the highly parallelized architecture available on graphics processing units rendering the completion of the full search feasible within a day. Availability: The program is available at http://www.mpipsykl.mpg .de/epigpuhsic/.
INTRODUCTIONThe field of bioinformatics matures into a stage of development where the common association search of significant univariate single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) to a particular phenotype reveals few novel insights in the underlying biological mechanisms involved. New endeavors must be undertaken to address potential higher order interactions existing among genes in view of revealing underlying common mechanisms in more complex diseases. A brute force exhaustive approach currently poses as a computational challenge. In human studies, the number of SNP can be in the order of millions resulting in the number of possible SNP pair combinations in the order of 10 12 10 14. The number of individuals can likely be in the range of tens of thousands in large study cohorts. Both dimensions will continue to grow as technological advancement continues on its steady incline. Approaches based on search space pruning and exhaustive search have been adopted for the study on genegene interactions in genome-wide association studies. Filtering by main effects to create a subset of SNPs on which all possible interactions are tested for, fails to capture high significance pairs with low main effects.and the more generalized form demonstrated by, are based * To whom correspondence should be addressed. on space search reduction strategy but is limited to homozygous SNPs and the noted speedup factor has not been substantial for large sample size. The most compelling search space pruning method developed byhas overcome these shortcomings but is limited to tests based on contingency tables where classes on the phenotype exist. As tools involved in collecting data improve, the software and computational strategy employed for the analysis should be refined to accommodate for these changes and should not limit the type of investigation that can be undertaken. In Kam, a difference of Pearson's correlation coefficients between binary phenotypes across all possible SNP pairs has been developed. This approach of a difference in correlation coefficients is not only mathematically appealing for its simplicity and from a practical standpoint for the comparative ease with which it can be computed, but is also interesting and appealing from a biological standpointit ties up the concepts of epistasis with the evolutionary concept of co-selection of unlinked loci. This search protocol was implemented on graphics processing units (GPUs) using the available parallel computing capability to reduce the search time by several orders of magnitude compared to single-core CPU-based computation. However, this method is strictly limited to binary phenotypes. When the recorded phenotypes are of quantitative nature, differences of test measures cannot be performed between classes/clusters of datasets as compared to the binary or qualitative phenotype counterparts where classes of subjects preexist. This article aims to present the steps that were taken to overcome this severe limitation and extend this method to quantitative phenotypes. The proposed search strategy performs an exhaustive search for interaction significance across all SNP pairs against a quantitative phenotype. The method is derived from the HilbertSchmidt Independence Criterion (HSIC) developed by. Furthermore, the implementation is done on commercially available GPUs to reduce the financial costs and search time. The actual timing measure will depend largely on the marker coverage size and computer resource utilized. However, the order of speedup factor is consistently observed throughout. This article is structured in the following order. It will first extend the correlation difference method developed for binary phenotypes in Kamto quantitative phenotypes by demonstrating it as an instance of HSIC. The proposed method is applied on a set of simulated data and a set of real data in the results section. Improved efficiency is measured between the GPU implementation and its CPU counterpart. Validation is determined by a comparison to the significance of the interaction term using linear regression fit.Page: i215 i214i221