Motivation: The growth of sequence data has been accompanied by an increasing need to analyze data on distributed computer clusters. The use of these systems for routine analysis requires scalable and robust software for data management of large datasets. Software is also needed to simplify data management and make large-scale bioinformatics analysis accessible and reproducible to a wide class of target users. Results: We have developed a workflow management system named Ergatis that enables users to build, execute and monitor pipelines for computational analysis of genomics data. Ergatis contains preconfigured components and template pipelines for a number of common bioinformatics tasks such as prokaryotic genome annotation and genome comparisons. Outputs from many of these components can be loaded into a Chado relational database. Ergatis was designed to be accessible to a broad class of users and provides a user friendly, web-based interface. Ergatis supports high-throughput batch processing on distributed compute clusters and has been used for data management in a number of genome annotation and comparative genomics projects. Availability: Ergatis is an open-source project and is freely available at http://ergatis.sourceforge.net Contact: jorvis@users.sourceforge.net
INTRODUCTIONWorkflow management systems (WMS) include software systems that execute and manage computational pipelines. These have become important tools in bioinformatics because they enable researchers to analyze the massive quantities of data generated by modern laboratory equipment. There are a number of WMS targeted to bioinformatics that differ in scope and approach for construction * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and execution of workflows (). One class of WMS enables biologists to manipulate data in a manner that would normally require some level of scripting ability or the use of a collection of local tools and web forms. The scope of this class usually includes querying preexisting datasets and transforming results. Operations include retrieving sequences from public collections, extraction of subsequences, converting among file formats and performing set operations on collections of results. Applications in this class include ISYS, a local application and development framework (), and Galaxy, a comprehensive web-based interface designed for tool and database integration (). Galaxy, in particular, excels at enabling users to gather data from diverse sources and execute a set of queries. Pipelines are represented as a history of user actions within the system that can be reused. BioMOBY () and Taverna () are notable instances of a class of WMS that organize and integrate a disparate collection of web service providers. In this model, data are exchanged using a common format and protocol, usually XML and SOAP, respectively, between the host and any number of providers during the course of a pipeline execution. Users of these systems do not need extensive local hardware resources since all computes are performed at each provider's site. Indeed, the number of providers available for common and overlapping services has grown so large that new strategies have been developed to assist in managing and ranking them (). For data-intensive pipelines, web service approaches can be limited by network performance, service availability and I/O compatibility between providers. Other WMS typically assume direct access to component executables and manage the execution of pipelines either locally or on a compute cluster. Wildfire () and Pegasys () aim to enable construction of components into a pipeline using local graphical user interfaces, representing these pipelines in a form that can be executed on distributed resources. Ergatis is a WMS that fits into this last class and is targeted toward the analysis of genome sequence data. Ergatis is designed to be accessible to bioinformaticians and biologists alike.Page: 1489 14881492. Architecture diagram showing process and data flow from pipeline creation in Ergatis, processing of wXML by Workflow Engine, job scheduling on a computational grid by SGE and finally optional data loading into a Chado relational database instance. Using an intuitive web-based interface, biologists can use the suite of integrated components to construct new analysis pipelines or reuse existing pipeline templates. These pipelines can be executed on a single desktop or distributed across large compute clusters. Their output can be converted into common formats or loaded into a relational database. The underlying workflow system provides structured pipeline representation, monitoring, audit capability and task execution on managed compute resources such as a grid or compute cluster. Our system allows construction of pipelines from common bioinformatics analysis tools as well as providing an architecture within which these pipelines can be reused and applied to new datasets. Ergatis is the only WMS among these to provide these features and contain prepackaged pipelines for whole-genome annotation, comparative genomics and pan-genome diversity studies.
DISCUSSIONThe Ergatis uses a modular, scalable and extensible approach to pipeline creation and management on local or distributed compute resources. It provides a wide array of analysis components and pre-configured pipeline templates with which users can build their own custom pipelines. While flexible and extensible, this modular approach is not necessarily the most efficient way to execute some pipelines. Each modular component accepts a set of input types and creates one or more output types. Because of this, Ergatis pipelines may involve a series of format conversion steps that can incur extra computational overhead. We believe that the benefits of the component abstraction layer, such as modular construction and pipeline reuse, outweigh drawbacks such as this. We believe this approach is preferable over webservice-based systems for institutions who possess adequate computational hardware and who wish to ensure maximal resource availability and customization. Pipelines can be executed in Ergatis without concern for service availability or data transfer limitations to remote service sites. Though initially intended as a local pipeline management tool, Ergatis has been extended and employed by some users to drive publicly available computational web resources. One example of this is the Integrative Services for Genomics Analysis, a webbased prokaryotic annotation server that uses Ergatis as its back-end (). Ergatis has also been extended to serve as the pipeline framework for CloVR, a virtual appliance that integrates genomics tools on cloud computing platforms for viral, prokaryotic, metagenomic and eukaryotic sequencing projects (Fricke). Current and future work includes improvement to the web interface, training documentation and addition of new components and pipeline templates to Ergatis for analysis of metagenomics and transcriptomics data. This work will also enable Ergatis to serve as one of the access portals for the Data Intensive Academic Grid, a publicly available 1000+ core computational infrastructure currently under development. The Ergatis software is open source and freely available at http://ergatis.sf.net.