Motivation: Intrinsically disordered regions are key for the function of numerous proteins, and the scant available experimental annotations suggest the existence of different disorder flavors. While efficient predictions are required to annotate entire genomes, most existing methods require sequence profiles for disorder prediction, making them cumbersome for high-throughput applications. Results: In this work, we present an ensemble of protein disorder predictors called ESpritz. These are based on bidirectional recursive neural networks and trained on three different flavors of disorder, including a novel NMR flexibility predictor. ESpritz can produce fast and accurate sequence-only predictions, annotating entire genomes in the order of hours on a single processor core. Alternatively, a slower but slightly more accurate ESpritz variant using sequence profiles can be used for applications requiring maximum performance. Two levels of prediction confidence allow either to maximize reasonable disorder detection or to limit expected false positives to 5%. ESpritz performs consistently well on the recent CASP9 data, reaching a S w measure of 54.82 and area under the receiver operator curve of 0.856. The fast predictor is four orders of magnitude faster and remains better than most publicly available CASP9 methods, making it ideal for genomic scale predictions. Conclusions: ESpritz predicts three flavors of disorder at two distinct false positive rates, either with a fast or slower and slightly more accurate approach. Given its state-of-the-art performance, it can be especially useful for high-throughput applications. Availability: Both a web server for high-throughput analysis and a Linux executable version of ESpritz are available from:
INTRODUCTIONProtein function has been traditionally thought to be determined by tertiary structure. More recently, an alternative view is emerging with respect to non-folding regions, which suggests a reassessment of the structure-to-function paradigm (). Flexible segments lacking a unique native structure within a protein are known as disordered regions (). Disorder has been shown to be widespread within known natural proteins, especially in eukaryotic organisms * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). It also plays a key role in human disease () where it is thought that 79% of all cancer-associated proteins are at least in part unstructured/disordered (). Proteins with disordered segments are frequently associated with molecular recognition (). They have also been observed to be common among hub proteins, i.e. those with a large number of interaction partners (). In addition, protein disorder is also important for protein expression, purification and crystallization since difficulties often arise when long disordered regions are present, as happens frequently at the N and C termini. Protein disorder is experimentally determined with an assortment of indirect biochemical methods collected in the DisProt database () currently containing 640 proteins. Alternatively, missing residues in X-ray crystallographic structures from 70 000 structures deposited in the Protein Data Bank (PDB) () can be used. The analysis of 6000 nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) ensembles from the PDB is also possible (), but to the best of our knowledge, has never been used to train a prediction method. It is assumed that different flavors of protein disorder exist (). The most common distinction is between long (DisProt) and short (X-ray) segments (). Alternatively, there has also been an attempt to distinguish flavors based on enrichment for certain amino acid types (). The characteristically skewed amino acid distribution of disordered segments, lacking in hydrophobic and enriched in polar and charged residues (), can be easily exploited for sequencebased predictions. Available prediction methods can be broadly divided into three classes. Biophysical methods () exploit the sequence distribution to derive pseudo-energy propensities to adopt a disordered state. Of these, IUPred () is probably the most widely used due to its availability and efficiency, as it does not require multiple sequence alignments. Machine learning techniques have been widely used for the prediction of protein disorder (). In most cases, PSI-BLAST sequence profiles () are combined with additional features, e.g. predicted secondary structure in the widely used Disopred (). On average, these methods are slower but somewhat more accurate than biophysical predictors. The last, and most recent, category of disorder predictors use a consensus of various biophysical and machine learning methods (). Here, a further improvement in accuracy is obtained at the cost of running several predictors in parallel and averaging their output. Among the applications of disorder prediction, we can distinguish at least two different scenarios. The first is represented by the Critical Assessment of techniques for protein Structure Prediction (CASP) experiment, where the methods are used to predict disorder on a relatively small number of proteins with maximum accuracy (). Here, clearly consensus predictors aiming for maximum accuracy should excel. However, a more practical scenario is represented by high-throughput analysis of protein disorder, e.g. on entire genomes (). In this case, the focus is shifted toward fast predictors producing a minimum number of false positives (). Over the years, most prediction methods have addressed the first problem, with comparatively little attention to the practicalities of largescale predictions. This has led to a relative paucity of accurate fast predictors, as adding more prediction layers has produced slightly more accurate but increasingly cumbersome methods (e.g.). Here we present the ESpritz methods for determining disorder based solely on sequence, aimed for high-throughput applications. The predictor is tested on large datasets of different disorder types, including a novel NMR mobility definition. The sole input for the ESpritz method is the amino acid. It does not require sliding windows to capture local contextual information or any complex sources of information and is shown to be both state-of-the-art and efficient.