Motivation: Insertion of DNA segments is one mechanism by which genomes evolve. The bulk of genomic segments are now known to be transcribed into long and short non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs), promoter-associated transcripts and enhancer-templated transcripts. These various cryptic ncRNAs are thought to be dispersed in the human and other genomes by retroposition. Results: In this study, I report clear evidence for dissemination of cryptic ncRNAs transcribed from intronic and intergenic segments by retroposition. I used highly stringent conditions to find recently retroposed ncRNAs that had a poly(A) tract and were flanked by target site duplication. I identified 73 instances of retroposition in the human, mouse, and rat genomes (12, 36 and 25 instances, respectively). The inserted segments, in some cases, served as a novel exon or promoter for the associated gene, resulting in novel transcript variants. Some disseminated sequences showed sequence conservation across animals, implying a possible regulatory role. My results indicate that retroposition is one of the mechanisms for dispersion of ncRNAs. I propose that these newly inserted segments may play a role in genome evolution by potentially functioning as novel exons, promoters or enhancers.
INTRODUCTIONInsertion of DNA segments into a genome is one of the mechanisms underlying genome evolution. Inserted DNAs include genomic segments derived from other locations in the genome (), repetitive elements (), organellar chromosome fragments, such as nuclear mitochondrial DNAs (), and retroviruses (). Duplication of genomic segments is common in eukaryotic genomes. These duplications are produced either by DNA-mediated or RNA-mediated mechanisms. DNA-mediated duplication includes interchromosomal recombination and tandem duplication by non-allelic homologous recombination or non-homologous end-joining (). Many DNA insertion events are mediated by a retroposition mechanism, which involves transcription of genomic segments into RNA molecules, reverse transcription of these RNAs to cDNAs and insertion of the cDNA segments into new genomic locations (). Retroposition of RNAs of various origins has contributed abundant innovations for genome evolution (). The most common retroposed DNA segments are retrotransposable elements, such as Alu, SVA, L1, MIR and endogenous retroviruses; the inserted segments can be exapted as novel exons for protein-coding genes (), act as alternative promoters of nearby genes or induce de novo transcription () and contribute to regulatory elements, such as enhancers (). Retroposition of fully or partially processed protein-coding genes is a well-known mechanism for gene duplication, and results in generation of either non-functional retropseudogenes or functional retrocopies (retrogenes) of the original parental genes (). Functional RNA molecules, such as small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs) and small Cajal body-specific RNAs (scaRNAs), are also to be subject to retroposition and have been reported to generate novel sno/scaRNAs during evolution (). It is now known that the bulk of human and other eukaryotic genomes, other than protein-coding genes or RNA genes, is transcribed pervasively (). Although a lot of these transcripts, which are collectively known as non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) or untranslated RNAs (utRNAs), were thought to be simply transcriptional noise, some of them were reported to play important roles in genome regulation (). Enhancer regions have been reported to be bidirectionally transcribed to produce a distinct class of ncRNAs, enhancer-templated ncRNAs or eRNAs, which are involved in transcriptional control of nearby genes (). I hypothesized that various cryptic ncRNAs that were pervasively transcribed from intronic or intergenic segments would be subject to retroposition. There are many genomic duplicons that originated from intronic or intergenic regions in the human and other genomes. However, it is difficult to determine whether these duplicons are generated by RNA-mediated retroposition or DNA recombination mediated by non-homologous end-joining. Retrogenes and retropseudogenes are easy to identify because they usually lack introns compared with their source genes. Retroposed intronic or intergenic segments, in contrast, would not show any splicing features, but would still exhibit other signatures of retroposition, namely, a poly(A) tract and target site duplication (TSD). In this study, I devised a bioinformatics procedure to identify retroposed ncRNAs originating from intronic or intergenic segments in the human, mouse and rat genomes. The signature of retroposition such as the poly(A) tract decays over time (). Loss of the retroposition signature would make it difficult to judge whether a duplicon originated by retroposition or DNA-mediated recombination. Therefore, in this study, I used highly stringent conditions to detect only recently retroposed ncRNAs. To collect clear evidence for retroposition of ncRNAs, I designed a procedure to identify only recently retroposed segments that retained the following retroposition signatures: (i) strong sequence similarity between the source and the insert copies; (ii) a poly(A) tract at the end of the insert; and (iii) a TSD at both boundaries of the insert. By using these criteria, I identified 73 recent retroposition events of ncRNAs in the human, mouse and rat genomes. Furthermore, I comprehensively explored and discussed the impact of these retroposition events on nearby genes.
DISCUSSIONThis report presents clear evidence for dissemination of cryptic ncRNAs by retroposition in the human, mouse and rat genomes.Because retroposed ncRNAs have no spliced-out segments, the gradual loss of retroposition signatures, such as a poly(A) tract and a TSD make them practically indistinguishable from DNA-mediated segmental duplicons. In this study, therefore, I used highly stringent conditions to collect 73 recent retroposition cases. Considering the rapid shortening of poly(A) tracts of retroposed transcripts () and the decay of retroposition signatures over time, there are likely many more 'aged' retroposed ncRNAs that I did not detect using my screening procedure. There is also a distinct class of retroposons that lack poly(A) tails named tailless retropseudogenes (), which also could not be detected in this study. Therefore, it is highly likely that the dissemination of ncRNAs is more common than observed here. It has been shown that the bulk of the eukaryotic genome is pervasively transcribed (). Several distinct classes of ncRNAs have been observed. Enhancer elements have been reported to be bidirectionally transcribed to produce eRNAs in human neuronal cells (Kim et al.,of the human and the gorilla RBPJ gene is shown. The inserted sequence is underlined. The poly(A) tail and the TSD at the target site are shown on gray and black background, respectively. The start position of EST DC397179 and the splice donor (GT) are marked with a greater than sign and two number signs, respectively 2010;). Stable intronic sequence RNAs (sisRNAs) were detected in the nucleus of Xenopus tropicalis oocytes (). Polyadenylated promoter upstream transcripts are produced upstream of active human promoters (). Many other types of promoterassociated RNAs have also been described (). Short polyadenylated RNAs transcribed from highly conserved regions in the human genome have been reported (). These ncRNAs, especially when polyadenylated, can serve as substrates for LINE-1 reverse transcriptase. Therefore, it is highly probable that these distinct classes of ncRNAs are disseminated in the genome by retroposition. In this study, I identified the source of four retroposed ncRNAs inserted into the human RBPJ gene (ID H004,), mouse Dab1 gene (ID M011, Supplementary), rat Abcb1b gene (ID R012) and rat Trim16 gene (ID R018, Supplementary) as originating from the 5 0 region of known genes, indicating that these were promoter-associated transcripts (). The human RBPJ gene case is particularly interesting because the retroposed promoter-associated ncRNA retains promoter activity, generating a novel transcript variant of the RBPJ gene (). Nineteen retroposed ncRNAs were highly conserved across animals: an example is the rat Lnx2 gene case (ID R020,). A possible source of these retroposed sequences is short polyadenylated RNAs transcribed from conserved genomicThe target region is shown. The inserted sequence is underlined. The poly(A) tail and the TSD at the target site are shown on grey and black background, respectively. The putative poly(A) signal for the source transcript is marked with six o marks. Potential effects of retroposed cryptic ncRNAs on the insertion region are depicted regions (). Another possibility is that these sequences were derived from eRNAs (), although there is no direct evidence that these regions have enhancer activities. The steps for retroposition of ncRNAs are likely to be identical or similar to those of retroposition of retro(pseudo)genes and repetitive elements (). First, the transcript is polyadenylated at an authentic or cryptic poly(A) site. Then, the polyadenylated RNA molecule is recognized by the enzymatic machinery of LINE-1 retrotransposons and inserted into a new location, generating a TSD during the insertion process. The inserted segments can serve as novel exons or promoters to produce novel transcript variants and novel protein isoforms. If the retroposed ncRNA originates from a regulatory element, such as an enhancer, it could potentially play a role in genome regulation. In summary, I developed a procedure to identify recently retroposed ncRNAs in the human, mouse and rat genomes and provided clear evidence for retroposed ncRNAs. I strongly argue that the dissemination of ncRNAs by retroposition is common. The inserted segments can create novel transcript variants of the associated genes and play a role in genome regulation.