Motivation: Many methods predict the physical interaction between two proteins (protein-protein interactions; PPIs) from sequence alone. Their performance drops substantially for proteins not used for training. Results: Here, we introduce a new approach to predict PPIs from sequence alone which is based on evolutionary profiles and profile-kernel support vector machines. It improved over the state-of-the-art, in particular for proteins that are sequence-dissimilar to proteins with known interaction partners. Filtering by gene expression data increased accuracy further for the few, most reliably predicted interactions (low recall). The overall improvement was so substantial that we compiled a list of the most reliably predicted PPIs in human. Our method makes a significant difference for biology because it improves most for the majority of proteins without experimental annotations. Availability and implementation: Implementation and most reliably predicted human PPIs available at https://rostlab.org/owiki/index.php/Profppikernel.
IntroductionPPIs: physical proteinprotein interactions between different proteins. We define PPIs as interactions that bring two different proteins A and B directly into 'physical contact'. This 'molecular' perspective on PPIs differs from the view adopted by many 'users' of interaction data who look for associations. Again: for us the crucial aspect of an interaction is the direct physical contact. This molecular perspective is a crucial component of curated resources such as Hippie (), as well as of our method.Predictions and experimental evidence intertwined. PPIs are supported by an increasing amount of data, derived for example from sequences, structures, co-evolution, co-expression, domain co-occurrence, text-mining or subcellular co-localization. Many in silico tools use these data to enrich PPI networks and to predict new interactions (). For instance, high-throughput data in integrative models such as Bayesian Networks improves predictions and blurs the line between in vitro and in silico (). Predictions can be improved further by, e.g. developing better statistical models (). Protein sequences improve most integrative models, e.g. through homology-based inference and are highly predictive of PPIs on their own (). Sequences are also by far the most abundant data. Homology-based inference assigns feature F to a protein A if another protein B is experimentally annotated with feature F and sequence-similar to A. This concept works well for Gene Ontology terms () and can even outperform advanced predictions of subcellular localization (). For PPIs, however, it is substantially more challenging () and many advanced sequence-based PPI prediction methods have been developed.New prediction method for difficult cases. Park and Marcotte recently introduced three classes of difficulty for predicting whether proteins A and B interact: C1 if both A and B were in the dataset used to develop the prediction method (but not the PPI AB itself), C2 if this was the case for either A or B and C3 if neither of the two was in the dataset (). Even today's best sequence-based methods perform significantly worse if A and B were not used for method training. Here, we introduce a new method that tackles this problem. It only uses features that are available for all proteins of known sequence and combines empirical rules with advanced machine learning protocols. We show that it slightly outperformed other methods for classes C1 and C2 and that it improved substantially for C3. A filter based on recent tissue-specific gene expression data further increased performance. Finally, by generalizing classes C1C3, we could identify and predict all difficult query protein pairs in human.