Background: Network motifs within biological networks show non-random abundances in systems at different scales. Large directed protein networks at the cellular level are now well defined in several diverse species. We aimed to compare the nature of significantly observed two-and three-node network motifs across three different kingdoms (Arabidopsis thaliana for multicellular plants, Saccharomyces cerevisiae for unicellular fungi and Homo sapiens for animals). Results: Two-node feedback is the most significant motif in all three species. By considering the sign of each two-node feedback interaction, we examined the enrichment of the three types of two-node feedbacks [positive–positive (PP), negative–negative (NN) and positive–negative (PN)]. We found that PN is enriched in the network of A.thaliana, NN in the network of S.cerevisiae and PP and NN in the network of H.sapiens. Each feedback type has characteristic features of robustness, multistability and homeostasis. Conclusions: We suggest that amplification of particular network motifs emerges from contrasting dynamical and topological properties of the motifs, reflects the evolutionary design principles selected by the characteristic behavior of each species and provides a signature pointing to their behavior and function.
INTRODUCTIONSystems biology involves the study of complex interactions between components of a biological system. The study of network motifs () within larger networks can help to unravel the functions of complex biological networks (). In biology, network motifssubgraphs that recur within a network much more often than expected in random networksinclude negative autoregulation, positive autoregulation, feedforward loops, single-input modules, dense overlapping regulons and feedback loops (). These network motifs are known to have different dynamical functions, and distinct subsets have been found to predominate in various biological networks such as transcription, signal transduction, protein interaction and neuronal networks, or even larger scale ecosystem-wide networks. Most of the previous studies on network motifs () were, however, limited to the networks with no interaction sign (activation or inhibition) although such interaction sign is indispensable for characterizing various dynamical properties. Now that networks involving a substantial proportion of all the signed directed protein networks (SDPNs) within cells are available for organisms from the animal, plant and fungal kingdoms, we can compare the network motifs and ask whether there are characteristics which may be kingdom specific, and allow us to unravel evolutionary design principles. In this article, we examine the enrichment of particular network motifs in the Arabidopsis thaliana (multicellular plant), Saccharomyces cerevisiae (unicellular fungus) and Homo sapiens (multicellular animal). We suggest biological implications for the sets of network motifs in each species that arise from their characteristic dynamical and topological features.