Motivation: Bacterial resistance to antibiotics, particularly plasmid-encoded resistance to beta lac-tam drugs, poses an increasing threat to human health. Point mutations to beta-lactamase enzymes can greatly alter the level of resistance conferred, but predicting the effects of such mutations has been challenging due to the large combinatorial space involved and the subtle relationships of distant residues to catalytic function. Therefore we desire an information-theoretic metric to sensitively and robustly detect both local and distant residues that affect substrate con-formation and catalytic activity. Results: Here, we report the use of positional mutual information in multiple microsecond-length molecular dynamics (MD) simulations to predict residues linked to catalytic activity of the CTX-M9 beta lactamase. We find that motions of the bound drug are relatively isolated from motions of the protein as a whole, which we interpret in the context of prior theories of catalysis. In order to robustly identify residues that are weakly coupled to drug motions but nonetheless affect catalysis, we utilize an excess mutual information metric. We predict 31 such residues for the cephalosporin antibiotic cefotaxime. Nine of these have previously been tested experimentally, and all decrease both enzyme rate constants and empirical drug resistance. We prospectively validate our method by testing eight high-scoring mutations and eight low-scoring controls in bacteria. Six of eight predicted mutations decrease cefotaxime resistance greater than 2-fold, while only one control shows such an effect. The ability to prospectively predict new variants affecting bacterial drug resistance is of great interest to clinical and epidemiological surveillance.
IntroductionBeta lactamases are enzymes produced by bacteria that confer resistance to a broad range of clinically used antibiotics that share a common chemical core structure (). Use of these drugs has led to the emergence of beta lactamases with a broad spectrum of activity that render many classes of antibiotics ineffective (). In the past, this has spurred the development of new beta lactam antibiotics, but that pipeline has slowed in recent decades, creating a clinical problem of highly resistant infections (). Understanding the determinants of activity and specificity in beta lactamases is key to both monitoring the emergence of further resistance and the targeted design of new antibacterial agents. Here, we focus on the CTX-M family, a group of extended spectrum beta lactamases that have spread globally in recent years and utilize a catalytic mechanism roughly analogous to serine proteases (). CTX-M enzymes are currently the most prevalent extended-spectrum beta lactamases in both hospital-associated and community-acquired infections and are thus of substantial clinical concern (Cant on and). Even when the resulting infections are treatable, presence of a CTX-M enzyme greatly increases the morbidity resulting from bacterial infection (Cant on and). Although the key catalytic residues in CTX-M enzymes are well known, we wish to understand the basis for modulation of activity and ligand specificity in these enzymes. Even though comprehensive mutagenesis of CTX-M has not yet been experimentally feasible, reports of individual mutations show that single point mutations can alter drug spectrum and catalytic activity (). Such point mutants have been identified in clinical isolates of bacteria () as well as laboratory mutagenesis experiments (). A comprehensive experimental understanding of how mutations affect beta lactamase drug resistance has been hindered by the combinatorial magnitude of the problem. Even for point mutations on CTX-M enzymes alone, rigorous quantitation of how mutants affect activity against a large panel of drugs is extremely resourceintensive, entailing the screening of $5000 mutants (260 residues  19 amino acid changes) against multiple antibiotics. Therefore, we wish to identify residues that may contribute to activity and specificity but are not absolutely essential to function. Prediction of such residues can guide a more targeted set of mutagenesis experiments. In designing such an approach, we wish to consider all residues in the protein, not simply those in direct contact with the drug or previously identified via serendipitous mutations. We have chosen to predict residues modulating antibiotic resistance in CTX-M enzymes based on analysis of molecular dynamics (MD) simulations. We hypothesize that the conformational dynamics of the enzyme and its substrate will yield insight into catalytic activity even though we do not consider catalysis explicitly in classical MD simulations, unlike reactive methods (). Classical MD simulations have been previously used to predict or explain mutations in a number of enzyme systems (). To predict individual residues to mutate, we seek to identify the influence of individual atoms on catalytic activity rather than overall conformational substates of the enzyme. MD simulations provide a means to quantify this 'influence' by measuring positional relatedness between protein atoms and a bound drug, based on the hypothesis that the conformation and orientation of the drug and its environment are related to catalytic activity. We sample conformations from MD simulations, which estimate a Boltzmann-weighted ensemble. Positional mutual information provides a robust non-linear metric to quantify relatedness of positional displacement in MD simulations (). Normalized covariance matrices have also been used for such measurements (), but such approaches are restricted by a linear correlation approximation (), which is less desirable for detecting subtle yet important motions. Mutual information quantifies how much knowledge of the probability distribution of positional displacement for one atom i affects the distribution for another atom j and thus provides a much more general means of detecting relatedness. Although positional mutual information has been used to analyze large-scale movements in a manner analogous to principal components analysis (), here we desire a more focused approach. To predict residues important to catalytic activity, we score by mutual information to drug conformation. This is corrected for bulk protein movement, yielding excess mutual information Ii; drug  Ii; protein background;where I(i,j) denotes the mutual information between residues i and j (). Such a metric encapsulates the precise question 'how related is movement of atom i to the drug conformation'. This metric is designed to identify functionally important residues that meet this criterion; it is of course not designed to detect residues that might not be motionally correlated with the drug but still important to catalysis. Simulations and analysis were performed on the CTX-M9 beta lactamase in complex with one of two antibiotics: cefotaxime and meropenem (). CTX-M enzymes hydrolyze antibiotics by way of an acyl-enzyme intermediate where the antibiotic is covalently bound to the enzyme (). CTX-M9 is able to efficiently hydrolyze cefotaxime, whereas it only forms the acyl intermediate for meropenem without completing hydrolysis (). The conformational dynamics of this intermediate may thus yield insight into the residues important for hydrolytic specificity in these enzymes. The positional mutual information matrices for both CTX-M9:meropenem and CTX-M9:cefotaxime complexes yield important insight regarding the organization of these enzymes. We then score residues that may affect catalytic activity of CTX-M9 using excess mutual information. These predictions yield a set of residues that have previously been identified as affecting catalytic activity and a set of novel, previously untested predictions. To validate our predictions, we tested the top-scoring residues for CTXM9:meropenem and CTX-M9:cefotaxime via alanine mutagenesis, a common means to assess the effect of ablating a residue side chain. Six of these eight mutants had a 2-fold decrease in cefotaxime resistance while only one of the four lowest scoring residues for CTX. Structures of CTX-M9:drug complexes. The overlaid structures of CTXM9 acylated to meropenem (brown online) and cefotaxime (violet online) are rendered in panel (A) with a close-up of the drug-binding pocket in panel (B). Protein is rendered in cartoon form and drug in sticks. These structures were used for MD simulations that served as the basis for positional mutual information calculations M9:meropenem and CTX-M9:cefotaxime similarly decreased resistance.
DiscussionWe have developed an excess mutual information metric to predict residues important for drug hydrolysis in the CTX-M9 beta lactamase enzyme based on MD simulations. We initially developed excess positional mutual information to score protein residues on the influenza hemagglutinin glycoprotein that influence low-affinity binding of sialoglycans (). Here, we show howwere located outside the drug-binding pocket. As plotted in panel (C), none of near-background mutants (yellow) and one of the lowest scoring mutants (orange) showed a 2-fold decrease in drug resistance excess mutual information can be used in a much more sensitive and targeted fashion, detecting motions of an enzyme that are weakly but significantly coupled to dynamics of a bound substrate, and prospectively predicting and testing mutants that affect enzyme function. This marks a substantial expansion on the scope of problems for which excess mutual information can predict mutational effects: from initial work on relatively 'floppy' low-affinity ligand binding, it was not obvious that mutual information would successfully predict sites of mutation in a relatively rigid beta-lactamase enzyme. Although positional mutual information has been used very productively to identify conformational substates of a protein, use of excess mutual information allows a much more targeted measurement of how individual residues are related to ligand motion in a manner that is robust even in the presence of weak coupling. As we have shown, excess mutual information identifies residues where mutation alters k cat even though these residues are not strongly related to ligand or binding-pocket motions in the full N 2 symmetric uncertainty matrix. Our primary goal in developing excess mutual information is to obtain a metric that can predict both binding-pocket mutations and allosteric ones in a single integrated analysis. Since many structure-based approaches concentrate on the ligand-binding pocket, our prediction of both proximate and distant residues demonstrates the power of such an approach. Another motivation for the use of positional excess mutual information is that it provides an empirical measurement of positional relatedness that can be complementary to mutational analysis () yet leverages state-of-the-art classical MD force fields for both force calculation and sampling of statistical ensembles of conformations. In contrast to methods that compute energy-based coupling of protein residues, analyses of MD trajectories naturally incorporate entropic terms and yield a free-energy-based coupling of protein residue motions. Our analysis identified several previously untested mutations predicted to alter the catalytic activity and drug resistance conferred by CTX-M9. We tested a set of these prospective predictions utilizing bacterial drug resistance as a measure of enzyme function, comparing to low-scoring mutations. The predicted high-scoring mutations had a much greater effect on enzyme function than midscoring or low-scoring controls (6/8 showing a 2-fold drop in resistance versus 1/8 in the aggregate control groups; P  0.01 via KS test). Furthermore, these mutations that alter drug resistance are located both within and outside the drug-binding pocket, with highscoring mutations as far as 24 A  away, meeting our design criteria of a single global analysis to identify both local and allosteric mutants. The ability to anticipate altered drug-resistance of new variants is of great utility for clinical surveillance of CTX-M beta lactamases as well as drug development efforts.