Motivation: Adoptive T cell therapies based on introduction of new T cell receptors (TCRs) into patient recipient T cells is a promising new treatment for various kinds of cancers. A major challenge, however, is the choice of target antigens. If an engineered TCR can cross-react with self-antigens in healthy tissue, the side-effects can be devastating. We present the first web server for assessing epitope sharing when designing new potential lead targets. We enable the users to find all known proteins containing their peptide of interest. The web server returns not only exact matches, but also approximate ones, allowing a number of mismatches of the users choice. For the identified candidate proteins the expression values in various healthy tissues, representing all vital human organs, are extracted from RNA Sequencing (RNA-Seq) data as well as from some cancer tissues as control. All results are returned to the user sorted by a score, which is calculated using well-established methods and tools for immunological predictions. It depends on the probability that the epitope is created by proteasomal cleavage and its affinities to the transporter associated with anti-gen processing and the major histocompatibility complex class I alleles. With this framework, we hope to provide a helpful tool to exclude potential cross-reactivity in the early stage of TCR selection for use in design of adoptive T cell immunotherapy. Availability and implementation: The Expitope web server can be accessed via http://webclu.bio. wzw.tum.de/expitope.
IntroductionIn adoptive immunotherapy, engineered T cell receptors (TCRs) are introduced into natural patient cytotoxic T lymphocytes. After this treatment, the T cells recognize a specific tumor antigen and will thus start to target cancer cells. It is vital for the success of the therapy that the antigen is only expressed in cancer cells or non-vital tissue, otherwise the effects can be devastating for the patients. Recent studies showed that not only the expression of the direct target has to be examined across all vital tissues, but also approximate sequences have to be considered, as TCRs are not perfectly exact in their epitope choice. In one study,reported cross-recognition of a MAGE-A3 TCR with a MAGE-A12 epitope that was later found to be expressed in the brain. The MAGE-A12 epitope had one mismatch when compared with the initial target of the study, but was apparently recognized by the TCR and the treatment was fatal for some patients (). In another case,used a different MAGE-A3-specific TCR that was found to show cross-recognition of an epitope present in titin, a protein expressed in the heart, although the titinassociated epitope had four mismatches compared with the originalMAGE-A3 epitope. Nevertheless, titin was targeted by the engineered T cells and the patients suffered cardiac arrest (). In order to see potential off-target recognition when designing new lead targets, until now one needed to search protein databases for approximate hits and than evaluate each hit for its potential to be an epitope. Our Expitope web server combines all these searches and evaluation in one place and even reports the expression of the associated transcripts in all vital human tissues to facilitate TCR selection.