Motivation: Numerous public microarray datasets are valuable resources for the scientific communities. Several online tools have made great steps to use these data by querying related datasets with users own gene signatures or expression profiles. However, dataset annotation and result exhibition still need to be improved. Results: ExpTreeDB is a database that allows for queries on human and mouse microarray experiments from Gene Expression Omnibus with gene signatures or profiles. Compared with similar applications, ExpTreeDB pays more attention to dataset annotations and result visu-alization. We introduced a multiple-level annotation system to depict and organize original experiments. For example, a tamoxifen-treated cell line experiment is hierarchically annotated as agent!drug!estro gen receptor antagonist!tamoxifen. Consequently, retrieved results are exhibited by an interactive tree-structured graphics, which provide an overview for related experiments and might enlighten users on key items of interest. Availability and implementation: The database is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONComparing gene expression profiles of cultured cells, tissues or other samples at different states or time points is a common strategy to search for key factors or underlying mechanisms in biological and medical studies. Over the past decades, commercial microarray platforms have been used for global gene expression profiling, and numerous profiling datasets have been produced (). Gene Expression Omnibus (GEO), the public repository collecting microarray datasets (), has included 32 856 series datasets across 1591 organisms produced by microarrays (). These public datasets are valuable resources for biological, medical and pharmaceutical studies. To use large numbers of public gene expression datasets, a useful strategy is to connect datasets or experiments with similar or opposite gene expression signatures. One important application of this strategy is to predict novel drug repositioning candidates or promising bioactive small molecules. The connectivity map (cMap) project has generated a large number of gene expression profiles of human tumor cell lines treated with over thousands of bioactive small molecules and systematically discovered potential connections among molecules, genes and diseases (). On using the datasets of the cMap project, Iorio et al. found 41 047 connections among 1302 drugs based on similarities of transcriptional responses following drug treatments; several potentially 'repositioned' drugs were predicted and verified, i.e. Topoisomerase inhibitors like SN-38 and Doxorubicin were repositioned to functional inhibition of cyclindependent kinase 2 (). Using similar strategy, Butte and his colleagues investigated the connections of global transcriptional responses between diseases and 164 small-molecule drug compounds; using rodent models, they predicted and validated that topiramate, an anticonvulsant drug, might be effective in inflammatory bowel disease (IBD), and cimetidine, an antiulcer drug, might be a previously undescribed therapeutic for lung adenocarcinoma (). Several algorithms have been developed to quantitatively compare expression profiles of global transcriptional responses (). Among these, gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) based on the KolmogorovSmirnov statistic () is a widely used method (). Instead of individual genes, GSEA focuses on gene sets sharing biological functions or other information like chromosomal location and regulation. Specifically, GSEA compares a given gene set with a ranked gene list, and provides scores and statistics to show how the gene set is enriched at extremes (top or bottom) of the gene list. Facilitated by these algorithms, various online tools and resources have emerged. The cMap, as we described previously, allows users to access and query with an algorithm later formalized in GSEA. Molecular Signatures Database (MSigDB) 3.0 has included 46700 well-annotated gene sets from human and *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONCurrently, many other online applications querying gene signature databases have been developed, such as MSigDB, MARQ, GEM-TREND, EXALT and GeneChaser (), and provide users with great convenience. A tendency of these types of applications is to cover more and more datasets (), and algorithms to quantify). Compared with these applications, ExpTreeDB exhibits a disadvantage in organism coverage (human and mouse) and data content (906 human and 445 mouse RRGLs). However, previous studies did not provide a well-depicted standard for control group or reference dataset selection, which might make it difficult to interpret the perturbation inducing the cell response (see example in Supplementary Material). Raw gene expression profiles are also supported by ExpTreeDB, and the threshold of 500 most upregulated and downregulated genes was chosen to generate signatures from these data. Though this threshold might not be suitable for datasets with very few differentially expressed genes, it could be applied to other datasets in most cases. Moreover, previous applications generally exported retrieved results in a table list sorted by relevance with users' query, which might be inconvenient for browsing or finding items of interest. MSigDB classified gene sets into seven major collections and several sub-collections according to genes' derivation, including gene locations in chromosomes, pathway genes and motif genes, which is an approach essentially different from the experiment-based classification in ExpTreeDB. In ExpTreeDB, GDS records were manually examined to generate RRGLs. Datasets without blank control group were excluded. The stringent requirement for control groups remarkably decreased GDS records included in ExpTreeDB, but ensured a clear biological interpretation of perturbations inducing cell transcriptional responses. On top of that, we implemented a multiple-level annotation system for original experiments, which greatly differed from other similar online applications. The annotations briefly and comprehensively depicted experiment classifications and designs. By this approach, data within ExpTreeDB were well organized, and query results could be vividly visualized by an interactive and informative tree structure. Therefore, the multiple-level annotation system could greatly improve users' experience in result interpretation. In all, ExpTreeDB is an online database for querying gene expression datasets of human and mouse derived from GEO. Users can upload global gene profiling data or gene signatures to mine related previously reported experiments. ExpTreeDB integrates a widely used algorithm and public gene expression datasets, but characterizes itself by manually annotated experiments and tree visualization of retrieved results. We also have a plan to update the database repository by including GEO series records in the next version of ExpTreeDB.