Motivation: Ontologies are an everyday tool in biomedicine to capture and represent knowledge. However, many ontologies lack a high degree of coverage in their domain and need to improve their overall quality and maturity. Automatically extending sets of existing terms will enable ontology engineers to systematically improve text-based ontologies level by level. Results: We developed an approach to extend ontologies by discovering new terms which are in a sibling relationship to existing terms of an ontology. For this purpose, we combined two approaches which retrieve new terms from the web. The first approach extracts siblings by exploiting the structure of HTML documents, whereas the second approach uses text mining techniques to extract siblings from unstructured text. Our evaluation against MeSH (Medical Subject Headings) shows that our method for sibling discovery is able to suggest first-class ontology terms and can be used as an initial step towards assessing the completeness of ontologies. The evaluation yields a recall of 80% at a precision of 61% where the two independent approaches are complementing each other. For MeSH in particular, we show that it can be considered complete in its medical focus area. We integrated the work into DOG4DAG, an ontology generation plugin for the editors OBO-Edit and Protégé, making it the first plugin that supports sibling discovery on-the-fly. Availability: Sibling discovery for ontology is available as part of DOG4DAG (www.biotec.tu-dresden.de/research/schroeder/ dog4dag) for both Protégé 4.1 and OBO-Edit 2
INTRODUCTIONDuring the last decade, the field of biomedicine has seen a data explosion, made evident by the overwhelming number of published articles, databases, nucleotide sequences and protein structures (). Today, ontologies are used extensively in the biomedical and healthcare sector for information and data integration, such as gene product annotation (), analysis of high-throughput data () and searching (). If an ontology cannot maintain a high degree of coverage in its domain, its correctness and integrity will suffer, leading to missing results when trying to find documents or genes semantically associated with terms (). However, to keep up with new information, ontologies must be revised and newly added terms need to be enriched with definitions, cross-references and additional properties. Since ontologies are * To whom correspondence should be addressed. manually curated, developing and maintaining them is often a slow, tedious and error-prone process. To mitigate this bottleneck, text mining and related techniques can be employed to enrich ontologies in a semi-automated fashion. Among the variety of ontology learning methods proposed in the past, mainly term recognition and patternbased relationship extraction methods are used in the biomedical field (). In this article, we present an alternative approach to enhancing ontologies by automatically finding suitable co-hyponyms of terms, i.e. finding terms which are in a sibling relationship to each other. This approach can be used to extend ontologies in a horizontal way and therefore to complete a set of terms. For instance, an ontology that already includes the terms somatotrophs and trophoblasts (which are both endocrine cells) could be extended by automatically proposing more terms with the same parent term (). With this approach, ontology engineers can semi-automatically extend ontologies using two to three terms, which are the 'seed terms' for the algorithm. Many existing ontologies can be expanded in this way with minimal effort. Our method extracts siblings of existing terms on-the-fly using web sites returned by queries to search engines, thus implicitly incorporating full-text journal articles, patents, text books, wiki pages, etc. as indexed by the engines. In our methodology, we are integrating two approaches, which, when combined efficiently, improve the quality of the proposed siblings in terms of precision and recall.
DISCUSSION