Motivation: Cytochrome P450s are a family of enzymes responsible for the metabolism of approximately 90% of FDA-approved drugs. Medicinal chemists often want to know which atoms of a mol-ecule—its metabolized sites—are oxidized by Cytochrome P450s in order to modify their metabolism. Consequently, there are several methods that use literature-derived, atom-resolution data to train models that can predict a molecules sites of metabolism. There is, however, much more data available at a lower resolution, where the exact site of metabolism is not known, but the region of the molecule that is oxidized is known. Until now, no site-of-metabolism models made use of region resolution data. Results: Here, we describe XenoSite-Region, the first reported method for training site-of-metabolism models with region-resolution data. Our approach uses the Expectation Maximization algorithm to train a site-of-metabolism model. Region-resolution metabolism data was simulated from a large site-of-metabolism dataset, containing 2000 molecules with 3400 metabolized and 30 000 un-metabolized sites and covering nine Cytochrome P450 isozymes. When training on the same molecules (but with only region-level information), we find that this approach yields models almost as accurate as models trained with atom-resolution data. Moreover, we find that atom-resolution trained models are more accurate when also trained with region-resolution data from additional molecules. Our approach, therefore, opens up a way to extend the applicable domain of site-of-metabolism models into larger regions of chemical space. This meets a critical need in drug development by tapping into underutilized data commonly available in most large drug companies. Availability and implementation: The algorithm, data and a web server are available at http:// swami.wustl.edu/xregion.
IntroductionCytochrome P450 (abbreviated as CYP or P450) enzymes are a family of proteins responsible for the metabolism of $90% of FDA-approved drugs () The P450-mediated metabolism of a drug affects its clinical efficacy and safety. Knowing which atoms of a moleculeits sites of metabolismare oxidized by P450s enables medicinal chemists to rationally design new molecules with improved metabolic profiles. Determining which exact atoms of an individual molecule are metabolized is often difficult and expensive. The mass spectrometry experiments typically used in drug discovery most often can only identify regions of a molecule that are metabolized, rather than identify the specific metabolized atoms that medicinal chemists need to know. Analyzing the mass spectra of a P450-substrate reaction to determine metabolic products is a complicated problem, the). The key point is that although there are many ways of interpreting mass spectrometry data, none can reliably identify atom-resolution sites of metabolism for all molecules (). For these two reasonsthe value of knowing sites of metabolism and the difficulty of determining them at atom-resolutionsubstantial effort has been invested in building computational models that can predict a molecule's sites of metabolism (). There are several methods, but the best performing methods all use machine learning to train models from literature-curated databases of hundreds of molecules with known atom-resolution sites of metabolism (). The reliance of these models on literature-derived, atom-resolution data has two important consequences. First, the molecules used to train site of metabolism models are, for the most part, limited to only those available in the literature. Literature-derived data are based, primarily, on molecules that are structurally different from proprietarylead molecules. Consequently, models trained on literature data are often not as accurate on molecules in drug development, the exact molecules for which accurate predictions are most important (). Second, these models do not make use of the large number of molecules with known, region-resolution sites of metabolism, which can include data from thousands of molecules more similar to the molecules currently in development. To overcome these shortfalls, we introduce XenoSite-Region, the first reported method that uses region-resolution data to train atomresolution site of metabolism prediction models. Region-resolution data are much easier to experimentally obtain than atom-resolution data, and it is already collected in drug discovery on a regular basis. For example, Pfizer collects ADME data, including region-resolution sites of metabolism, on 2000 molecules every week, more than triple the total amount of atom-resolution data in literaturederived datasets (). By including this region-resolution data, site-of-metabolism models could extend into areas of chemical space that are poorly represented in the public domain. Our strategy is to modify an existing site-of-metabolism prediction method, XenoSite (), to train from regionresolution data. XenoSite uses a neural network to predict which atoms in the molecule are metabolized, and is a suitable starting point for our approach for two reasons. First, XenoSite is accurate, picking out a correct site of metabolism in the top two predictions for every molecule with an accuracy of 87% on literature-derived data. This accuracy surpasses those of other site-of-metabolism models like RS-Predictor (), SMARTCyp (), StarDrop () and Schrodinger (Schr dinger LLC, 2011)with performances of 84.3, 82.1, 75.8 and 68.2%, respectivelyon the same dataset (). Second, Xenosite can both train from probabilistically labeled training data and also outputs a score that is a well-scaled probability. In addition to using binary 1/0 labels on each atom, Xenosite can also train from data where the probability is used as a training target. Similarly, XenoSite's outputs range from 0 to 1 and correspond closely to the probability that an atom is a site of metabolism. Both these capabilities are necessary for the approach we will use to adapt XenoSite to use region-level data. We hypothesize that a statistical method called Expectation Maximization (EM) () can train XenoSite models with region-resolution data. XenoSite, like all reported machine learning methods in the literature, requires a training set with every atom labeled as a site or not-a-site-of-metabolism. For regionresolution data, however, these labels are hidden from us. EM is designed to work in just these situations, enabling statistical models to be trained with key variables hidden from view. The EM algorithm is iterative, using the output of the model to successively improve an estimate of the true labels for the training data, which is, in turn, used to improve the output of the model.
ConclusionIn this study, we present the first site-of-metabolism model that uses region-resolution data. Moreover, it appears that extending atom-resolution training data with region-resolution data improves the accuracy of site-of-metabolism models. This is an exciting result, because there is often much more region-resolution site of metabolism data available in pharmaceutical companies, much of which covers chemical space currently underrepresented in public atomresolution literature-derived data. By using data already collected in drug development, but unused for modeling, Xenosite-Region may prove to be a powerful way of extending site of metabolism models making them more accurate. Furthermore, the approach we describe here is general and could extend other SOM modeling approaches to use region-resolution data as well, and we leave this for future work.