Motivation: Families with inherited diseases are widely used in Mendelian/complex disease studies. Owing to the advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies, family genome sequencing becomes more and more prevalent. Visualizing family genomes can greatly facilitate human genetics studies and personalized medicine. However, due to the complex genetic relationships and high similarities among genomes of consanguineous family members, family genomes are difficult to be visualized in traditional genome visualization framework. How to visualize the family genome variants and their functions with integrated pedigree information remains a critical challenge. Results: We developed the Family Genome Browser (FGB) to provide comprehensive analysis and visualization for family genomes. The FGB can visualize family genomes in both individual level and variant level effectively, through integrating genome data with pedigree information. Family genome analysis, including determination of parental origin of the variants, detection of de novo mutations, identification of potential recombination events and identical-by-decent segments, etc., can be performed flexibly. Diverse annotations for the family genome variants, such as dbSNP memberships, linkage disequilibriums, genes, variant effects, potential phenotypes, etc., are illustrated as well. Moreover, the FGB can automatically search de novo mutations and compound heterozygous variants for a selected individual, and guide investigators to find high-risk genes with flexible navigation options. These features enable users to investigate and understand family genomes intuitively and systematically. Availability and implementation: The FGB is available at
IntroductionFamilies with inherited genetic diseases are widely used as cases in Mendelian/complex disease studies. Recently, advances in highthroughput sequencing technologies have led the family genome sequencing to become more and more popular in these studies. Through analysis of family genome sequencing data, such as variant calling, variant prioritizing, etc., researchers are able to better understand the genetic basis of Mendelian/complex diseases in variant level, and create insights for disease prediction, diagnosis and treatment. In family genome sequencing analysis, millions of variants are called from sequencing data. Most of them are rare or have no functional significance. Several methods, such as GEMINI, VariantTools, MendelScan, FARVAT, etc., are developed to identify causal variants in family based studies of disease (). However, visualization is always the most intuitive and straightforward approach to compare and validate the remaining candidates of disease causing variants. Several methods, tools and statistical models have been developed for family based variant detection, annotation and analysis. MendelScan prioritizes candidate variants and searches Mendeliandisease genes by analysing sequencing data and pedigree/phenotype information in family studies of Mendelian diseases (). GEMINI annotates genetic variants by integrating a diverse and adaptable set of genome annotations into a unified database to facilitate interpretation and data exploration (). VariantTools provides a command-line driven toolset for building more sophisticated analytical methods (). FamAnn automatically selects and annotates variants segregating in each family and shared across families, for facilitating disease variants or genes discovery in family based sequencing studies (). VAR-MD analyses the DNA sequence variants produced by human exome sequencing, and generates a ranked list of variants using predicted pathogenicity, Mendelian inheritance models, genotype quality and population variant frequency data (). FARVAT is a family based rare variant association test, and estimates minor allele frequency of each rare variant between affected and unaffected individuals with the best linear unbiased estimators (). FamSeq builds on Bayesian networks and the Markov chain Monte Carlo algorithm and provides a confidence measure for variant calls using data from all family members, which can improve the quality of rare variant detection in family based sequencing studies (). These tools and methods optimize, simplify and automatize many analysis processes in family based sequencing studies, generating huge amount of genetic variants for downstream validation and visualization. Visualization provides users intuitive descriptions of raw data. Various visualization tools have been developed for facilitating different types of genomic studies. Comprehensive genome browsers, such as the UCSC genome browser (), Ensembl genome browser (), etc., can rapidly and reliably display genomes of many species, together with dozens of integrated genome annotations, including genes and transcripts, variation, comparative genomics, regulatory data, etc. Some standalone genome browsers are available for the interactive exploration of large datasets, especially the high-throughput sequencing datasets, for example, the Integrative Genomics Viewer () and Savant genome browser (). They can also display a wide variety of genomic annotations to support data analysis. There are many visualization tools focusing on visualizing particular types of data, such as Epigenome Browser () for visualizing epigenome data, and Hawkeye () for visualizing large-scale assembly data. GBrowse () and HuRef browser () are used to display the genome of a single individual. TASUKE () is developed for the visualization of variations, annotations and read depth of multiple genomes. The personal genome browser is designed and developed for visualizing functions of individual genome variants (). Although these genome browsers enable researchers to view and interact with genomic annotations and data at any requested portion of genomes, they have no functionality with pedigree information. The pedigree shows the relations and phenotypes of a family. A few tools such as HaploPainter () and Pedimap () are developed for displaying phenotypic and genotypic data for related individuals linked in pedigrees. These tools focus on visualizing pedigrees rather than genomes. Family genome sequencing data, including both exome sequencing data and whole-genome sequencing data, have been generated by many family based Mendelian and complex disease studies. The visualization and comparison of disease-causing variants of family members can provide intuitive understanding of the genetic basis of Mendelian and complex diseases, thus can support decision making in healthcare. However, currently there is a lack of visualization tools dedicated to analysing variants for family genomes. We developed the Family Genome Browser (FGB) to support the comprehensive analysis and visualization for genomes of related individuals linked in pedigrees. The FGB enables investigators to upload and view family genome variants with the pedigree information of the family. Based on the relations among family members, users are able to investigate the genetic similarities/ differences among consanguineous individuals in variant level. Various kinds of family based analysis, such as determination of parental origin of the variants, recognition of de novo mutations, identification of potential recombination events and identical-by-decent (IBD) segments, etc., can be performed by flexibly specifying different family members and analysis modes. Diverse bioinformatics resources, such as dbSNP (), linkage disequilibrium (LD), HGNC genes (), RefSeq genes (NCBI Resource), OMIM (), etc., are integrated in the FGB for comprehensively annotating the genomic variants. For individuals whose parents' variant data are available, the FGB offers a scanning function for automatically finding de novo mutations and compound heterozygous variants of the individual. The two kinds of suspicious variants may have the potential to cause dominant and recessive genetic diseases. The scan can be performed on the whole genome, a chromosome, or a cytoband. The FGB provides necessary and convenient genome visualization and analysis features dedicated to family based studies. These features enable users to investigate and understand family genomes intuitively and systematically.