Motivation: The need for efficient molecular docking tools for high-throughput screening is growing alongside the rapid growth of drug-fragment databases. AutoDock Vina (Vina) is a widely used docking tool with parallelization for speed. QuickVina (QVina 1) then further enhanced the speed via a heuristics, requiring high exhaustiveness. With low exhaustiveness, its accuracy was compromised. We present in this article the latest version of QuickVina (QVina 2) that inherits both the speed of QVina 1 and the reliability of the original Vina. Results: We tested the efficacy of QVina 2 on the core set of PDBbind 2014. With the default exhaustiveness level of Vina (i.e. 8), a maximum of 20.49-fold and an average of 2.30-fold acceleration with a correlation coefficient of 0.967 for the first mode and 0.911 for the sum of all modes were attained over the original Vina. A tendency for higher acceleration with increased number of rotatable bonds as the design variables was observed. On the accuracy, Vina wins over QVina 2 on 30% of the data with average energy difference of only 0.58 kcal/mol. On the same dataset, GOLD produced RMSD smaller than 2 A ˚ on 56.9% of the data while QVina 2 attained 63.1%. Availability and implementation: The Cþþ source code of QVina 2 is available at (www.qvina.org).
IntroductionAutoDock Vinaalso referred to as Vinaemploys the iterated local search global optimizer to search for the minimum-energy docking conformations (). Subsequently, QuickVinareferred to as QVina 1 hereinafterenhanced Vina's computation time via heuristics that prevents unnecessary local searches. As proof of concept, QVina 1 needs high exhaustiveness level compared to the original Vina (). Here, we present the most recent QuickVinareferred to as QVina 2 with improved reliability. QVina 2 avoids the unnecessary local searches in a similar manner to QVina 1. In contrast to QVina 1, however, QVina 2 misses fewer necessary local searches thanks to a new procedure to test if a randomized docked conformation is significant for local search. This improves QVina 2's reliability in discovering the minimum-energy docking conformation.
ConclusionQuickVina 2 is a fast and accurate molecular docking tool. Tested against 195 proteinligand complexes that compose the core set of the 2014 release of the PDBbind using default exhaustiveness level of 8, QVina 2 successfully attained up to 20.49-fold acceleration over Vina. The Pearson's correlation coefficient between Vina's and QVina 2's binding energy was 0.967 for the first predicted mode and 0.911 for the sum of all predicted modes. It is also witnessed that QVina 2 is more accurate than GOLD 5.2 and is only slightly less accurate than Dock 6.6. This shows that QVina 2 has paved theFast, accurate, and reliable molecular docking with QuickVina 2way for some high-throughput and sufficiently accurate virtual screening of molecular libraries. This in turn brings great value to the fragment-based computer-aided drug design.