Motivation: Genome-wide association studies have become widely used tools to study effects of genetic variants on complex diseases. While it is of great interest to extend existing analysis methods by considering interaction effects between pairs of loci, the large number of possible tests presents a significant computational challenge. The number of computations is further multiplied in the study of gene expression quantitative trait mapping, in which tests are performed for thousands of gene phenotypes simultaneously. Results: We present FastEpistasis, an efficient parallel solution extending the PLINK epistasis module, designed to test for epistasis effects when analyzing continuous phenotypes. Our results show that the algorithm scales with the number of processors and offers a reduction in computation time when several phenotypes are analyzed simultaneously. FastEpistasis is capable of testing the association of a continuous trait with all single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) pairs from 500 000 SNPs, totaling 125 billion tests, in a population of 5000 individuals in 29, 4 or 0.5 days using 8, 64 or 512 processors. Availability: FastEpistasis is open source and available free of charge only for non-commercial users from http://www.vital-it.ch/software/FastEpistasis
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWASs) have been instrumental in identifying genetic variants associated with complex traits such as human disease or gene expression phenotypes (). While many GWAS results have been reported analyzing single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) one-at-a-time, only recently have studies begun to extend analysis methods to consider interaction effects between pairs of loci (). Although interactions may yield new insight into the effect of genetics on complex traits (), a major challenge to studying interactions is due to the large number of possible tests, which need to be considered. Examining all pairwise interactions between two SNP loci using a 500000 SNP chip * To whom correspondence should be addressed. equates to performing 125 billion tests. Additionally, carrying out permutation tests or studying epistasis in the context of quantitative trait mapping of gene expression, in which genetic variants are tested for association with each of thousands of phenotypes simultaneously (), further increases the number of epistasis tests. Efficient software is needed to carry out the large number of tests of interaction using quantitative responses. Although several software programs have been proposed to search for interactions in casecontrol data (), few have been optimized to handle continuous responses. In this article, we describe FastEpistasis, an optimized software suite designed for quantitative responses, which extends PLINK () epistasis functionality. FastEpistasis uses a parallel algorithm that is capable of computing tests for all pairs of genome-wide SNPs and efficiently handles tests given multiple phenotypes.
DISCUSSIONEpistasis is fundamental to understanding the structure and function of genetic pathways (). Recent studies have reported epistatic effects that confer susceptibility to common diseases (). Genetic interactions may also be able to explain a larger proportion of phenotypic variance for common diseases or related traits () or reveal information about gene function (). FastEpistasis is capable of computing fast tests of epistasis for quantitative phenotypes, enabling researchers to study interaction effects of pairs of genetic loci.