Motivation: Sequence discovery tools play a central role in several fields of computational biology. In the framework of Transcription Factor binding studies, most of the existing motif finding algorithms are computationally demanding, and they may not be able to support the increasingly large datasets produced by modern high-throughput sequencing technologies. Results: We present FastMotif, a new motif discovery algorithm that is built on a recent machine learning technique referred to as Method of Moments. Based on spectral decompositions, our method is robust to model misspecifications and is not prone to locally optimal solutions. We obtain an algorithm that is extremely fast and designed for the analysis of big sequencing data. On HT-Selex data, FastMotif extracts motif profiles that match those computed by various state-of-the-art algorithms, but one order of magnitude faster. We provide a theoretical and numerical analysis of the algorithms robustness and discuss its sensitivity with respect to the free parameters. Availability and implementation: The Matlab code of FastMotif is available from http://lcsb-portal.
IntroductionIn the last decades, due to the advent of new sequencing technologies, motif discovery algorithms have become an essential tool in many computational biology fields. In cell biology, sequence motif discovery plays a primary role in the understanding of gene expression through the analysis of sequencing data and the identification of DNA-transcription factor binding sites (). Various experimental techniques are nowadays available to extract DNA-protein binding sites in vivoand in vitro [protein binding microarray (PBM) (), HT-Selex (. Thanks to the quantity and quality of the generated data, HT-Selex is considered one of the most promising high-throughput techniques for studying transcription factor binding affinity in vitro [see the recent work () for a quantitative comparison between HT-Selex and other high-throughput techniques as ChIP. In the HT-Selex protocol, tens of thousands enriched DNA fragments are obtained through a series of incubation/selection cycles. In each cycle, an initial pool containing randomized ligands of length 1440 bp is incubated with an immobilized DNA-binding protein. Bound ligands are amplified by polymerase chain reaction steps (PCR), sequenced and then used as initial pool for a next cycle, until the pool is saturated (). Due to the high but not exact specificity of transcription factor binding affinities, enriched DNA fragments in a dataset typically contain similar but not exactly conserved instances of the same binding motif. This calls for algorithms that can extract simple and intuitive binding motifs that are robust to such stochasticity (). In the simplest case, the binding preferences are modelled by means of consensus sequences, obtained by selecting a few deterministic character strings that are over-represented in the dataset. A more flexiblerepresentation is provided by Position Weight Matrices (PWM) that describe binding sites as probability distributions over the DNA alphabet. Based on the simplifying assumption that the total binding energy is a site-by-site sum of single protein-nucleobase interactions, PWM's are only approximate models of the true transcription factor preferences. A debate is still open on whether such an approximation gives a satisfactory picture of the DNA-protein interaction or it is a too simplified reduction of the real biological process (). More sophisticated models, that go beyond the PWM representation by taking into account multi-base probability distributions or long-distance interactions, have been proposed and tested in the literature (). However, in most cases, these improvements did not bring about cogent evidence against the simpler and more intuitive approach based on position independent distributions (). In statistics and machine learning, factorized (aka product) distributions like PWMs and their linear combinations (aka mixtures) are commonly used in modelling empirical distributions from various kinds of data, and an important problem is how to estimate such models from data (). In pioneering work,showed that it is possible to infer a mixture of product distributions via the spectral decomposition of 'observable' matrices, i.e. matrices that can be estimated directly from the data using suitable combinations of the empirical joint probability distributions (). Extensions and improvements of this idea have been developed more recently in a series of remarkable works, where the spectral approach is applied to a larger class of probability distributions, and robust versions of the original method have been analysed theoretically (). In this article, we further develop the original spectral technique of Chang (1996) and study its application to the problem of learning probabilistic motif profiles from noisy sequencing data. The key observation is that, under the PWM approximation, motif discovery reduces to the more general problem of learning a mixture of product distributions, and hence, it is possible to extract motif profiles from sequencing data using usual spectral decompositions. We present FastMotif, a new motif finding algorithm that is faster than other sequence discovery tools and is designed for processing noisy high-throughput datasets. Based on a new and more stable version of the spectral techniques introduced in (), our algorithm is robust to model misspecification, is not prone to local optima, and it can be adapted to searching for motifs of arbitrary length. In addition, the method is completely general and, upon minor modifications, can be used for sequence discovery over any sequence alphabet and for analyzing datasets with binding affinity scores (). Throughout this work, we assume that transcription factor specificities are well described by product distributions, i.e. PWM's, and leave for future work the spectral inference of more advanced motif representations. Finally, a comment on the claimed optimality of FastMotif. It has been shown [see for example] that in the limit of infinitely many data and under no model misspecification, a spectral method is statistically consistent, that is, it always recovers the true underlying model. FastMotif, being a spectral method, inherits this optimality property by the way of the uniqueness of matrix eigen decomposition. This is in marked contrast to algorithms like Expectation Maximization (EM) that can easily get trapped in poor local optima even under favourable sample conditions. In practice, we expect the output of FastMotif to approach optimality when the true binding model approaches a PWM and the size of the training dataset is big enough, as for example in the case of HT-SELEX data. The article is organized as follows: In Section 2, we give a brief overview of related work; in Section 3, we describe FastMotif and its application to sequencing data; and in Section 4, we show our results. More mathematical details about spectral approaches in general and FastMotif in particular can be found in the Supplementary Material. The Matlab code of FastMotif is available from http:// lcsb-portal.uni.lu/bioinformatics.