Motivation: Gene models from draft genome assemblies of metazoan species are often incorrect, missing exons or entire genes, particularly for large gene families. Consequently, labour-intensive manual cur-ation is often necessary. We present Figmop (Finding Genes using Motif Patterns) to help with the manual curation of gene families in draft genome assemblies. The program uses a pattern of short sequence motifs to identify putative genes directly from the genome sequence. Using a large gene family as a test case, Figmop was found to be more sensitive and specific than a BLAST-based approach. The visualization used allows the validation of potential genes to be carried out quickly and easily, saving hours if not days from an analysis. Availability and implementation: Source code of Figmop is freely available for download at https://github.com/dave-the-scientist, implemented in C and Python and is supported on Linux, Unix and
INTRODUCTIONThe majority of published metazoan genome assemblies are in draft form, representing an in silico prediction of the in vivo genome. Errors include sequence reads that are not clustered into contigs, and contigs that are misplaced on scaffolds, either in the wrong location or orientation. This can have a significant impact on finding the genes in the genome, an already complex process in eukaryotes that may have tiny exons and introns of variable length (). The best algorithms get many of the gene models mostly correct, but this may not be enough to make and test evolutionary and functional hypotheses in many cases, particularly for large and complex gene families. Here, we present Figmop (Finding Genes using Motif Patterns), which will guide the user to identify the correct gene models, or provide a measure of the accuracy of the current gene models of their gene family. The software extends the use of MEME and MAST to identify regions of the genome containing genes of interest (). It uses amino acid motifs to capture conservation within short stretches of sequence in the user's gene family, giving an architecture for that family as a specific pattern of those motifs. For highly variable regions, alternative or optional motifs can be included. Figmop implements a profile hidden Markov model (pHMM) that conducts a fuzzy match of this motif architecture against the given genome sequence, accounting for variation and introns as random or unmatched motifs. Figmop has proved invaluable in our efforts to manually curate cytochrome P450 (CYP) gene family members, which have high sequence variability and differing intron/exon structure, within a draft genome assembly of the parasitic nematode Haemonchus contortus (). Figmop is a general tool, and besides CYPs, it has also proven useful in identifying other diverse gene families, including glutathione-S-transferase, UDP-glucuronosyl transferase and ABC-transporters.