A motif is a short DNA or protein sequence that contributes to the biological function of the sequence in which it resides. Over the past several decades, many computational methods have been described for identifying, characterizing and searching with sequence motifs. Critical to nearly any motif-based sequence analysis pipeline is the ability to scan a sequence database for occurrences of a given motif described by a position-specific frequency matrix. Results: We describe Find Individual Motif Occurrences (FIMO), a software tool for scanning DNA or protein sequences with motifs described as position-specific scoring matrices. The program computes a log-likelihood ratio score for each position in a given sequence database, uses established dynamic programming methods to convert this score to a P-value and then applies false discovery rate analysis to estimate a q-value for each position in the given sequence. FIMO provides output in a variety of formats, including HTML, XML and several Santa Cruz Genome Browser formats. The program is efficient, allowing for the scanning of DNA sequences at a rate of 3.5 Mb/s on a single CPU. Availability and Implementation: FIMO is part of the MEME Suite software toolkit. A web server and source code are available at
INTRODUCTIONA DNA or protein sequence motif is a short pattern that is conserved by purifying selection. In DNA, a motif may correspond to a protein binding site; in proteins, a motif may correspond to the active site of an enzyme or a structural unit necessary for proper folding of the protein. Thus, sequence motifs are one of the basic functional units of molecular evolution. Consequently, identifying and understanding these motifs is fundamental to building models of cellular processes at the molecular scale and to understanding the mechanisms of human disease. We describe here a software tool, called FIMO (Find Individual Motif Occurrences, pronounced f em o), that carries out in an efficient, statistically rigorous fashion one of the core functions required for any motif-based sequence analysis: scanning a collection of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.DNA or protein sequences for occurrences of one or more motifs. FIMO is by no means the first motif scanning method; however, many publicly available motif scanners are either not currently maintained or lack some of FIMO's features.summarizes the differences between FIMO and eight currently available motif scanners. Furthermore, as part of the MEME Suite (), FIMO can be used seamlessly in conjunction with a variety of complementary motif-based sequence analysis tools. Note that the MEME Suite provides two other motif scanning algorithms that are useful in different scenarios. MAST () searches with one or more DNA or protein motifs against a database composed of relatively short sequences, e.g. proteins or candidate regulatory regions, assigning a single score to each target sequence assuming that every motif occurs exactly once in the sequence. MCAST (), in contrast, uses a hidden Markov model to search DNA sequences for regions that are enriched with occurrences of one or more of the given motifs. Thus, MCAST is designed to scan chromosomes to detect cis-regulatory modules containing a known collection of cofactor motifs. Compared with MAST and MCAST, FIMO is simpler and more general. FIMO only assigns scores to individual motif occurrences; it makes no attempt to assign scores to joint occurrences of motifs, to sequence regions or to complete sequences. FIMO is thus a general-purpose tool for identifying individual candidate binding sites or protein motifs.