Motivation: Finding novel or non-standard metabolic pathways, possibly spanning multiple species, has important applications in fields such as metabolic engineering, metabolic network analysis and metabolic network reconstruction. Traditionally, this has been a manual process, but the large volume of metabolic data now available has created a need for computational tools to automatically identify biologically relevant pathways. Results: We present new algorithms for finding metabolic pathways, given a desired start and target compound, that conserve a given number of atoms by tracking the movement of atoms through metabolic networks containing thousands of compounds and reactions. First, we describe an algorithm that identifies linear pathways. We then present a new algorithm for finding branched metabolic pathways. Comparisons to known metabolic pathways demonstrate that atom tracking enables our algorithms to avoid many unrealistic connections, often found in previous approaches, and return biologically meaningful pathways. Our results also demonstrate the potential of the algorithms to find novel or non-standard pathways that may span multiple organisms.
INTRODUCTIONOver the last few decades, experimental studies on metabolic networks, coupled with computational methods, have generated increasingly large amounts of data. In turn, many specialized databases have been created to store and organize information about metabolic networks (). These networks are usually presented as many small subpathways that are manually divided based on function. However, it is often difficult to navigate these subpathways to find connections between compounds, especially for novel or non-standard routes used in applications such as metabolic engineering. Furthermore, as more information is accumulated from metagenome work on multispecies communities, it is of interest to find pathways that are a composition of the metabolic pathways from multiple organisms. Combining parts of pathways existing in different organisms can lead to new ways of considering how metabolism works in complex * To whom correspondence should be addressed. communities and provide novel routes to form important and useful compounds. Consequently, computational identification of biologically relevant pathways in large metabolic networks is required for applications such as metabolic engineering, metabolic network analysis and metabolic network reconstruction (). The main contribution of this article is a pair of algorithms that find metabolic pathways by using atom mapping data to track the movement of atoms through metabolic networks. One algorithm finds linear pathways and the other algorithm finds branched pathways. They both take as input atom mapping data, a start compound, a target compound, a minimum number of atoms to conserve and a maximum number of pathways to return. A set of metabolic pathways, which conserve at least given number of atoms from the start compound to the target compound, are returned. Atom tracking is a crucial feature in finding meaningful metabolic pathways because it essentially eliminates spurious connections and reactions that do not correspond to useful or real biochemical pathways or reactions, which are present in earlier work (). Furthermore, we are able to harness atom tracking in order to find branched pathways. While atom tracking does increase the complexity of finding pathways, we demonstrate that our algorithms can efficiently identify both linear and branched metabolic pathways, in which a certain threshold of atoms are conserved. The resulting metabolic pathways are validated on known functional pathways and reveal the potential of our algorithms to find novel or alternative pathways that may span multiple organisms.