Motivation: Protein–protein interactions are a key in virtually all biological processes. For a detailed understanding of the biological processes, the structure of the protein complex is essential. Given the current experimental techniques for structure determination, the vast majority of all protein complexes will never be solved by experimental techniques. In lack of experimental data, computational docking methods can be used to predict the structure of the protein complex. A common strategy is to generate many alternative docking solutions (atomic models) and then use a scoring function to select the best. The success of the computational docking technique is, to a large degree , dependent on the ability of the scoring function to accurately rank and score the many alternative docking models. Results: Here, we present ProQDock, a scoring function that predicts the absolute quality of docking model measured by a novel protein docking quality score (DockQ). ProQDock uses support vector machines trained to predict the quality of protein docking models using features that can be calculated from the docking model itself. By combining different types of features describing both the protein–protein interface and the overall physical chemistry, it was possible to improve the correlation with DockQ from 0.25 for the best individual feature (electrostatic complementarity) to 0.49 for the final version of ProQDock. ProQDock performed better than the state-of-the-art methods ZRANK and ZRANK2 in terms of correlations, ranking and finding correct models on an independent test set. Finally, we also demonstrate that it is possible to combine ProQDock with ZRANK and ZRANK2 to improve performance even further. Availability and implementation: http://bioinfo.ifm.liu.se/ProQDock
IntroductionProteinprotein interactions are crucial in almost all biological processes. To understand the mechanism of proteinprotein interaction, the structure of the protein complex is essential. Despite massive efforts in structure determination the majority of protein complexes are not and will never be available in the PDB (). Thus, there is a great need for computational methods that are able to build models of protein complexes using docking. Constructing models of protein complexes is a fundamental challenge in structural biology and despite years of investigation is still unsolved. The problem can be divided into sampling and scoring, where sampling is the problem of generating realistic docking models, and scoring is the problem of identifying the correct docking models among many incorrect ones. A number of different approaches have been applied to this problem ranging from composite scoring describing the physics () to methods derived from the statistics of structural databases (), methods based on interface composition and geometry () or complementarity () and methods based on machine learning (). The different approaches provide different aspects of docking model quality and could potentially result in higher performance when combined together (). The multitude of approaches applied to the scoring problem highlights the difficulty in scoring protein docking models. At one end there are features that serve as critical filters for complex V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.