Motivation: Recent discoveries show that most types of small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) such as miRNAs, snoRNAs and tRNAs get further processed into putatively active smaller RNA species. Their roles, genetic profiles and underlying processing mechanisms are only partially understood. To find their quantities and characteristics, a proper annotation is essential. Here, we present FlaiMapper, a method that extracts and annotates the locations of sncRNA-derived RNAs (sncdRNAs). These sncdRNAs are often detected in sequencing data and observed as fragments of their precursor sncRNA. Using small RNA-seq read alignments, FlaiMapper is able to annotate fragments primarily by peak detection on the start and end position densities followed by filtering and a reconstruction process. Results: To assess performance of FlaiMapper, we used independent publicly available small RNA-seq data. We were able to detect fragments representing putative sncdRNAs from nearly all types of sncRNA, including 97.8% of the annotated miRNAs in miRBase that have supporting reads. Comparison of FlaiMapper-predicted boundaries of miRNAs with miRBase entries demonstrated that 89% of the start and 54% of the end positions are identical. Additional benchmarking showed that FlaiMapper is superior in performance compared with existing software. Further analysis indicated a variety of characteristics in the fragments, including sequence motifs and relations with RNA interacting factors. These characteristics set a good basis for further research on sncdRNAs. Availability and implementation: The platform independent GPL licensed Python 2.7 code is available at: https://github.com/yhoogstrate/flaimapper. Corresponding Linux-specific scripts and annotations can be found in the same repository.
IntroductionSequencing of small non-coding RNAs (sncRNAs) aiming at the quantification and discovery of microRNAs (miRNAs), small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), transfer RNAs (tRNAs) and vault RNAs (vtRNAs) has revealed that most types of sncRNAs get processed into smaller RNAs (). Initially, it was suggested that these smaller RNAs are degradation products of the turnover of their precursors. Nevertheless, evidence accumulating over the last years demonstrates that some RNA fragments are). Such fragments find their origin in tRNAs, vtRNAs and snoRNAs and are assumed to have a variety of functions. Most importantly, deregulation and involvement of different types of fragments have been demonstrated in different types of cancer (). A description of commonly detected fragments and their precursors is given below: @BULLET A pre-miRNA is an approximately 75 nt long RNA molecule produced from its primary precursor transcript (pri-miRNA) by Drosha (). Pre-miRNAs adopt a hairpin structure recognized by Dicer that cleaves the terminal loop to release an approximately 22-nt long double-stranded miRNA duplex. One of the strands (miRNA) is loaded into AGO to generate the functional miRISC complex (Lin He, 2004; Fabian and). The remaining strand (miRNA*) is usually degraded. Often both strands are found as fragments in small RNA-seq (). @BULLET Fragments originating from mature tRNAs are commonly classified into two subgroups (), tRNA halves and tRNA-derived RNA fragments (tRFs):@BULLET tRNA halves are most probably produced by angiogenin that cleaves the tRNA near its anticodon, resulting into halve tRNAs ($ 35 nt). It is believed that some tRNA halves contribute to translational repression and cell stress response (). @BULLET The smaller ($ 20 nt) tRFs are derived from the tRNAs 5 0-and 3 0-end and from the pre-tRNAs 3 0-end. It is not completely understood which proteins are involved in the production of tRFs, although evidence for associations with both Dicer and RNaseZ are reported (;). Although the putative functions of the majority of tRFs are unclear, evidence suggests that some are involved in RNA interference, with effects on cell proliferation and gene regulation (). @BULLET snoRNA are (60250 nt) small RNAs found in the nucleolus. They comprise the subtypes H/ACA-box, C/D-box and small Cajal body-specific RNAs (scaRNAs) (). Putative functions such as regulation of alternative splicing, post-transcriptional regulation of gene expression and associations with cancer have been proposed for their fragments (). Currently, studies on fragments other than miRNA and miRNA* are restricted to (often visual) interpretation of alignments. Consequently, the data are inspected only at a global ncRNA level. Not making use of the annotation of exact fragment coordinates is a shortcoming, since it restricts analysis at the level of individual fragments. Additional benefit of such analysis is the gained statistical power. Here, we describe Fragment Location Annotation Mapper (FlaiMapper) that predicts the locations of sncRNA fragments in small RNA-seq alignments. Prediction is based on the densities of start and end positions of aligned reads. It is important to state that the goal is not to predict any particular subtype of fragment but to annotate data for subsequent quantitative analysis, by making use of sequencing data only. Therefore, FlaiMapper does not use 2D structure prediction or classification based on heuristics of previous discoveries as often is used for the prediction of pre-miRNAs ().
DiscussionWe set out a method able to extract and annotate ncRNA fragments, because such annotations can be helpful in further high-throughput. Relation between sequencing depth and offset in predicted miRBase annotations for dataset SRP002175. The horizontal axis represents the offset for the start (left) and end (right) positions between a miRNA annotation and a predicted fragment. Predictions with exact matches are located at 0, offsets  0 are predicted upstream the miRNA's boundaries and offsets  0 downstream. The vertical axis represents the number of reads corresponding to a start (left) or end (right) position. The figure indicates that the higher the number of corresponding reads, the lower the offset. Overall, the predicted start positions have a lower offset than the end positions, for the same sequencing depth research. We designed FlaiMapper, a computer program to predict ncRNA fragments using small RNA-seq alignments. Benchmarking indicated that FlaiMapper is able to predict 97.8% of the miRNAs with corresponding reads. 95% of the miRNAs 5 0-end and 82% of the 3 0-end predictions were concordant with miRBase annotations. For this analysis, data from the Illumina Genome Analyser II was used. A similar accuracy was observed for sequencing data derived from the Ion Torrent PGM and Illumina HiSeq2000 (Supplementary information), indicating FlaiMapper can perform well on data from different platforms. We demonstrated that FlaiMapper performs better than existing similar software (). FlaiMapper predicts fragments by looking at the most common start and end positions in alignments. It can be argued whether the most common start and end positions should indeed provide the evidence for the prediction of a fragment, since the most common read could be used instead. However, the most common start and end positions should usually be covered by a higher number of reads. This corresponds to a higher resolution, which is especially advantageous for the prediction of fragments with a low read coverage, and should therefore also be more robust towards noise. Together with the demonstrated high performance, this implies that predictions based on start and end position densities provide a more appropriate solution for fragment annotation.The weights used in the filtering step are based on a normal distribution with an arbitrary chosen r. These parameters probably find their optimum in relation with sequencing protocols, 5 0 =3 0end-specific processing factors or different families of fragments. Therefore, once there is a better understanding of the processing of. Summary of predicted fragments on datasets SRP002175 (), SRP006788 (), SRP028959 (), SRP034013 () and SRP041082 (fragments, it is recommended to spend effort in optimizing these parameters. Additional analysis indicated that FlaiMapper's performance in miRNA annotation is positively correlated to sequencing depth. Predicted 3 0-ends of miRNAs have a larger offset compared with miRBase annotations than the 5 0-ends, even for the same sequencing depth. The higher variability of the miRNAs 3 0-ends has earlier been reported (). In addition, research on the classification of sncRNAs indicated that metrics corresponding to the variability in the alignment are indeed higher for the 3 0-end in miRNAs (). They were able to indicate that different levels of variability correspond to specific types of sncRNAs. Possible explanations could be RNA postprocessing or RNA editing. This means that alignments over the entire fragment can be asymmetrical because of a larger variation observed at miRNAs 3 0-ends. Since BlockBuster assumes reads to be symmetrically distributed over a fragment, this might explain why (i) its accuracy is lower, (ii) its predictions are longer and (iii) shifted with respect to miRBase. Although it seems counter-intuitive that an ncRNA can produce different fragments that originate from an overlapping region, there are situations where overlapping fragments can be expected. This can be stressed by recalling the not fully understood tRNA processing mechanism(s), where tRNA halves and tRFs spanning similar regions have been reported. Therefore, FlaiMapper has no restriction to the prediction of overlapping fragments, similar to the method of. Sequence logos indicated that the ACA box, as part of the the