Motivation: Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) represent a significant fraction of the human proteome. The classical structure function paradigm that has successfully underpinned our understanding of molecular biology breaks down when considering proteins that have no stable tertiary structure in their functional form. One convenient approach is to describe the protein in terms of an equilibrium of rapidly inter-converting conformers. Currently, tools to generate such ensemble descriptions are extremely rare, and poorly adapted to the prediction of experimental data. Results: We present flexible-meccano—a highly efficient algorithm that generates ensembles of molecules, on the basis of amino acid-specific conformational potentials and volume exclusion. Conformational sampling depends uniquely on the primary sequence, with the possibility of introducing additional local or long-range conformational propensities at an amino acid-specific resolution. The algorithm can also be used to calculate expected values of experimental parameters measured at atomic or molecular resolution, such as nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) and small angle scattering, respectively. We envisage that flexible-meccano will be useful for researchers who wish to compare experimental data with those expected from a fully disordered protein, researchers who see experimental evidence of deviation from random coil behaviour in their protein, or researchers who are interested in working with a broad ensemble of conformers representing the flexibility of the IDP of interest. Availability: A fully documented multi-platform executable is provided, with examples, at
INTRODUCTIONThe realization that a significant percentage of the functional proteins encoded in eukaryotic genomes are fully or partially * To whom correspondence should be addressed. disordered in their functional state has revolutionized our understanding of structural and molecular biology (). Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs), or proteins containing long intrinsically disordered regions, do not adopt a stable 3D fold, and therefore fall beyond the scope of classical structural biology. IDPs are biologically functional in the disordered state imposing a very different perspective on the relationship between primary protein sequence and function compared with the standard structure/function relationship that underpins our understanding of molecular biology. IDPs are implicated in a large number of human pathologies, and the development of pharmacological solutions to these problems awaits a molecular description of the role of flexibility in a number of diseases (). In order to understand the conformational behaviour of IDPs it is essential to develop a molecular description of the disordered state. The structural biology paradigm shifts when we consider disordered proteins, so that the determination of a single structure has no real physical relevance, or at best can only describe isolated sub-states on a vast potential energy landscape. A structural description of IDPs rather aims to determine rules that define the behaviour of the flexible protein in terms of probabilities of populating different regions of conformational space, and to correlate these probabilities with the function of the protein. The description of conformational propensities can be conveniently achieved by evoking an explicit ensemble description of interconverting structures in equilibrium. Due to the very large number of degrees of freedom available to such a disordered system, the problem of defining conformational space is highly underdetermined, requiring extensive experimental data to delimit the structural propensities of a given protein. Novel analytical tools are required to exploit the specific conformational sensitivity of different experimental parameters. Each experimental NMR parameter for example, is sensitive to different aspects of the structural and dynamic behaviour of the disordered state and requires specific consideration of the relevant averaging properties of the physical interaction ().is the flexible-meccano statistical coil description. This can be modified in terms of additional propensities to form secondary structure, by modifying the amino acid-specific potentials or by introducing long-range contacts. Biophysical parameters (radius of gyration and / sampling), and expected experimental parameters (shown figuratively on the right, for example NMR RDCs, PREs etc.) are calculated for this conformational regime, as well as explicit conformational ensemble of backbone conformers.