Motivation: Structured RNAs can be hard to search for as they often are not well conserved in their primary structure and are local in their genomic or transcriptomic context. Thus, the need for tools which in particular can make local structural alignments of RNAs is only increasing. Results: To meet the demand for both large-scale screens and hands on analysis through web ser-vers, we present a new multithreaded version of Foldalign. We substantially improve execution time while maintaining all previous functionalities, including carrying out local structural alignments of sequences with low similarity. Furthermore, the improvements allow for comparing longer RNAs and increasing the sequence length. For example, lengths in the range 2000–6000 nucleotides improve execution up to a factor of five. Availability and implementation: The Foldalign software and the web server are available at
IntroductionRecent research points towards an increasing awareness of structured RNAs in genomic and transcriptomic sequences (). However, the tools needed for structural analysis, such as pairwise local structural RNA alignments, are not yet fully developed. Foldalign () is a tool that explicitly carries out local pairwise structural alignment of RNA sequences based on the Sankoff algorithm (). Even though tools like CMfinder can carry out local RNA structure alignment on multiple sequences (), the pairwise problem is still of key interest. A range of other methods for RNA structural alignments focusing more on the global alignment (;) have been proposed, but only a few efforts were made to parallelize these methods (). The relevancy of a parallel version of the pairwise Sankoff algorithm is underpinned by its time complexity of OL 6 , where L is the sequence length. This makes it prohibitive for long sequences, but Foldalign uses several heuristics: a maximum length of the alignment, k, and a maximum difference, d between any two subsequences being aligned. This reduces the time complexity to OL 2 k 2 d 2 . However, runtime and memory is further substantially improved using several other heuristics like limiting the multiloop calculation and pruning of the alignment score, for details see. All these heuristics can be used in a parallel version of the algorithm, which we address here, providing new opportunities for both large-scale analysis as well as case-based analyses through a web interface.
ConclusionWe presented a multithreaded version of Foldalign. This new version was carefully designed to keep all the previous program functionalities, such as the dynamical pruning heuristic, limiting the calculation of branch points, and the option to perform local and global alignments. It opens up new possibilities to search for structured RNAs in much longer sequences in reasonable time. One great advantage of the multithreaded version is that it allows for better exploitation of the available hardware when the number of jobs which can run on a given machine is smaller than the number of cores available in the machine due to memory constraints. With the previous version of the algorithm it is necessary to let the extra cores run idle, but now they can be put to use. Foldalign is producing predictions with the same accuracy but in a fraction of the time compared to the previous version. It may produce more accurate predictions than it was previouslyt 2 , respectively. Dark red/blue are cells that have already been processed, light red/blue are cells being processed and white or grey are cells to be processed next. The dashed area represents cells that are being read and written by one thread. (b) The Foldalign execution time and memory consumption according to the number of threads. This set contains 5 random sequences with length 6000, GC-content from 40% to 50%, d  25 and k  1000. The linear speed up is the ideal speedup, when n threads are used and Foldalign is executed n times faster. With 8 threads, the elapsed time is reduced from 4:44 h to 57.1 min (4.98 faster), while consuming 1.99 more memory possible, with the much more relaxed constraint parameters d and k values. The perspective for this new tool is to contribute significantly to further analysis of structured RNAs in long sequences including specific case analysis through the web server.