Motivation: Fractionation is arguably the greatest cause of gene order disruption following whole genome duplication, causing severe biases in chromosome rearrangement-based estimates of evolutionary divergence. Results: We show how to correct for this bias almost entirely by means of a consolidation algorithm for detecting and suitably transforming identifiable regions of fractionation. We characterize the process of fractionation and the performance of the algorithm through realistic simulations. We apply our method to a number of core eudicot genomes, we and by studying the fractionation regions detected, are able to address topical issues in polyploid evolution.
INTRODUCTIONFractionation (), the loss of duplicate genes after whole genome duplication (WGD), causes more gene order disruption than classical chromosomal rearrangements such as inversion or reciprocal translocation. WGD and fractionation are particularly prevalent in flowering plants (), where the cycle of the two processes also involves the constant excision of excess non-coding DNA (), a major difference between these organisms and other evolutionary domains, such as the mammals. Gene order disruption follows from the partly random choice of which of the two copies is deleted, i.e. which of two homeologous chromosomes retains the remaining single copy of the gene. This process was first hypothesized by Wolfe and Shields in their 1997 demonstration of the ancient WGD of Saccharomyces cerevisiae (), suggesting '... this is the result of random deletion of individual duplicated genes from one or other chromosome subsequent to the initial duplication of the whole region'. This loss pattern was further highlighted years later by the comparison of the S. cerevisiae gene order with that of related diploid yeasts by, who called it 'interleaving', while Freeling was coining the usage 'fractionation' in the context of plant genomics. When a number of adjacent duplicate pairs lose a group of their redundant genes from one homeolog and another group from the other homeolog, as in, methods for inferring the rearrangement distances between the WGD descendant T (referred to as an 'ancient tetraploid' despite being a present-day genome, long since re-diploidized) and an unduplicated sister genome D automatically infer that there are rearrangement breakpoints where * To whom correspondence should be addressed.adjacency no longer exists between the two groups of singlecopy survivors. This artificially inflates the inferred number of reciprocal translocations and greatly exaggerates the overall amount of chromosomal rearrangement between the two sister genomes. The first goal of our work is to be able to computationally detect, characterize and correct for this impediment to the study of evolution. Key to our method is the identification and isolation of 'fractionation intervals', regions in both the ancient tetraploid and its sister diploid that have become entirely single copy and may or may not have been rearranged internally but have (so far) been unaffected by rearrangements exchanging genes from within the interval and genes external to the interval. The second goal of our work is to inventory these regions across the two genomes to that they can be studied quantitatively. The statistical properties of the intervals bear on current topics of interest in plant evolutionary genomics, whether duplicated genes are silenced or deleted one by one or through the deletion of longer stretches of DNA, whether a fractionation regions tends to lose genes largely from one of the homeologous chromosomal segments or equally from the two and on the question of subgenome dominance, i.e. whether any such bias toward one homeolog persists from the original WGD event and is unaffected by chromosome shuffling.
DISCUSSIONAn analytically advantageous feature of our analysis is that it partitions the rearrangements that have affected a tetraploid into those that have operated within a fractionation interval and those that have left these intervals intact, either because the intervals are outside the scope of the rearrangement or the interval is affected as a whole, without any effect internally. Of course, in the the history of the tetraploid there will have been some rearrangements that have involved elements both within and outside fractionation intervals, but these are rendered irrelevant and invisible to our analysis because their effect is simply to fragment the intervals into two or more new intervals and hence perpetuate the within-outside partitioning of the rearrangements. One of the problems remaining with this work is the large number of genes that do not appear in any synteny block in the diploidtetraploid analysis of pairs of core eudicot genomes. This despite reducing the minimum block length as low as 2 in SynMap. Some of this is undoubtedly due to genes absent from one of the genomes, but much of it will be due to movement of genes out of their erstwhile homeologous contexts, by various processes (). In our simulations of geometric deletion events, we 'marked'some duplicate genes for deletion before carrying out the rearrangement step, and only actually deleted them afterward. This was for purposes of comparability of the results with the previous simulations where deletions followed rearrangements. Our goal in this marking was to allow a degree of switching between homeologous chromosomes during the deletion event, and no connection was assumed between two different events. However, this computational device could also be used to model subgenome dominance, by using two different pvalues one for the dominant subgenome and a smaller value for the other subgenome. Marking becomes analogous to (lack of) methylation or to other epigenetic regulatory mechanism that can persist despite extensive genome rearrangement. It will be of interest to explore the extensions of our treatment of fractionation to genomes descending from more complex polyploidization events than WGD. The plant genomes studied here, as well as all the other core eudicots, descend from an ancestral i407