Motivation: One of the major bottlenecks with ab initio protein folding is an effective conformation sampling algorithm that can generate native-like conformations quickly. The popular fragment assembly method generates conformations by restricting the local conformations of a protein to short structural fragments in the PDB. This method may limit conformations to a subspace to which the native fold does not belong because (i) a protein with really new fold may contain some structural fragments not in the PDB and (ii) the discrete nature of fragments may prevent them from building a native-like fold. Previously we have developed a conditional random fields (CRF) method for fragment-free protein folding that can sample conformations in a continuous space and demonstrated that this CRF method compares favorably to the popular fragment assembly method. However, the CRF method is still limited by its capability of generating conformations compatible with a sequence. Results: We present a new fragment-free approach to protein folding using a recently invented probabilistic graphical model conditional neural fields (CNF). This new CNF method is much more powerful than CRF in modeling the sophisticated protein sequence-structure relationship and thus, enables us to generate native-like conformations more easily. We show that when coupled with a simple energy function and replica exchange Monte Carlo simulation, our CNF method can generate decoys much better than CRF on a variety of test proteins including the CASP8 free-modeling targets. In particular, our CNF method can predict a correct fold for T0496_D1, one of the two CASP8 targets with truly new fold. Our predicted model for T0496 is significantly better than all the CASP8 models. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONDespite significant progress in recent years, ab initio protein folding is still one of the most challenging problems in computational structural biology. Fragment-based ab initio protein folding () and lattice-models () has been extensively studied. These two popular methods and their combination for protein modeling have achieved great success in critical assessment of structure prediction (CASP) competitions (). For example, the widely-used fragment assembly program Rosetta () is one of the most successful ab initio protein folding programs. The TASSER program () and its derivative Zhang-Server () have achieved outstanding * To whom correspondence should be addressed. performance in both CASP7 and CASP8 by combining lattice model and threading-generated fragments and distance restraints. Although fragment-based ab initio protein folding demonstrates encouraging performance, several important issues remain with this method. First, there is no guarantee that the local conformations of a protein can be accurately covered by short structural fragments in the PDB since a protein with new fold is likely to be composed of some structural motifs that rarely occur in the PDB (Andras Fiser, CASP8 talk). Second, the conformation space defined by a fragment library is discrete in nature. This discrete nature may exclude the native fold from the conformational search space since even a slight change in backbone angles, especially in the middle region of a protein, can result in a totally different fold. To resolve these two limitations, this article will propose a fragment-free folding method that can efficiently explore protein conformations in a continuous space. In literature there are quite a few fragment-free methods for ab initio. protein folding. For example, Joe et al. described an iterative folding method (), which folds a protein by mimicking folding pathway and explores the conformation space by directly sampling the backbone angles using a trimer library. Shakhnovich group also described a method that can directly sample backbone angles using a trimer library ().first predict the backbone angles of a protein using a machine learning method and then explore protein conformation search space using a genetic algorithm, based upon the predicted backbone angles. Recently,have developed two hidden Markov models (HMMs) (i.e. FB5-HMM and Torus-HMM) () for fragment-free conformation sampling. Using a Torus-HMM model, they can generate local conformations as accurately as the fragment assembly method (). However, these HMM models have not been applied to realworld ab initio folding yet. Recently, we have proposed a protein conformation sampling algorithm based on conditional random fields (CRF) () and directional statistics. The CRF model is a generalization of the HMM models and much more powerful than HMM. Our CRF model can accurately describe the complex sequence-angle relationship and estimate the probability distribution of (virtual) backbone angles directly from sequence information and predicted secondary structure. We have shown that by using the CRF models, we can sample protein conformations with much better quality than FB5-HMM (). We have also shown that by coupling our CRF model with a simple energy function, our method compares favorably with fragment assembly in the CASP8 blind prediction (). This article presents a new probabilistic graphical model conditional neural fields (CNFs) for ab initio protein folding. CNF is recently invented by our group for the modeling of sequential data. Seefor a detailed exposition. CNF isPage: i311 i310i317
CONCLUSIONThis article has presented a new fragment-free approach to protein ab initio folding by using a recently-invented probabilistic graphical model CNF. Our fragment-free approach can overcome some limitations of the popular fragment assembly method. That is, this new method can sample protein conformations in a continuous space while the fragment-based methods cannot do so. This CNF method is also better than our previous CRF method in that (i) this method can easily model non-linear relationship between protein sequence and structure; and (ii) we can also minimize energy function to lower values. Experimental results indicate that our CNF method clearly outperforms the CRF method on most of the test proteins. Previously, we have compared our CRF method with the popular fragment-based Robetta server in the CASP8 blind prediction and shown that our CRF method is on average better than Robetta on mainly-alpha or small beta proteins (). This article further confirms our advantage on mainly-alpha or small beta proteins. Since CNF is better than CRF in modeling non-linear sequence-structure relationship, we are going to incorporate more information (such as amino acid physicalchemical property profile) to our model so that we can improve sampling efficiency further. We will also extend our CNF method so that long-range hydrogen bonding can also be modeled.