Immunoinformatics approaches are widely used in a variety of applications from basic immunological to applied biomedical research. Complex data integration is inevitable in immuno-logical research and usually requires comprehensive pipelines including multiple tools and data sources. Non-standard input and output formats of immunoinformatics tools make the development of such applications difficult. Here we present FRED 2, an open-source immunoinformatics framework offering easy and unified access to methods for epitope prediction and other immu-noinformatics applications. FRED 2 is implemented in Python and designed to be extendable and flexible to allow rapid prototyping of complex applications. Availability and implementation: FRED 2 is available at http://fred-2
IntroductionThe field of immunoinformatics has matured over the last decades. Epitope prediction methods are now widely used and have been successfully applied in many areas from basic immunological to translational research (). However, these applications often require complex pipelines combining multiple tools, multiple data sources and extensive preand post-processing. Furthermore, many of the HLA epitope prediction tools do not offer a unified interface and output format, which makes it difficult to use prediction methods interchangeably. One way to overcome these problems are web-based workbenches like the ones offered by IEDB () or EpiToolKit (). But often data volume, speed, or legal restrictions (e.g., concerning data privacy) prevent the use of such applications. Also, web-based workbenches usually provide only limited or delayed integration of novel resources and methods. We therefore developed FRamework for Epitope Detection (FRED 2), an opensource, Python-based framework for computational immunology. FRED 2 is the (completely re-implemented) successor of FRED () and provides a unified interface to many prediction tools. We implemented routines covering data pre-processing, HLA typing, epitope prediction, epitope selection, as well as epitope assembly. FRED 2 is flexibly designed to allow easy extension. By building on top of popular modules such as BioPython (http://biopython.org) and Pandas (http://pandas.pydata.org), FRED 2 allows rapid prototyping of complex and innovative immunoinformatics applications.
ConclusionWe present FRED 2, a versatile immunoinformatics software framework enabling a unified interface to many tools, from epitope prediction, HLA typing, to epitope selection and assembly. Its openness and easy extensibility makes FRED 2 a perfect instrument for the development of advanced immunoinformatics pipelines that are needed for example in cancer immunotherapy development and other areas of personalized medicine.