A new generation of tools that identify fusion genes in RNA-seq data is limited in either sensitivity and or specificity. To allow further downstream analysis and to estimate performance, predicted fusion genes from different tools have to be compared. However, the transcriptomic context complicates genomic location-based matching. FusionMatcher (FuMa) is a program that reports identical fusion genes based on gene-name annotations. FuMa automatically compares and summarizes all combinations of two or more datasets in a single run, without additional programming necessary. FuMa uses one gene annotation, avoiding mismatches caused by tool-specific gene annotations. FuMa matches 10% more fusion genes compared with exact gene matching due to overlapping genes and accepts intermediate output files that allow a stepwise analysis of corresponding tools.
IntroductionA new generation of bioinformatics tools has been released that aims to detect fusion genes within RNA-seq data; however, the current tools are limited in either sensitivity or specificity, making their results impractical for downstream analysis and subsequent validation (). As shown in other domains of high throughput sequencing analysis, using a consensus of tools may improve performance by compensating for individual tool error profiles (). Since no single tool shows superior detection performance, a consensus-based fusion gene detection in RNA-seq can improve both downstream analysis as well as overall performance. Moreover, to identify limiting factors and promote improvement of current algorithms, an accurate estimation of sensitivity and specificity is required, for which an accurate fusion gene comparison is crucial. Therefore, comparing validated and in silico predicted fusion genes in an automated fashion and summarizing identical fusion genes in two or more datasets in an easy and accessible way is a desirable feature. Ideally, sensitivity/specificity estimation should be based upon the identified genomic breakpoints provided as two chromosomal locations. However, the nature of RNA-seq complicates this strategy, as reads may span exon junctions and breakpoints are more likely to be expected in introns because of their relative large size, introducing additional uncertainty when trying to pinpoint the exact genomic position of the DNA breakpoint. For instance, using exact position-based matching (EPM) results in poor overlap between tools (Supplementary Section S6). A less conservative strategy used in DNA-seq analysis involves comparing genomic intervals (), which can be defined by adding flanking regions to), intron sizes are differing and lastly, a substantial number of genes do overlap with each other () due to opposite strand positioning. Therefore, we designed a new method, FuMa, which boosts the current fusion gene matching functionality of the Chimera package (), to address the challenges outlined above.