Motivation: Experimental evidence has accumulated showing that microRNA (miRNA) binding sites within protein coding sequences (CDSs) are functional in controlling gene expression. Results: Here we report a computational analysis of such miRNA target sites, based on features extracted from existing mammalian high-throughput immunoprecipitation and sequencing data. The analysis is performed independently for the CDS and the 3-untranslated regions (3-UTRs) and reveals different sets of features and models for the two regions. The two models are combined into a novel computational model for miRNA target genes, DIANA-microT-CDS, which achieves higher sensitivity compared with other popular programs and the model that uses only the 3-UTR target sites. Further analysis indicates that genes with shorter 3-UTRs are preferentially targeted in the CDS, suggesting that evolutionary selection might favor additional sites on the CDS in cases where there is restricted space on the 3-UTR. Availability: The results of DIANA-microT-CDS are available at
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small endogenous RNA molecules that play a key role in development and diseases through posttranscriptional regulation of gene expression. They are part of the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC) and guide it to specific miRNA recognition elements (MREs) on the mRNA molecules of target genes. This leads either to translational repression and/or messenger RNA (mRNA) degradation (). Although most of the MREs have been found in 3-UTRs of protein coding genes (), there are individual reports of MREs located in protein coding sequences (CDSs) of target genes with evidence for their relation to biological function (). In, it is shown that miR-148 represses specific splice variants of DNA methyltransferase 3b (Dnmt3b) by targeting its coding sequence, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and that this mechanism might play a role in determining the relative abundance of different splice variants.demonstrate that four let-7 miRNA target sites within the CDS of the miRNA-processing enzyme Dicer establish a mechanism for a miRNA/Dicer autoregulatory feedback loop. Init is shown that the coding region of -transducin repeat containing protein 1 is regulated by miR-183.show that Hepatocyte nuclear factor 4 (HNF4) is downregulated by miR-24 targeting its CDS. The expression of miR-24 is regulated by cellular stress, thus affecting metabolism and cellular biology.show that, based on miRNA targeting in the CDS, miR-519 represses the translation of the RNA-binding protein Hu antigen R (HuR), which in turn reduces HuR-regulated gene expression and cell division.measure the effect of four human miRNAs and find that miR-107 tends to target the CDS, but not the 3-UTR. Finally, Schnallshow that miR-181 targets the repeat-rich CDS of the well-known tumor suppressor retinoblastoma protein (RB1) and RB-associated, Kruppel-associated-box zinc finger (RBAK). High-throughput CLIP data now allow for the direct identification and localization of MREs on the target genes ().show through immunoprecipitation of the miRNA containing ribonucleoprotein complexes and sequencing of the associated RNA fragments (PAR-CLIP) that miRNAs tend to bind in approximately equal proportions on the 3-UTR as well as on the protein coding sequences (CDSs) of target mRNAs.also suggest that miRNA targeting in the CDS has a measurable effect on miRNA-mediated mRNA degradation. The same observation has been made by two more groups after computational analysis of previously published high-throughput studies regarding miRNA targets. Forman and Coller (2010) analyze the dataset derived from the measurements of protein and mRNA level changes after the transfection of five miRNAs in HeLa cells as provided by () and detect a functional role of miRNA binding sites in the CDS. Fang and Rajewsky (2011) analyze the same dataset and additionally the protein and mRNA level measurements after over-and underexpression of five miRNAs in mouse neutrophils provided by (). They find that genes containing target sites both in the CDS and the 3-UTR exhibit significantly stronger regulation than genes targeted in the 3-UTR only and that this effect is stronger for conserved CDS sites with longer binding sites. Schnallof the analysis on the PAR-CLIP data. MREs specified by the PAR-CLIP data are divided in two categories according to the genomic region in which they lie (A). For these two datasets, several features are extracted and the most informative of them are selected by comparing true MREs with false MREs (B). The selection is performed through a three-fold cross-validation (C). For each identified miRNA MRE, the selected features (depending on the gene region it lies in) are combined into an MRE score through generalized linear models (D). For each gene, the CDS score and the 3-UTR score is defined by summing the MRE scores that lie in CDSs and 3-UTRs, respectively. These two scores are linearly combined into a final score (E). To test for the overall performance of this scoring approach, an independent test on the high-throughput proteomics data of Selbach et al. is performed (F). only on conservation, and they validate five of their top seven predictions. Most miRNA target prediction programs nevertheless limit their search for MREs only within the 3-UTR (). Here we describe an algorithm for the prediction of miRNA targets in both 3-UTRs and CDSs that are trained on a positive and a negative set of MREs defined by PAR-CLIP data of. The analysis is performed independently for MREs in CDSs and 3-UTRs, which enables the identification of miRNA:mRNA binding features specific for CDS or UTRs (). For each of these regions, a separate prediction model is built and the models are combined for computing a final miRNA:gene interaction score. This algorithm permits the identification of a large number of protein-coding genes that are only targeted in their CDSs and provides a model of the interaction between the CDS and the UTR targeting mechanism.