Motivation: Flux balance analysis (FBA) has been used extensively to analyze genome-scale, constraint-based models of metabolism in a variety of organisms. The predictive accuracy of such models has recently been improved through the integration of high-throughput expression profiles of metabolic genes and proteins. However, extensions of FBA often require that such data be discretized a priori into sets of genes or proteins that are either on or off. This procedure requires selecting relatively subjective expression thresholds, often requiring several iterations and refinements to capture the expression dynamics and retain model functionality. Results: We present a method for mapping expression data from a set of environmental, genetic or temporal conditions onto a metabolic network model without the need for arbitrary expression thresholds. Metabolic Adjustment by Differential Expression (MADE) uses the statistical significance of changes in gene or protein expression to create a functional metabolic model that most accurately recapitulates the expression dynamics. MADE was used to generate a series of models that reflect the metabolic adjustments seen in the transition from fermentative-to glycerol-based respiration in Saccharomyces cerevisiae. The calculated gene states match 98.7% of possible changes in expression, and the resulting models capture functional characteristics of the metabolic shift. Availability: MADE is implemented in Matlab and requires a mixed-integer linear program solver. Source code is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONThe availability of sequenced genomes has enabled the assembly of high-quality, genome-scale metabolic reconstructions (). Various constraint-based techniques such as flux balance analysis (FBA) have been developed to predict the steadystate flux distribution through a metabolic network after various environmental and genetic perturbations. This method assumes that an organism's metabolic objective (or objective function) is to maximize the flux through a subset of pathways [often corresponding to the production of biomass in unicellular organisms as an approximation of growth ()] and formulates * To whom correspondence should be addressed. a linear programming problem describing the stoichiometry of the metabolic network (). With constraint-based techniques such as FBA, in silico reconstructions have successfully predicted relationships between the presence or absence of a gene and the metabolic capabilities of a microorganism, including gene essentially (), adaptive evolution () and strain design for optimal production of a metabolic byproduct (). These predictions assume that the reactions in a reconstruction are either 'on' or 'off', as determined by a set of Boolean rules connecting reactions to the binary expression states of associated genes. This simplification attempts to overcome the paucity of kinetic details for metabolic gene/reaction associations and allows genes to be mapped to the hundreds or thousands of reactions in a genome-scale model. Genome-wide transcriptional regulatory networks (TRNs) can be used to predict the likely 'on' or 'off' state of metabolic genes as a function of environmental factors. Unfortunately, complete TRNs are only available for a limited number of organisms [including Escherichia coli () and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (. Other reconstructions must instead rely on experimental measurements (typically from gene expression microarrays) to determine the appropriate gene states, but this approach suffers from two complications. First, classifying reactions as 'on' or 'off' requires setting a threshold in the continuous expression levels of the associated genes; such thresholds cannot be accurately determined from measured mRNA levels alone. Recent evidence indicates that such a correlation between transcript levels and metabolic reaction activity does exist (). However, determining a specific threshold above which microarray measurements imply physiologically appreciable activity in the corresponding metabolic reaction is an unresolved problem. Second, these thresholds are not independent, since functioning metabolic reconstructions require a minimum set of reactions to be active in each condition, regardless of any apparent change in the underlying gene expression data. Especially when considering decreases in expression levels, the choice to fit these data by inactivating the corresponding reaction must be balanced with the functional effects of removing a reaction from the metabolic network. An early attempt at reconciling gene expression data with an FBA model was the GIMME algorithm (). Using a set of user-supplied thresholds for the transition of each gene from 'on' to 'off', GIMME iteratively reactivated 'off' reactions (by turning on genes below their threshold) until a functioning model was obtained. While GIMME did produce functioning FBA models, the method required the a priori determination of expression thresholds.Page: 542 541547
CONCLUSIONOur MADE algorithm integrates gene or protein expression data and a metabolic model without a priori determination of activity thresholds. MADE can be applied to any set of two or more Page: 546 541547Normalized expression levels were averaged across all genes associated with the subsystem. For comparison, the same approach was applied to the binary expression states calculated by MADE. The range of flux variability is the difference between the maximum and minimum allowable fluxes through a reaction while preserving an optimal objective value. These ranges were averaged for reactions in a subsystem and normalized: '1' indicates the largest average range for reactions in the subsystem; '0' is the smallest range. The 'Models Only' FVA results use the indicated media and no constraints on gene expression. The 'Models with Expression Data' show the changes to flux variability at each time point after the expression data were integrated with the model by MADE. genetic, environmental or temporal conditions. The method attempts to match most closely the genes that exhibit the most statistically significant changes in expression levels. The resulting gene states always produce functioning models and match the direction of differential expression with high accuracy. Results from the glucose/glycerol shift in S.cerevisiase indicate that MADE-derived models also recapitulate the overall behavior of the actual biological system.