Motivation: Next generation sequencing technology generates high-throughput data, which allows us to detect fusion genes at both transcript and genomic levels. To detect fusion genes, the current bioinformatics tools heavily rely on paired-end approaches and overlook the importance of reads that span fusion junctions. Thus there is a need to develop an efficient aligner to detect fusion events by accurate mapping of these junction-spanning single reads, particularly when the read gets longer with the improvement in sequencing technology. Results: We present a novel method, FusionMap, which aligns fusion reads directly to the genome without prior knowledge of potential fusion regions. FusionMap can detect fusion events in both single-and paired-end datasets from either RNA-Seq or gDNA-Seq studies and characterize fusion junctions at base-pair resolution. We showed that FusionMap achieved high sensitivity and specificity in fusion detection on two simulated RNA-Seq datasets, which contained 75 nt paired-end reads. FusionMap achieved substantially higher sensitivity and specificity than the paired-end approach when the inner distance between read pairs was small. Using FusionMap to characterize fusion genes in K562 chronic myeloid leukemia cell line, we further demonstrated its accuracy in fusion detection in both single-end RNA-Seq and gDNA-Seq datasets. These combined results show that FusionMap provides an accurate and systematic solution to detecting fusion events through junction-spanning reads. Availability: FusionMap includes reference indexing, read filtering, fusion alignment and reporting in one package. The software is free for noncommercial use at
INTRODUCTIONA fusion gene is a hybrid gene by joining parts from two previously separate genes at transcript or genomic level. The importance of fusion genes in cancer development has been well recognized * To whom correspondence should be addressed. since the discovery of the recurrent BCR-ABL1 fusion gene in chronic myelogenous leukemia (CML) () and TMPRSS2-ERG fusion gene in solid tumor (). Fusion genes are caused by chromosomal aberrations, e.g. inversion, translocation, large deletion or insertion. For example, BCR-ABL1 is formed by a translocation event involving chromosome 9 and 22. Its fusion transcript is translated into an abnormal tyrosine kinase, which plays a critical role in the development of CML (). These chromosomal aberrations were traditionally detected through fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH) or comparative genomic hybridization (CGH) techniques (). ArrayCGH and SNP array were later developed to detect genomic copy number variations at 1Kb resolution in a high-throughput fashion (). Compared to these techniques, next-generation sequencing (NGS) generates base-pair resolution data, which allows the detection and characterization of genomic aberrations at more levels of details. With NGS, fusion genes were detected using either genomic DNA sequencing (gDNASeq) () or transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) (). In NGS datasets, fusion genes can be detected based on both paired-and single-end reads. On the one hand, paired-end reads (50100 bp) generated from long fragments (200500 bp) are shown to be useful in increasing the ability to detect fusion events (). In a paired-end NGS dataset, a discordant read pair is one that is not aligned to the reference genome with the expected distance or orientation. If a set of discordant read pairs are mapped to two different genes, a fusion gene is suggested (). Computational tools like FusionSeq () have been developed to detect fusion candidates by analyzing paired-end reads and removing spurious candidates using varied filters. On the other hand, single-end reads that span the fusion junctions provide basepair evidence for the fusion events. Since sequencing technology is improving rapidly, the current usable read length from the Illumina Genome Analyzer is typically in the range of 75100 nt and reaches 150 nt using Illumina's TruSeq SBS V5 GA Kit (). Long read lengths not only increase the number of fusion junctionspanning reads but also allow us to align them unambiguously to the fusion junction. Moreover, junction-spanning reads can also be present in paired-end datasets. They provide additional information. Identification of fusion events in NGS dataset through junctionspanning reads. Fusion source 1 and 2 are from two different genes or genomic regions. for fusion genes suggested by discordant read pairs. When the read length is long or the inner distance (the gap size) between read pairs is short, the number of junction-spanning reads would be larger than that of discordant read pairs. Then, fusion detection based on junction-spanning reads is more powerful than the paired-end approach. One approach to detect fusion junction-spanning reads is mapping the reads to a set of artificially constructed exonexon segments from potential fusion gene pairs (). However, such an approach relies on prior knowledge of potential fusion regions and only identifies fusion junctions between known exons. Another approach is using splice aligners, such as TopHat () SpliceMap () and MapSplice (), to detect splice junctions. These alignment tools can split and map a read to different locations in a genome but only within local regions (usually 50 Kb). They are not able to identify distant or inter-chromosome fusion genes. Therefore, the development of a dedicated fusion aligner to align junction-spanning reads is necessary for fusion detection. In this article, we describe a new method, FusionMap, which detects and aligns fusion junction-spanning reads to the reference genome systematically. FusionMap can be applied to both singleand paired-end datasets from either RNA-Seq or gDNA-Seq studies. During the fusion alignment, FusionMap dynamically creates a pseudo fusion transcript/sequence library based on consensus junction sequences suggested by seed reads, and then aligns the remaining full-length reads to this pseudo reference (and Supplementary). The program reports a list of detected fusion junctions, statistics of supporting reads, fusion gene pairs, as well as genomic locations of breakpoints and junction sequences, which characterize fusion genes comprehensively at base-pair resolution.
DISCUSSIONThe FusionMap method described in this article allows us to align fusion junction-spanning reads to references and can, therefore, fully utilize NGS data to characterize fusion genes at base-pair resolution. The method achieves the following three goals in computational detection of fusion genes using NGS data. First, FusionMap performs a sensitive and complete search of fusion junction-spanning reads without relying on any additional information. It has the same detection power in both singleand paired-end NGS datasets. In paired-end datasets, the fusion report from junction-spanning reads is complementary to that from discordant read pairs. Moreover, as shown by dataset P2, fusion detection based on junction-spanning reads is more powerful than the paired-end approach when the inner distance between read pairs is short. In theory, for a set of 75 nt paired-end reads generated from a 400 bp fragment library, the ratio between the number of junction-spanning reads and discordant read pairs is close to 75*2/(400-75*2) = 0.6. The ratio will increase when the usable read lengths increase with new sequencing techniques or reagents (), making FusionMap more useful and effective. Second, FusionMap can be applied to both gDNA-Seq and RNASeq datasets. Compared to gDNA-Seq datasets, RNA-Seq is more complicated to detect fusion genes due to the implication of exon exon junctions. In gDNA-Seq fusion junctions detected are the actual fusion positions in the genome, while junctions detected in RNA-Seq are more likely to be splice junctions rather than genomic