Motivation: Synonymous codon usage bias has been shown to be correlated with many genomic features among different organisms. However, the biological significance of codon bias with respect to gene function and genome organization remains unclear. Results: Guanine and cytosine content at the third codon position (GC3) could be used as a good indicator of codon bias. Here, we used relative GC3 bias values to compare the strength of GC3 bias of genes in human and mouse. We reported, for the first time, that GC3-rich and GC3-poor gene products might have distinct sub-cellular spatial distributions. Moreover, we extended the view of genomic gene domains and identified conserved GC3 biased gene domains along chromosomes. Our results indicated that similar GC3 biased genes might be co-translated in specific spatial regions to share local translational machineries, and that GC3 could be involved in the organization of genome architecture. Availability and implementation: Source code is available upon request from the authors.
IntroductionDue to the redundancy of the genetic code, most amino acids can be translated by multiple codons (called synonymous codons). The frequencies of synonymous codon usage vary among different genes within the same and across different organisms (). This phenomenon is termed synonymous codon usage bias (SCUB). Accumulating evidence has suggested different mechanisms for SCUB, including mutational pressure and selection, etc. (). Recent bioinformatics and experimental studies have shown strong correlations between SCUB and translation accuracy and speed, mRNA secondary structures and stability, protein folding and function and other factors (). Although much effort has been made to explain the mechanisms and biological roles of SCUB, whether there are some unexplored biological functions of SCUB, especially with respect to gene function and genome organization, have not yet been elucidated. Because most synonymous codons differ at only the third nucleotide positions, guanine and cytosine content at the third codon position (GC3) is a good indicator of the extent of SCUB. Previous studies have shown that genes with high GC3 levels may have more sites for DNA methylation, exhibit more variable expression, and accumulate more mutations than those with low GC3 levels (). In several earlier studies, GC3 has been shown to act as an isochore marker (), and the relationship between GC3 and the GC content of the flanking regions is still debatable (). However, the distribution of GC3-biased genes along chromosomes is unknown. There are numerous genomic features related to GC3 bias. Here, we focused on the genome-wide gene distribution and examined V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.