GenAlEx: Genetic Analysis in Excel is a cross-platform package for population genetic analyses that runs within Microsoft Excel. GenAlEx offers analysis of diploid codominant, haploid and binary genetic loci and DNA sequences. Both frequency-based (F-statistics, heterozygosity, HWE, population assignment, related-ness) and distance-based (AMOVA, PCoA, Mantel tests, multivariate spatial autocorrelation) analyses are provided. New features include calculation of new estimators of population structure: G 0 ST , G 00 ST , Josts D est and F 0 ST through AMOVA, Shannon Information analysis, linkage disequilibrium analysis for biallelic data and novel heterogen-eity tests for spatial autocorrelation analysis. Export to more than 30 other data formats is provided. Teaching tutorials and expanded step-by-step output options are included. The comprehensive guide has been fully revised. Availability and implementation: GenAlEx is written in VBA and provided as a Microsoft Excel
INTRODUCTIONGenAlEx 6 was originally developed as a teaching tool to facilitate teaching population genetic analysis at the graduate level (). GenAlEx operates within Microsoft Excelthe widely used spreadsheet software that forms part of the cross-platform Microsoft Office suite. Packaging genetic analysis within a familiar and flexible environment resulted in quick understanding and effective performance of population genetic analyses. Taking advantage of the rich graphical options available within Excel, GenAlEx offers a wide range of graphical outputs that aid genetic data analysis and interpretation. GenAlEx is now widely used by university teachers at both undergraduate and graduate levels around the world. Moreover, the software has also attracted a large number of researchers who utilize its unique features. Here we provide an update on the new features offered in GenAlEx 6.5 that we believe will be welcomed by students, teachers and researchers. GenAlEx offers population genetic analysis of diploid codominant, haploid, haplotypic and binary genetic data from animals, plants and microorganisms. It accommodates a wide range of genetic markers, including microsatellites (SSRs), singlenucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), amplified fragment length polymorphisms and DNA sequences. Both allele frequencybased and distance-based analysis options are provided. The former includes estimates of heterozygosity and genetic diversity, F-statistics, Nei's genetic distance, population assignment and relatedness. The latter includes Analysis of Molecular Variance (AMOVA), Principal Coordinates Analysis (PCoA), Mantel tests, TWOGENER, multivariate and 2D spatial autocorrelation. Readers are referred to Peakall and Smouse (2006) for a more comprehensive outline of these standard procedures, data formats and data import options. GenAlEx 6.5 maintains backward compatibility, but it provides access to the expanded spreadsheet of Excel 2007 onward. Thus, the maximum numbers of loci and samples are vastly expanded and only constrained by memory. More than 30 different Excel graphs summarize the outcomes of genetic analyses. Graphics can be further manipulated with Excel options and easily converted to pdf or other publication-quality formats.