The two main functions of bioinformatics are the organization and analysis of biological data using computational resources. Geneious Basic has been designed to be an easy-to-use and flexible desktop software application framework for the organization and analysis of biological data, with a focus on molecular sequences and related data types. It integrates numerous industry-standard discovery analysis tools, with interactive visualizations to generate publication-ready images. One key contribution to researchers in the life sciences is the Geneious public application programming interface (API) that affords the ability to leverage the existing framework of the Geneious Basic software platform for virtually unlimited extension and customization. The result is an increase in the speed and quality of development of computation tools for the life sciences, due to the functionality and graphical user interface available to the developer through the public API. Geneious Basic represents an ideal platform for the bioinformatics community to leverage existing components and to integrate their own specific requirements for the discovery, analysis and visualization of biological data. Availability and implementation: Binaries and public API freely available for download at http://www.geneious.com/basic, implemented in Java and supported on Linux, Apple OSX and MS Windows. The software is also available from the Bio-Linux package repository at http://nebc.nerc.ac.uk/news/
INTRODUCTIONResearch in the biosciences increasingly depends upon bioinformatics for the effective organization and analysis of biological data and experimental results. Having access to the appropriate bioinformatics tools is crucial to the success of any research project. The field of bioinformatics itself has previously been segregated into the parallel realms of data organization * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  Current affiliation: Google Inc.(databases, access, integration, web services and search tools) and data analysis (efficient algorithms and statistical modeling). As a result, a large proportion of bioinformatics work involves the chaperoning of data from a variety of sources through a pipeline of analysis tools. This approach typically involves a number of ad hoc labor-intensive steps to convert file formats and create transitional file types. Geneious Basic was created to provide a general framework for research-focused bioinformatics tasks to overcome these challenges and take advantage of modern computing trends. Highlights of the platform include automated database searching, data backup functionality and an extensible API for the integration of novel bioinformatics analysis tools.