Conserved intron positions in eukaryotic genes can be used to reconstruct phylogenetic trees, to resolve ambiguous subfamily relationships in protein families and to infer the history of gene families. This version of GenePainter facilitates working with large datasets through options to select specific subsets for analysis and visualization, and through providing exhaustive statistics. GenePainters application in phylogenetic analyses is considerably extended by the newly implemented integration of the exon–intron pattern conservation with phylogenetic trees. Availability and implementation: The software along with detailed documentation is available at
IntroductionThe rapid growth of sequenced eukaryotes increasingly allows incorporating exonintron pattern information into phylogenetic analyses. Conserved intron positions have helped resolving the relationship of taxonomic lineages () and have also extensively been used to reveal subfamily relationships within larger gene families () and to reconstruct ancient genes (). Because the early eukaryotes were rather intron rich and the gene structure evolution towards the extant species was dominated by intron-loss events (), considerable taxonomic and sequence sampling is necessary to reconstruct the gene structure history of a gene or gene family across the eukaryotic tree of life. For example, mammals and plants are known to have intron-rich genomes, while most unicellular organisms are intron poor. However, although the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae is known to contain only 275 introns in total (), the yeast's dynein light chain LC8 coding region is split by two introns (other ascomycetous fungi contain even up to seven introns) while the human LC8 orthologs only contain a single intron. In general, intron gain events are rare and are most often recent events (). Existing tools for the comparison of gene structures like Exalign (), CIDA/CIWOG (), GECA () and GenePainter () compare exon lengths or map intron positions to positions in multiple amino acid sequence alignments (MSA). However, none of the tools integrates gene structure conservation with taxonomic and phylogenetic tree information. Here, we present a new version of our GenePainter software, v. 2.0, which maps intron positions onto the multiple sequence alignment and assigns intron gain and loss events to taxonomic branches and extant species.