Motivation: Protein–protein interactions (PPIs) are pivotal for many biological processes and similarity in Gene Ontology (GO) annotation has been found to be one of the strongest indicators for PPI. Most GO-driven algorithms for PPI inference combine machine learning and semantic similarity techniques. We introduce the concept of inducers as a method to integrate both approaches more effectively, leading to superior prediction accuracies. Results: An inducer (ULCA) in combination with a Random Forest classifier compares favorably to several sequence-based methods, semantic similarity measures and multi-kernel approaches. On a newly created set of high-quality interaction data, the proposed method achieves high cross-species prediction accuracies (Area under the ROC curve ≤ 0.88), rendering it a valuable companion to sequence-based methods. Availability: Software and datasets are available at
INTRODUCTIONA major challenge in systems biology is the accurate mapping of the interactomethe set of all protein-protein interactions (PPIs) within a cell. Understanding the interactome is essential in deciphering protein function and cell behavior (). Large-scale interaction maps have been experimentally determined but are incomplete and show high error rates (von). Consequently, in silico methods have been developed to infer PPIs from various sources of information including sequence features such as n-gram composition, phylogenetic relationships, e.g. interologs, and Gene Ontology (GO) annotation.provide an excellent overview of features indicative for PPIs. Several studies have recognized similarity in GO annotation as one of the strongest predictors for protein interaction (). GO annotation-driven interaction inference is based on the observation that proteins localized to the same cellular compartment are more * To whom correspondence should be addressed. likely to interact than are proteins that reside in spatially distant compartments (). Similarly, proteins that share a common biological process or molecular function have been found to be predictive for PPI (). GO is organized as a graph with terms as nodes and edges describing relationships (). The literature distinguishes two fundamentally different approaches to exploit GO annotation for the prediction of protein interactions: (i) the semantic similarity measure (SSM) approach and (ii) the machine learning (ML) approach. SSMs are unsupervised methods that operate on a hierarchical graph (DAG) of relationships to measure similarities between entities. For instance, similarity between GO terms can be expressed by the shortest path between terms within the GO DAG. ML approaches for PPI inference, on the other hand, are supervised and the GO annotation of a protein pair is encoded by a feature vector, indicating assigned or shared GO terms, which is subsequently evaluated by an ML classifier. The ML approach has the advantage that advanced classification algorithms such as Support Vector Machines or Random Forests () can be applied, which are usually more accurate predictors than unsupervised methods. However, the traditional encoding of shared GO terms within the feature vector ignores the relationships between GO terms and therefore hides important information from the classifier. The SSM approach, on the other hand, explicitly exploits topological relationships between GO terms but is typically limited to comparatively simple predictors, e.g. term probabilities. These competing properties of the SSM and the ML approach have been recognized by many authors, and hybrid methods have been developed, in which the output of a SSM method serves as input (among others) to an ML classifier. However, the hybrid approach still does not allow the classifier to exploit term relationships directly. We hypothesized that a better integration of SSMs with ML algorithms may lead to improved prediction accuracies and we propose the concept of inducers to achieve such integration. In the following, we first discuss the various hybrid ML approaches and SSMs, before explaining inducers in Section 2.2. Patil and Nakamura (2005) trained a Naive Bayes classifier using input features such as shared GO terms, PFAM domains and sequence similarity to infer PPI. Shared GO terms were also exploited byto identify novel interactions in human., Lin (1998) and many others utilize the information content of the most informative common ancestor to measure term similarity. Edge-based methods, on the other hand, exploit the lengths of the paths between terms (). Only a few authors have utilized SSMs to infer PPIs.defined a similarity measure that is composed of three components, such as overlap of induced term subgraphs, term generality and term distances to lowest common ancestors.compared five SSMs to predict human PPIs and found Resnik's measure () to perform best. Finally, Jain and Bader (2010) introduced a novel SSM that attempts to compensate for the unequal depths of different branches of the GO DAG. In an evaluation on a yeast PPI dataset, the prediction performance (Area under the ROC curve) was on par with Resnik's similarity metric. Applications of SSMs to other prediction problems are referenced in Section 11 of the Supplementary Material.
DISCUSSIONInducers encompass the traditional ML approach, in which only the assigned GO terms are mapped onto a feature vector (ignoring the GO topology), and also SSMs. For instance, Resnik's SSM is effectively an OLCA inducer with a simple classifier, utilizing information content as term weights. Numerous variants of Resnik's method with different aggregation strategies have been developed, but for many applications do not achieve higher accuracies.reviewed SSMs applied to biomedical ontologies and in 5 of 11 studies Resnik's method with BMA or MAX as aggregation strategy was identified as the best performer. The ULCA inducer presented here significantly outperforms Resnik's method with BMA/MAX aggregation because the latter (and most other SSMs) are unsupervised methods, limited to simple estimators (e.g. term probabilities), while machine learning methods are able to model higher-order statistics. To confirm this, we replaced the classifier component of the ULCA inducer by the average or the maximum information content over the induced term set. The resulting prediction accuracies drop to the level of SSMs (Section 4 of Supplementary Material). The inducer approach outperformed the sequence-based method evaluated (), but it is noteworthy that Patil and Nakamura (2005) found sequence similarity and GO annotation to have low correlation (r = 0.13), implying that a combination of GO and sequence-based methods could lead to further improvements in prediction accuracy. While the cross-species accuracy of sequencebased methods is low, they have the advantage of being applicable in cases where sequence data but no further annotation is available, e.g. newly sequenced genomes. On the other hand, annotation software such as Blast2Go () can be employed to transfer GO terms to unannotated gene products. Since annotation transfer is largely based on sequence similarity as well, it remains an open question whether the superior accuracy of the inducer approach can be maintained in this case. The computational burden of the inducer-based approach can be alleviated by using a reduced term set, a so-called GO slim. While slims lead to much shorter feature vectors and therefore shorter prediction times, they also reduce the prediction accuracy considerably (Section 6 of Supplementary Material). Furthermore, the mapping of GO annotations to slim terms via map2slim.pl (http://search.cpan.org/~cmungall/go-perl/scripts/ map2slim) is algorithmically more complex than the ULCA inducer and also requires the selection of a suitable slim. Here, we utilized a binary encoding to indicate the presence or absence of shared GO terms in an induced term set. However, the binary encoding cannot distinguish between the case in which a GO term is assigned to only one protein, and that in which it is assigned to none of the two proteins. This loss of information can be avoided by using a ternary encoding, e.g. 1 for GO terms assigned to one of the two proteins, 2 for GO terms assigned to both proteins and 0 otherwise. We found the ternary encoding not beneficial for the ULCA inducer, but it considerably improved the accuracy of the AL inducer (Section 8 of Supplementary Material). It is known that PPI networks contain many more non-interactions (negatives) than interactions (positives).estimate a ratio of 600:1 but as classifiers generally cannot be trained on sample sets of this size, balanced datasets are used instead (Ben). Performance is frequently measured by the AUC to compare methods and by the AUC 50 as a practically relevant measure for experimental validation of top-ranking predictions. We found the AUC stable for different ratios but the AUC 50 highly volatile and less reliable (Section 9 of Supplementary Material).
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we introduce the concept of inducers to better integrate ML methods and SSMs for the inference of PPIs. The inducer approach outperformed a suite of sequenced-based methods and SSMs, and achieved accuracies close to a multi-kernel method that exploits information beyond mere GO annotation. On a high-quality yeast PPI dataset, a peak prediction accuracy of 0.91 (AUC) was achieved by the ULCA inducer in combination with a RF classifier. We also showed that the cross-species prediction accuracy of the inducer approach is high (AUC  0.88). When comparing the three individual ontologies of the GO we found, in agreement with other studies (), similarities in biological process and cellular component annotation to be stronger indicators for protein interaction than similar molecular function annotation. It is noteworthy that the proposed method is not specifically designed for the prediction of PPIs and can be applied to other domains described by ontological data. Considering the growing number of ontologies () and their improving coverage, formality and integration (), we expect