Motivation: Univariate Cox regression (COX) is often used to select genes possibly linked to survival. With non-proportional hazards (NPH), COX could lead to under-or over-estimation of effects. The effect size measure c = P(T 1  T 0), i.e. the probability that a person randomly chosen from group G 1 dies earlier than a person from G 0 , is independent of the proportional hazards (PH) assumption. Here we consider its generalization to continuous data c and investigate the suitability of c for gene selection. Results: Under PH, c is most efficiently estimated by COX. Under NPH, c can be obtained by weighted Cox regression (WHE) or a novel method, concordance regression (CON). The least biased and most stable estimates were obtained by CON. We propose to use c as summary measure of effect size to rank genes irrespective of different types of NPH and censoring patterns.
INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, many studies aimed at finding prediction models which link high-dimensional gene expression data to a survival outcome (e.g.). A comparative analysis of methods used in this context can be found in a paper by. All these methods are extensions of the basic Cox proportional hazards regression model (COX) (). This semi-parametric model assumes that the hazard rate  i (t|x i ) of subject i at time t given a row vector x i of log 2 gene expression measurements is of the formwhere  0 (t) is an unspecified baseline hazard function. Thus the elements of  are log hazard ratios (HR) associated with a unit increase in log 2 gene expression or a doubling of gene expression. COX assumes proportional hazards (PH), which means that we consider a constant effect of gene expression on survival over the whole period of follow-up. In a typical microarray study comprising a large number of genes the assumption of PH cannot be verified for each gene, though it is unlikely that PH hold for each gene. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Consequently, ignoring the PH assumption and applying COX based methods could lead to under-or over-estimation for a considerable number of genes, meaning that some genes may be falsely declared important for predicting survival, while at the same time relevant genes are missed. If some genes exhibit non-proportional hazards (NPH) then their HRs, estimated while ignoring time-dependency, are not comparable to those of genes with PH or of genes exhibiting different patterns of NPH. Nonetheless, very few theoretical studies have considered the possibility of NPH and its consequences on gene selection or prediction () and to our knowledge its occurrence has never been addressed in applied studies. By contrast, in classical applications a large body of literature exists which deals with COX under NPH () and the importance to cope with the possibility of NPH was often emphasized (). With gene expression as predictor, this has been a neglected area of research.and Supplementaryshow examples of genes with PHs, converging hazards (CH) and diverging hazards (DH) from the study of. For the gene with PH (left column) the correlation of scaled Schoenfeld residuals () with the rank of time is close to 0. For the other genes the correlation is considerably larger indicating violation of the PH assumption. The middle column ofshows a gene with CH, where the effect fades away with time, whereas the gene depicted in the right column exhibits DH, i.e. an effect increasing with time. In the Bhattacharjee study, genes with DH are found more often than genes with CH. NPH may arise from time-dependent effects of genes on survival, but could also result from model misspecification, e.g. from omitting a strong clinical covariate or another gene. This may particularly happen in univariate analyses.
DISCUSSIONWe have introduced c , a semi-parametric generalization of the well-known concordance probability for continuous predictors and Page: 789 784790Assume that S j (t ), f j (t ) and  j (t ) denote the survivor function, the density and the hazard function in group j, j ={0,1} at time t. Under PH we assume that the hazard ratio is constant over time,