Motivation: Much of the large-scale molecular data from living cells can be represented in terms of networks. Such networks occupy a central position in cellular systems biology. In the protein– protein interaction (PPI) network, nodes represent proteins and edges represent connections between them, based on experimental evidence. As PPI networks are rich and complex, a mathematical model is sought to capture their properties and shed light on PPI evolution. The mathematical literature contains various generative models of random graphs. It is a major, still largely open question, which of these models (if any) can properly reproduce various biologically interesting networks. Here, we consider this problem where the graph at hand is the PPI network of Saccharomyces cerevisiae. We are trying to distinguishing between a model family which performs a process of copying neighbors, represented by the duplication–divergence (DD) model, and models which do not copy neighbors, with the Barabási–Albert (BA) preferential attachment model as a leading example. Results: The observed property of the network is the distribution of maximal bicliques in the graph. This is a novel criterion to distinguish between models in this area. It is particularly appropriate for this purpose, since it reflects the graphs growth pattern under either model. This test clearly favors the DD model. In particular, for the BA model, the vast majority (92.9%) of the bicliques with both sides ≥ 4 must be already embedded in the models seed graph, whereas the corresponding figure for the DD model is only 5.1%. Our results, based on the biclique perspective, conclusively show that a naïve unmodified DD model can capture a key aspect of PPI networks. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONMany real-life systems can be modeled as complex networks, or graphs, of interacting components. Although the study of such largescale networks is not new, there has recently been much renewed interest in this field. This is due to technological advances of two types: (i) the collection of data which depict large networks in high-resolution detail, and (ii) the development of computational tools for the analysis of data. Among the well-studied examples of such networks are the World Wide Web, citation networks, neuronal connections, metabolic networks, ecological webs and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. more (for reviews, see). One of the best studied network types is the proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network. Protein interactions play a crucial role in the execution of biological functions in any model system. Accordingly, a systematic mapping of PPI on the scale of the whole proteomethe interactomehas recently become available for major model systems from yeast () to human (). Although far from complete, PPI network mappings have revealed topological and dynamic features of the interactome that are common to numerous model systems (). However, the overall size of interactomes differs substantially between human and other multicellular model organisms, including the Drosophila melanogaster and the Caenorhabditis elegans (). PPIs are usually represented by an undirected graph (network). Every node in such a network corresponds to a protein, and there is an edge between two nodes, if the two corresponding proteins interact physically. Such networks have been mapped for several organisms using high-throughput (HTP) techniques such as Yeast2-Hyrbid (Y2H) Systems () and co-immunoprecipitation (). HTP techniques are prone to a high rate of false positives and false negatives. Saccharomyces cerevisiae (baker's yeast) is the organism with the most comprehensive, high-coverage interactome mapping. Other PPI networks, such as those of Escherichia coli and Helicobacter pylori were investigated as well, but they are far from being complete (). The PPI networks of human, Drosophila melanogaster and Caenorhabditis elegans are more complex, due to their multicellular nature. Specifically, interactomes are harder to define, as they vary between different cell types, and subsequently, harder to map. The PPI network of yeast was refined over the years, followed by a critical assessment of data quality () {Chua, 2008 #19}. While the topology of the partial PPI network obtained from each of the main technologies is different (), the combination of PPI data from such complementary experimental technologies resulted in a near complete map (). For most organisms, the interaction data are still partial and thus topological assessment of these networks is prone to sampling biases (). It is not obvious how to infer direct pairwise interactions from HTP techniques that focus on protein complexes (i.e. co-immunoprecipitation). This is especially challenging when complexes of several proteins are considered. To document andPage: i143 i142i148