Motivation: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) based on single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) arrays are the most widely used approach to detect loci associated to human traits. Due to the complexity of the methods and software packages available, each with its particular format requiring intricate management workflows, the analysis of GWAS usually confronts scientists with steep learning curves. Indeed, the wide variety of tools makes the parsing and manipulation of data the most time consuming and error prone part of a study. To help resolve these issues, we present GWASpi, a user-friendly, multiplatform, desktop-able application for the management and analysis of GWAS data, with a novel approach on database technologies to leverage the most out of commonly available desktop hardware. GWASpi aims to be a start-to-finish GWAS management application, from raw data to results, containing the most common analysis tools. As a result, GWASpi is easy to use and reduces in up to two orders of magnitude the time needed to perform the fundamental steps of a GWAS. Availability: Freely available on the web at http://www.gwaspi.org. Implemented in Java, Apache-Derby and NetCDF-3, with all major operating systems supported.
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have come to be the choice method to detect loci associated with human hereditary traits, especially diseases (). The number of studies published yearly based on these arrays, has constantly increased from 3 in 2003 to 384 in 2010 (). In parallel, reference databases such as HapMap (), HGDP () and the 1000 Genomes Project () are being released together with an ever-growing range of analytical methods and software packages. The most common freely available tools in the field, however, leave it to the user to tackle the jungle of formats and the bulk of raw * To whom correspondence should be addressed. data generated by GWAS. Also, learning how to apply the methods commonly used in GWASs takes significant time, extending an already lengthy and arduous data gathering phase. Thus, the steep learning curve and the burden of manipulation of the raw data still makes the access to GWAS a costly endeavour for researchers or institutions without Bioinformatics personnel. To contribute to solve this problem and make GWAS an achievable effort for smaller teams, as well as for the sake of speeding up raw data management in a consistent, self-contained way for the general researcher community, we have developed the GWAS Pipeline (GWASpi). GWASpi has not been designed to replace other well-established applications () insofar as it does not offer the whole breadth of statistical analysis methods used in GWAS. Instead, the current version of GWASpi focuses in casecontrol studies and offers a solution for teams in need of concise and quickly obtained results as well as compact, comprehensive and agile dataset management to complement existing analysis packages. Some basic quality-control features are also integrated in GWASpi.
CONCLUSIONThe integration of key pre-processing, quality control, data management, analysis and reporting steps within a single application is a distinctive advantage we present in GWASpi. With this application, we want to offer a solid and scalable platform, even if the current version focuses in basic casecontrol designs. New qualitycontrol and analysis methods as well as new formats are scheduled to be added into GWASpi. High-quality charts and reports sorted by relevance are generated automatically, delivering the results visually and in tables. Reference databases and chart navigation tools are integrated in the application providing an agile starting point for continuing research. For the user, GWASpi simplifies drastically the cumbersome workflows so common in GWAS pipelines and the many intermediate data files to be generated, checked and reprocessed. The learning curve for GWASpi's usage is very accessible as all available operations are documented in an online contextual help page.