Motivation: The establishment of quantitative gene regulatory networks (qGRNs) through existing network component analysis (NCA) approaches suffers from shortcomings such as usage limitations of problem constraints and the instability of inferred qGRNs. The proposed GeNOSA framework uses a global optimization algorithm (OptNCA) to cope with the stringent limitations of NCA approaches in large-scale qGRNs. Results: OptNCA performs well against existing NCA-derived algorithms in terms of utilization of connectivity information and reconstruction accuracy of inferred GRNs using synthetic and real Escherichia coli datasets. For comparisons with other non-NCA-derived algorithms, OptNCA without using known qualitative regulations is also evaluated in terms of qualitative assessments using a synthetic Saccharomyces cerevisiae dataset of the DREAM3 challenges. We successfully demonstrate GeNOSA in several applications including deducing condition-dependent regulations, establishing high-consensus qGRNs and validating a sub-network experimentally for dose–response and time–course microarray data, and discovering and experimentally confirming a novel regulation of CRP on AscG. Availability and implementation: All datasets and the GeNOSA framework are freely available from http://e045.
IntroductionIn systems biology, inferring gene regulatory networks (GRNs) has focused on identifying effective mathematical models that accurately depict the variation of gene expressions through the use of mathematical equations (). In these equations, the values of model parameters are estimated through the use of microarray technologies and biological domain knowledge of connectivity information from customized biological experiments () and reliable databases [e.g. RegulonDB () and EcoCyc ()] remains challengeable (). The general procedure for reconstructing GRNs is illustrated in. Various microarray experiments are conducted for some control factors, such as knockout, drug treatment or overexpression, to investigate biological functions using gene expression analysis. To accurately reconstruct GRNs from multiple microarray profiles of doseresponse or timecourse data, prior connectivity information from public databases of considered species (e.g. RegulonDB and EcoCyc for Escherichia coli) that decreases the number of regulations to be estimated is used to reduce the solution space for inferring V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.comGRNs. Once the mathematic model of the GRN is established, one can deduce and analyze interested regulation through qualitative assessments regardless of regulatory roles as either activation or repression in GRNs. Qualitative GRNs have been inferred by numerous methods () but quantitative analysis and further experimental support is still lacking (). Quantitative GRNs have been widely investigated sinceproposed an approach for inferring GRNs with quantitative transcription rates and realistic descriptions of how a gene's regulators influence its expression level. Quantitative regulation information can help biologists reveal hidden knowledge in complicated and large-scale GRNs (). The network component analysis (NCA) approach is a wellknown model-based decomposition method for inferring GRNs to deduce valuable information related to the transcription factor activity (TFA) and control strength (CS) of TF-gene connectivity networks (). TFA is defined as the concentration of its subpopulation capable of DNA-binding domains () and is difficult to measure experimentally owing to the post-transcriptional and post-translational modifications (). Estimating the quantities of TFAs provides a basis for investigating perturbations caused by drug effects, genetic mutations, over-expression or complex environmental challenges. The linear model of NCA is described in Eq. (1) where the levels of gene expression are determined by CS and TFA, respectively, represented using the matricesand(),The values in the matrix(size M  T) are the log ratios of expression values of M genes and T time points measured using microarray technology under specific conditions. The connectivity matrix(size M  N) is composed of the regulation between M genes and N TFs, and the matrix(size N  T) represents activities of the N TFs on T time points. The matrixrepresents the measurement noise or other factors that influence gene expression but are not directly related to this linear model. The NCA-derived algorithms must obey the three identifiability criteria serving as constraints (The set Z 0 is the topologies induced by the network connectivity pattern. The inputs of the NCA-derived algorithms are the matricesandgiven from gene expression profiles and connectivity information, respectively. The outputs are the values in the matricesand. To satisfy the three criteria, some valuable connectivity information (such as the known TF-gene regulations) and some TFs and genes in the GRN of interest would be ignored. The existing NCA algorithm () adopts a twostep iterative method to satisfy the three aforementioned criteria, but the obtained solution has two shortcomings: (i) the method adopts a local search methodology () and (ii) the solution is computationally instable depending on initial values in matrix(). The subsequently developed NCA algorithm incorporating the Tikhonov regularization method () can improve the numerical sensitivity induced by the ill-conditioned matrices. However, the existing NCA-derived algorithms cannot estimate so many TFAs due to insufficient transcriptome data points in the third criterion. Hence, an enhanced version of the NCA algorithm revises the third criterion, thus relaxing the theoretical data point limitation (). The NCA algorithm with the revised third criterion and Tikhonov regularization is named NCAr in this work. However, the third criterion is difficult to meet because a single gene can be regulated by a large number of TFs in higher eukaryotes (). Therefore, the NCA-derived algorithms have to prune some TFs and genes in the original GRN of interest to make the GRN NCA-complaint and thus yield a unique solution. Therefore, the trimming schema was used to extend the applicability of the NCA model to the realm of mammalian regulatory network analysis (). In addition, FastNCA (), non-iterative NCA (NI-NCA;), and ROBNCA () focused on improving the efficiency of matrix decomposition in the NCA model when applied to large-scale GRNs. ROBNCA was more accurate than FastNCA and NI-NCA, irrespective of varying noise, correlation and/or amount of outliers for synthetic datasets (). Numerous studies have successfully used the NCA approach for qualitative GRNs reconstruction, although the NCA algorithms are still subject to limitations in the matrix() and instability in the matrixwith insufficient connectivity information (). Theoretically, the inferred GRNs using existing NCA-derived algorithms need to be further refined by biologists and confirmed through biological knowledge and empirical evidence. This work proposes a framework (named Gene Networks via Orthogonal Simulated Annealing, GeNOSA) for inferring quantitative GRNs from multiple microarray profiles of doseresponse or timecourse data using a global optimization algorithm (named OptNCA). OptNCA bases on orthogonal simulated annealing (OSA) and the best use of prior knowledge for the initial setting of the connectivity matrixwithout matrix reduction to confine the solution space of the decomposition problem of the NCA model (). We demonstrate the effectiveness of this framework in several respects. First, we adopt NCA-compliant datasets () as benchmarks and show that OptNCA is superior to existing NCA-derived algorithms in terms of the true network in silico. Moreover, OptNCA without using known qualitative regulations is also evaluated in terms of qualitative assessments using one of the widely used datasets of DREAM3 challenges. Second, we show the good quality of the inferred GRNs using GeNOSA to deduce condition-dependent regulations of a CRP-regulated GRN. Third, we apply GeNOSA to establish quantitative GRNs from. Overview of a general procedure for reconstructing GRNs. (A) Microarray experiments are conducted for some control factors (e.g. knockout, drug treatment or overexpression). (B) mRNA expression profiles are obtained from doseresponse or timecourse microarray data. (C) Inference methods reconstruct GRNs with interested regulation from the mRNA expression profiles. (D) The mathematical model with parameter values is obtained for a GRN with qualitative regulation. (E) Qualitative evaluations using in silico networks or biological experiments on interactions of reconstructed GRNs doseresponse or timecourse microarray data, and validate quantitative regulations in a small sub-network in vitro. The wide applicability of GeNOSA suggests that this framework is not only of theoretical use in the reverse engineering of quantitative GRNs but also can be practically applied in real-world GRNs.
ConclusionThis work proposes a complete framework GeNOSA to infer largescale, qGRNs using OptNCA based on the model of NCA. Using an OSA algorithm, the proposed OptNCA can efficiently yield a good solution to the decomposition problem without performing matrix reduction. To obey the three identifiability criteria, existing NCAderived algorithms except OptNCA usually perform matrix reduction and ignore some genes and transcription factors of interest. However, with prior knowledge of connectivity information from the literature and existing databases, OptNCA can retain this reliable connectivity information in inferring GRNs. The generalpurpose GeNOSA can quantitatively estimate CS and TFA as well as discover novel regulations for specific conditions and applications. Estimating quantitative TFAs improves understanding of how the physical states of cells respond to environmental changes and elucidate the transcriptional architectures for various applications such as drug design. OptNCA performs well compared to existing NCA-derived algorithms in terms of reliable connectivity information and reconstruction accuracy using synthetic and real E. coli datasets. Experimental results indicate that GeNOSA can infer CRP-regulated GRNs to quantitatively deduce condition-dependent and undiscovered regulations. In the NCA model, the quantity of the activity of a TF mainly depends on its target genes. By investigating the stability of a TFA that targets on multiple genes, GeNOSA provides a solution to elucidate relative CS of TF-mediated genes and the dynamics of TFAs (upper parts of Figs. 3B and C) for various dosages and time points. While existing NCA-derived algorithms focus on approximating expression profiles for GRN reconstruction with qualitative regulation or quantitative regulation, GeNOSA aims to minimize a profile approximation error while accurately identifying a topological structure with quantitative regulation for efficiently establishing large-scale GRNs. The framework GeNOSA consists of tools, including generation of input files for OptNCA and optimization of GRNs, to make the best use of connectivity information from the literature and regulation databases for time-course or doseresponseA CRP-regulated network (CRP-ybiT) for a new regulation and their quantitative results. We had reconstructed a qualitative GRN as shown in (A). We choose an independent sub-network including an unknown regulation between CRP and AscG from this GRN and design biological experiments to perform quantitative analysis for GeNOSA. The quantitative and correlation results for (B) DR-cAMP (five mutant experiments for each of the three concentrations) and (C) TC-IS (seven mutant experiments for each of the five time points). The quantitative values of CS of DR-cAMP and TC-IS were illustrated by the line width and the activities of TFs are also shown to demonstrate the dynamics of the reconstructed GRN (Upper). The correlation between results of qRT-PCR and GeNOSA are plotted (Lower, see Supplementary Tables S3 and S4 in detail). Each expression is the average of three replicates of qRT-PCR. The Pearson's correlation coefficients are 0.85 and 0.88 for DR-cAMP and TC-IS, respectivelyThe binding affinities of CRP to the promoters of ascF, ascG and ybiT are determined by EMSA, (B) quantified by measuring the intensity of retard bands in subfigure A to retain bands with Zero-D scan software and (C) the binding affinities of CRP to the promoters of ascF, ascG and ybiT are determined by qRT-PCR GeNOSAmicroarray datasets. We believe that GeNOSA could serve as a fundamental tool for estimating TFAs in the reverse engineering of inferring quantitative GRNs and lead to the development of a rich set of applications in the field of systems biology.