Motivation: Stoichiometric and constraint-based methods of computational strain design have become an important tool for rational metabolic engineering. One of those relies on the concept of constrained minimal cut sets (cMCSs). However, as most other techniques, cMCSs may consider only reaction (or gene) knockouts to achieve a desired phenotype. Results: We generalize the cMCSs approach to constrained regulatory MCSs (cRegMCSs), where up/downregulation of reaction rates can be combined along with reaction deletions. We show that flux up/downregulations can virtually be treated as cuts allowing their direct integration into the algorithmic framework of cMCSs. Because of vastly enlarged search spaces in genome-scale networks , we developed strategies to (optionally) preselect suitable candidates for flux regulation and novel algorithmic techniques to further enhance efficiency and speed of cMCSs calculation. We illustrate the cRegMCSs approach by a simple example network and apply it then by identifying strain designs for ethanol production in a genome-scale metabolic model of Escherichia coli. The results clearly show that cRegMCSs combining reaction deletions and flux regulations provide a much larger number of suitable strain designs, many of which are significantly smaller relative to cMCSs involving only knockouts. Furthermore, with cRegMCSs, one may also enable the fine tuning of desired behaviours in a narrower range. The new cRegMCSs approach may thus accelerate the implementation of model-based strain designs for the bio-based production of fuels and chemicals. Availability and implementation: MATLAB code and the examples can be downloaded at
IntroductionRecent advances in genome-wide characterization of cellular systems have allowed the opportunity to catalogue a significant fraction of the metabolic reactions in the cell. These advances coupled with the development of metabolic modelling methods have enabled the construction of detailed models for many industrially relevant microbial hosts including Escherichia coli and Saccharomyces cerevisiae (). In parallel, the increasing price and volatility associated with petroleum-based feedstocks have stimulated the use of biological processes for renewable chemical synthesis. Together, these two factors further have motivated the development of computational methods to guide the engineering of metabolism for renewable chemicals synthesis. In the past, several algorithms have been developed for computational strain design, most of them relying on stoichiometric and constraint-based models. The latter includes the series of bilevel optimization algorithms such as OptKnock (), OptStrain (), OptGene (), OptReg (), CosMos () and OptORF (), which have been recently reviewed (). In all of these methods, the inner optimization problem involves the formulation of a genome-scale metabolic model with growth rate maximization as the objective, whereas the outer optimization involves the identification of the specific deletions/additions (represented as binary variables) that lead to the maximization of the flux to the target chemical. Typically, duality theory is used to convert the bilevel optimization problem into a single level mixed integer linear optimization problem with both the primal and dual version of growth maximization linear programs. Another method based on mixed integer linear optimization is OptForce (), which does not rely on a cellular objective function and uses instead a reference flux distribution typically obtained from 13 C labelling experiments. By solving a series of Mixed Integer Linear Programming (MILPs), OptForce first identifies all reaction pairs, triples, quadruples, etc. that must be upregulated or downregulated or deleted to achieve a desired production threshold. In the second stage, these MUST sets are used to identify a minimal intervention strategy that can lead to desired production levels. Hence, OptForce has been used to identify lower-order combinations of flux changes required to obtain a desired phenotype and was recently extended to k-OptForce to include kinetics of a subset of metabolic reactions (). Finally, we have previously developed an integer-free optimization approach that considers up/downregulation based on successive linear programming and was shown to be highly efficient (EMILiO) (). However, identifying strategies with minimal number of interventions is still a challenge. Model-based strain designs based on optimization approaches have been experimentally validated for lactate, butanediol, malonylCoA and fatty acid production in E.coli, and vanillin production in S.cerevisiae highlighting the value of in silico strain designs for metabolic engineering (). However, solutions of bilevel optimization problems for genome-scale models for cases with more than four or so modifications are usually computationally prohibitive, even more if one wants to enumerate alternate intervention strategies. Other methods for computational strain design are based on pathway-centric approaches, which also do not involve a cellular objective function. These methods analyze and design the space of metabolic behaviours by means of elementary modes (EMs;). Examples are minimal metabolic functionality (), SMET (), FluxDesign () and CASOP (H dicke and). However, these methods cannot be applied to genome-scale networks due to the combinatorial explosion of EMs in large networks. An alternative approach, which, in contrast, to the aforementioned methods, seeks to enumerate all relevant intervention strategies, is based on minimal cut sets (MCSs). MCSs represent reaction/gene knockout sets eliminating all EMs with undesired phenotypes (e.g. low product yield) (). As an extension, constrained MCSs (cMCSs) were introduced to allow also the consideration of desired phenotypes to be maintained in the network (H dicke and). Previously, calculation of (constrained) MCSs required the calculation of the EMs of the metabolic network in a pre-processing step; they are used to specify desired and undesired metabolic behaviours from which the resulting (c)MCSs can then be determined (H dicke and). However, a recent study showed the equivalence between the MCSs of the primal and EMs of a dual problem (). In principle, this advance enables the direct identification of MCSs using the network stoichiometry and flux capacity constraints without requiring the enumeration of all EMs of the network in a pre-processing step. However, enumeration of all MCSs in large-scale networks was still infeasible due to the large number of cut sets (or, equivalently, of EMs in the dual). More recently, the duality approach was used to identify the smallest MCSs in genome-scale metabolic networks as shortest EMs in the dual (von). Once the smallest MCSs deleting all undesired phenotypes (the latter represented by linear inequalities) are identified, additional inequality constraints describing the desired metabolic behaviour (e.g. high product yield with some minimal biomass synthesis) can be used to filter the valid cMCSs from the calculated MCSs. The findings in von Kamp and Klamt (2014) highlighted the ability of these cMCSs to identify a large number of (partially novel) deletion strategies that are not typically found by growth-coupled bilevel optimization problems. However, one of the limitations of cMCSs is that they are limited to identifying only deletion modifications. Given the recent advances in synthetic biology () that provide an unparalleled opportunity to manipulate and finetune expression of metabolic enzymes in cells, there is a need to consider graded regulation of metabolic reaction rates in strain design methods. Consequently, herein we present an extended cut-set approach allowing the calculation of (constrained) regulatory MCSs where up/downregulation of metabolic reaction rates can be combined along with reaction (or gene) deletions. We present a modification by which up/downregulations can be treated as virtual cuts allowing their direct integration in the existing algorithmic framework of MCSs. As the generalized intervention strategies may lead to vastly enlarged search spaces in genome-scale networks, we developed strategies to (optionally) preselect suitable candidates of reactions to be considered for regulation. We illustrate this approach by a small example and then by identifying strain designs that lead to ethanol production in a genome-scale metabolic model of E.coli. The results clearly show that using the combined regulation and deletions allowed in constrained regulatory MCS, one can find strategies that are significantly smaller relative to the conventional cMCSs involving only knockouts. We also present new algorithmic techniques to enhance efficiency and speed of cut set-calculations. For example, the currently employed two-step approach in which first all MCSs are enumerated in the dual before the admissible cMCSs (that keep desired behaviours feasible) are filtered in the primal system can be integrated in one step bringing several advantages.
DiscussionIn this study, we have generalized the MCS-based framework to regulatory MCSs allowing the consideration of reaction/gene knockouts and up-and downregulation of reaction fluxes. Using a small example and a realistic strain design problem in a genome-scale network, we have shown that cRegMCSs, in comparison to cMCSs involving only reaction deletions, can lead to (i) a lower number of required modifications and (ii) an increased number of possible intervention strategies. For example, in the case of genome-scale network of E.coli, using cRegMCSs we were able to identify several strategies with only two or three modifications and 333 strategies that have fewer than or equal to five modifications compared with the case where the cMCSs requires at least seven deletions. Thus, our cRegMCSs approach increases the choices available to metabolic engineers for experimental implementation and may thus accelerate the implementation of model-based strain designs for the biobased production of fuels and chemicals. Another advantage of cRegMCSs is that they enable the fine tuning of desired behaviours in a narrower range which could not be attained by cMCSs alone. For example, in the toy network in, the cMCSs involving exclusively knockouts can only redirect the complete flux to P (the yield Y P/A is always 1). An intermediate level of 0.6 Y P/A 0.8 cannot be attained but is possible with some suitable cRegMCSs. Although there are previously developed methods that focus on the identification of reactions for regulation such as OptReg, OptForce and the more recently developed k-OptForce, all of them involve a bilevel optimization problem. Although the OptForce approach shares similarities with the cRegMCSs approach leading to partially overlapping results, the nature of the algorithm and of the solutions produced are significantly different. In contrast to OptForce requiring two optimization steps, cRegMCSs are calculated in a single-stage MILP algorithm and all intervention sets up to a given size can be directly enumerated. In addition, although OptForce indicates the direction of flux change relative to the reference flux distribution, it does not specify an optimal level for up/downregulation. Furthermore, cRegMCSs guarantee a high level of product synthesis irrespective of the optimality of growth in the mutant strain. On the other hand, OptForce allows direct consideration of phenotype (metabolic flux) data for the wild type; this narrower specification may help to obtain smaller (because more directed) intervention strategies. Although gene or reaction knockouts can normally easily be implemented, it will be less straightforward to achieve, e.g. elevation of a metabolic flux as suggested by cRegMCSs analysis. At least for irreversible reactions, overexpression or/and control of the activity of associated metabolic enzymes will be the first approach and novel tools of molecular and synthetic biology enabling the facile regulation of metabolic enzymes [e.g. ribosome binding site variants for fine tuning expression () and RNA devices for programming expression () and other tools (could provide key technologies in this context. Another (more indirect) possibility could be to enhance availability of metabolites consumed in a reaction to be upregulated. Nevertheless, the ability to precisely upregulate a flux as predicted in the cRegMCSs is still challenging. Therefore, one may select cRegMCSs that are not sensitive to the level of regulation. Additionally, cRegMCSs could also be used as a tool for preselecting promising intervention strategies, which are then analyzed in more detail in combination with kinetic modelling frameworks such as Ensemble modelling () or ORACLE framework (;) to eventually identify the most robust strategies. In any case, cRegMCSs analysis reveals combinations of flux constraints that will lead to fulfilment of a given intervention goal and multiple experimental solutions may exist to implement these flux constraints. A potential limitation of the new method is the largely enhanced solution space, which forces cRegMCSs approach to focus on a subset of reactions considered for regulation. In this work, we used an FVA-based method to identify most promising candidates, other methods such as EMILiO () could be applied to identify these reactions as well. In the future, it would be desirable to develop algorithms that can calculate cRegMCSs without explicit specification of the flux levels of the regulated reactions (i.e. the relevant flux boundaries are determined directly by the algorithm), which would also help to avoid calculation of redundant cRegMCS. Ideally, the algorithm would also select the relevant reactions for regulation automatically and then determine the respective flux boundaries to obtain smallest intervention strategies. Another possible extension to cRegMCSs would be the incorporation of kinetics in a similar manner as the recently developed k-OptForce algorithm (). The combinatorial complexity of cRegMCSs calculation also guided us to further improve the cut-set enumeration algorithm. Specifically, the new approach for calculating smallest cMCSs in large-scale networks directly integrates constraints of the desired phenotypes thereby avoiding preliminary MCSs that will later be discarded. In the E.coli genome-scale network, we observed that the integrated algorithm is more efficient than the standard algorithm proposed by von Kamp and Klamt (2014). However, relative performance of the algorithms will also depend on structure and properties of the given intervention problem. The sheer number of strain designs identified by cRegMCSs points to another important requirement, namely, methods for the prioritization of these strains for experimental implementation. Some of the results obtained in this study suggest that upregulation of certain reaction fluxes or enzyme activities such as PDH, which occur more often at multiple levels, might be a more robust strategy in comparison to other designs. In the future, it will be valuable to screen cRegMCSs to prioritize strategies that guarantee robust performance (). However, the detailed evaluation of the impact of regulation of these reaction fluxes or strain designs in general require additional systematic evaluation for measuring the ability