The amount of gene and genome data obtained by next-generation sequencing technologies generates a need for comparative visualization tools. Complementing existing software for comparison and exploration of genomics data, genoPlotR automatically creates publication-grade linear maps of gene and genomes, in a highly automatic, flexible and reproducible way. Availability: genoPlotR is a platform-independent R package, available with full source code under a GPL2 license at R-Forge: http://genoplotr.r-forge.r-project.org/ Contact:
INTRODUCTIONComparison of genes and genomes has increasingly been used to infer patterns and processes in evolution and to relate phenotypic differences to genomic changes. With the recent advent of modern high-throughput sequencing technologies, the need for methods and visualization tools in comparative genomics has vastly increased. As of 2010, more than 1000 bacterial and archaeal genomes are available in public databases, making the number of possible comparisons almost infinite. Several programs such as the Artemis Comparison Tool (ACT;), UCSC Genome Browser (), Mauve (), MGCAT () and Murasaki () have extensive visualization functions. However, these tools lack the ability (i) to directly add annotations to the publication quality graphics they produce or (ii) to fully automate the production of comparative figures. GenomeGraphs () is a R package, which allows the visualization of one genomic region with related datasets such as microarray data. It can display several annotations for the same region, but it cannot show several regions in a single plot. The R package genoPlotR is an attempt to fill in those gaps, by providing a flexible, automatable tool. It allows the user to graphically represent the comparison between several segments or subsegments of genomes in a linear fashion. It reads data stored in commonly used formats (EMBL, Genbank, BLAST and Mauve outputs) or in user-created tabular files and allows comparisons of one or several subsegments of a genome. A tree can be added to show the phylogenetic relationships between the segments, as can also scales and annotations to each subsegment. The use of R (R Development) and its grid package enables the use of its graphical power and flexibility to manipulate data and to