Motivation: Pre-mRNA cleavage and polyadenylation are essential steps for 3 0-end maturation and subsequent stability and degradation of mRNAs. This process is highly controlled by cis-regulatory elements surrounding the cleavage/polyadenylation sites (polyA sites), which are frequently constrained by sequence content and position. More than 50% of human transcripts have multiple functional polyA sites, and the specific use of alternative polyA sites (APA) results in isoforms with variable 3 0-untranslated regions, thus potentially affecting gene regulation. Elucidating the regulatory mechanisms underlying differential polyA preferences in multiple cell types has been hindered both by the lack of suitable data on the precise location of cleavage sites, as well as of appropriate tests for determining APAs with significant differences across multiple libraries. Results: We applied a tailored paired-end RNA-seq protocol to specifically probe the position of polyA sites in three human adult tissue types. We specified a linear-effects regression model to identify tissue-specific biases indicating regulated APA; the significance of differences between tissue types was assessed by an appropriately designed permutation test. This combination allowed to identify highly specific subsets of APA events in the individual tissue types. Predictive models successfully classified constitutive polyA sites from a biologically relevant background (auROC ¼ 99.6%), as well as tissue-specific regulated sets from each other. We found that the main cis-regulatory elements described for polyadenylation are a strong, and highly informative , hallmark for constitutive sites only. Tissue-specific regulated sites were found to contain other regulatory motifs, with the canonical polyadenylation signal being nearly absent at brain-specific polyA sites. Together, our results contribute to the understanding of the diversity of post-transcriptional gene regulation. Availability: Raw data are deposited on SRA, accession numbers: brain SRX208132, kidney SRX208087 and liver SRX208134. Processed datasets as well as model code are published on our website:
INTRODUCTIONAlmost all eukaryotic mRNAs undergo a post-transcriptional processing step called polyadenylation, in which they acquire a polyA tail at their 3 0-end. After transcription, the 3 0-most segment of the newly made RNA is cleaved off at specific sites (polyA sites) by a set of RNA regulatory proteins, which is followed by the synthesis of the polyA tail by the addition of adenine (A) residues in a non-templated fashion (). Around 90 protein factors regulate this process, with CPSF (cleavage and polyadenylation specificity factor), CstF (cleavage simulator factor), CFI (cleavage factor I), CFII (cleavage factor II), PAP (polyA polymerase) and PABII (polyA binding protein) playing a crucial role (). PolyA sites are essential for 3 0-end maturation, stability and degradation of mRNAs. Furthermore, polyadenylation defines the extent of the 3 0-untranslated region (3 0-UTR) of mRNAs, which spans from the stop codon up to the polyA tail and contains many post-transcriptional regulatory sequence elements such as microRNA (miRNA) target sites. In addition, alternative polyadenylation (APA) events arise from the presence of more than one particular functional cleavage/polyadenylation (polyA) site. The specific use of different polyadenylation sites can play a direct role in gene regulation. For instance, eliminating large parts of a 3 0-UTR by using the more proximal polyA site enables a transcript to escape from miRNA regulation of its longer isoform. In proliferating cells, proximal polyA sites are therefore favored over distal ones, resulting in the production of mRNAs with shorter 3 0-UTR and fewer miRNA-binding motifs (). APA can influence mRNA nuclear export, cytoplasmic localization and non-miRNA mediated changes in mRNA stability and translational efficiency (). As such, it is important to identify not just alternative but specifically regulated alternative events, such as tissue-specific APA. Based on earlier analysis of expressed sequence tags (ESTs), over 50% of the human and more than 30% of mouse genes were observed to have multiple polyadenylation sites, which results in mRNA isoforms different in their 3 0-UTR and/or coding sequences (). Initial studies on ESTs and tiling microarrays also indicated a bias in the regulation of polyA sites in certain human tissues (). The introduction of high-throughput sequencing technology has vastly expanded the opportunities to explore APA. Recent deep sequencing of mRNA populations from multiple tissue types has shown that 86% of human genes exhibit variants due to APA sites (). In addition, several protocols relevant for studying polyadenylation have been developed. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.comThese protocols are designed to capture the 3 0-end of mRNAs using specific primers, then sequence these fragments using second-and third-generation sequencing technologies (). However, with one exception (), these approaches have been applied on small samples or nonmammalian genomes, leaving human normal tissues unexplored. A thorough analysis of the polyadenylation process in adult tissue types, showing differential gene expression, would help us understand tissue-specific APA regulation. Although genomewide APA profiling enables us to discover genes with multiple polyA isoforms at a genome-wide scale, it introduces major challenges. Without adequate methodology to specify the significance of APA biases in different tissues, we may confuse the mere presence of multiple APA with their specific up-or downregulation across conditions. A clean definition of truly specific sets is necessary to investigate which features allow for successful discrimination via computational models, and to suggest candidate regulatory features for future studies. In this article, we address several of these challenges by using data from a new RNA-seq protocol applied to sequence the 3 0-UTR end of mRNAs from different adult normal tissue types. Using a linear model, we distinguish between constitutive, alternative and alternatively regulated polyadenylation sites. Our linear regression model takes into account different library depth, expression of each gene in each tissue, as well as interactions between tissues and genes. As is still the case with many deep sequencing datasets, we do not have multiple replicates at our disposition that can be used to identify significantly differing APAs across tissues. Instead, significance of differences between samples from different tissue types is assessed by an appropriately designed permutation test. We then use the flanking sequence region around polyA sites to build predictive models both for the discrimination of constitutive polyA sites from genomic background, as well as to distinguish between regulated APA sets from different tissues.
DISCUSSIONAPA is a regulatory process with major impact on the downstream post-transcriptional fate of affected transcripts, yet it has been fairly sparsely investigated. Recently, several studies have analyzed data resulting from new high-throughput sequencing protocols, and some studies reported on differential preferences for APA usage in some genes from one tissue to another (). However, without a suitable methodology to specify the significance of these events, we may confuse alternative with specifically regulated polyadenylation. Using a high-throughput sequencing method particularly designed to probe the mRNA 3 0-end, PA-Seq, we were able to accurately identify polyA sites with high resolution. PA-Seq data from brain, liver and kidney were collected and constitutive genes were separated from those having more than one APA isoform. Given the large variability of tag counts across genes and coverage across libraries, simple tag number thresholds or ratios, or information theoretic metrics such as Shannon entropy, are not a well-suited methodology for deep sequencing data. They drastically inflate the number of putative alternative sites, and cannot separate spurious events with little sequence evidence from truly significant ones. We therefore designed a suitable statistical framework to identify tissue-specific events such as APA sites across multiple deep sequencing libraries. Using a fixed-effects linear model and permutation tests, we were able to assign significance levels to APA usage and identify tissue-specific regulated events. Our stringent test left us with a highly specific and suitable dataset to investigate the regulation of alternative APA, but led to limited sample sizes. For example, the GFER mRNA showed two polyA sites with the distal site being used in brain only, similar to the findings in (). However, given its relatively lowread coverage, it did not meet our stringent specificity threshold. Replicate datasets will enable the use of other statistical tests, which will likely detect a larger subset as significantly different, and may thus help to identify additional regulatory elements that are not covered in our examples. This study is the first of its kind to analyze multiple APA sites for a transcript and across more than two conditions. We separated constitutive genes from genes with multiple APA sites, and examined each group separately. Our analysis demonstrated that the main cis-regulatory elements described to be responsible for polyadenylation, are a strongand in fact a highly informativehallmark for constitutive sites only. Studies have shown that 2030% of human genes do not have the canonical PAS signal and suggested that polyadenylation regulation is directed by non-canonical sequences (). Moreover, regulation by non-canonical sequences is more frequent in genes with APA (). In specifically regulated subsets, in particular brain APA sites, we were able to define a highly enriched motif (AAAAAAAAAA) starting just downstream of the PAS cluster (; application of MEME to the brain-specific subset confirmed its significance, resulting in an E-value of 1.8e-057). The canonical polyA signal was not observed in brain-specific clusters, and was found at lower conservation in liver and kidney. This agrees with an observation reported in (), where a polyA site did not possess the canonical polyA signal instead contained an A-rich element in its vicinity. An analysis of a different recent polyA deep sequencing dataset also showed a roughly 2-fold enrichment of the A-rich motif at brain sites, compared with liver and kidney, despite being generated by a different protocol and processed by a different pipeline (). Given that the motif is specifically observed in only one tissue within multiple datasets, it is unlikely to be an experimental artifact resulting from internal priming, but we cautiously point out that it may reflect a property of brain mRNAs unrelated to polyadenylation. Our methodology can be applied to data from additional libraries, such as the data generated from applying a highthroughput sequencing protocol on five mammals (). This will allow for the definition of specific subsets and aid in the identification of further candidates of regulatory sequence features. Combined with knowledge of regulatory factors affecting polyadenylation and their expression patterns, this will enable the design of models that can build on the encouraging tissue-specific results we have reported here.
CONCLUSIONIn summary, we have combined high-quality genome-wide data with appropriate downstream analyses and computational modeling. We have described a successful strategy to identify subsets of significant condition-specific polyA events, built sequencebased models to discriminate between them, and identified new candidates for post-transcriptional regulatory features.