With the ubiquitous generation of complete genome assemblies for a variety of species, efficient tools for whole-genome alignment along with user-friendly visualization are critically important. Our VISTA family of tools for comparative genomics, based on algorithms for pairwise and multiple alignments of genomic sequences and whole-genome assemblies, has become one of the standard techniques for comparative analysis. Most of the VISTA programs have been implemented as Web-accessible servers and are extensively used by the biomedical community. In this manuscript, we introduce GenomeVISTA: a novel implementation that incorporates most features of the VISTA family—fast and accurate alignment, visualization capabilities, GUI and analytical tools within a stand-alone software package. GenomeVISTA thus provides flexibility and security for users who need to conduct whole-genome comparisons on their own computers. Availability and implementation: Implemented in Perl, C/C++ and Java, the source code is freely available for download at the VISTA
INTRODUCTIONComparing genomic sequences across related species has become a source of invaluable data on the functional elements in various genomes (). There are a number of individual programs developed separately for genome alignment () and visualization of comparative information (), but few programs and Web servers integrate the two, giving researchers an opportunity to analyze results interactively. VISTA (), Dcode.org (), the PipMaker suite of tools () and Mauve (are some examples of such integration. VISTA online servers provide a wide range of services, which allow a user to align and compare sequences from multiple species up to 10 Mb long using different algorithms (), locate regulatory sequences using comparative sequence analysis and transcription factor binding site search (), compare user's sequences against whole-genome assemblies and browse pre-computed alignments of hundreds of microbial, fungal, plant, vertebrate, and other genomes. Comparative results can be examined through a highly interactive graphic user interface (GUI) featuring the visualization of the level of conservation in the format of a continuous VISTA curve based on the conservation in a sliding window. This concept proved to be extremely successful owing to the easy interpretation of the resulting plots. A novel stand-alone software GenomeVISTA integrates all well-established popular features of the VISTA family of tools () in one package, and provides users the opportunity to carry out comparative analysis of whole genomes on their own computers, allowing for more flexibility and security of computations. It runs an extensively tested and recently improved alignment algorithm (). Simultaneously, the built-in interactive GUI allows real-time examination of results of the comparative analysis. VISTA Point, a novel visualization program, is provided as a part of the GenomeVISTA package.