Comparative genomics remains a pivotal strategy to study the evolution of gene organization, and this primacy is reinforced by the growing number of full genome sequences available in public repositories. Despite this growth, bioinformatic tools available to visualize and compare genomes and to infer evolutionary events remain restricted to two or three genomes at a time, thus limiting the breadth and the nature of the question that can be investigated. Here we present Genomicus, a new synteny browser that can represent and compare
INTRODUCTIONFrom less than 20 fully sequenced metazoan genomes 4 years ago, nearly 80 species are now represented in a variety of centralized databases. This abundance of sequence data has reinforced the role of comparative genomics as the primary approach to gain insight in the organization of a genome. Comparing sequences from different species serves several purposes: (i) to outline conserved regions, a powerful guide to rapidly focus on functional regions; (ii) to document differences among these functional sequences as a first step to understand broader biological differences (metabolic, developmental, etc.) between organisms; and (iii) to identify evolutionary events that have interrupted the gene colinearity between the genomes of two species since their last common ancestor. To document and study the latter, the inference of ancestral gene orders starting from extant species provides important reference points; yet no visualization tool currently allows comparisons between an ancestral genome to one or more of its modern descendant. Existing software still limit the comparison to two or three extant genomes at a time, and are restricted to a limited range of species (; Derrien * To whom correspondence should be addressed). To address these issues, we have developed Genomicus, a browser dedicated to the study of synteny and the conservation of gene order among multiple genomes (currently 52 metazoan genomes and the yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae). Importantly, Genomicus also integrates reconstructed ancestral synteny blocks at 44 ancestral nodes.