Somatic internal tandem duplications (ITDs) are known to play important roles in cancer pathogenesis. Although recent advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies have enabled genome-wide detection of various types of genomic mutations, including single nucleotide variants, indels and structural variations, only a few studies have focused on ITDs. We have developed an analytical tool called Genomon ITDetector for genome-wide detection of som-atic ITDs. After evaluating the sensitivity and precision of the proposed approach using synthetic data, we have demonstrated that it can successfully detect not only common ITDs involving FLT3, but also a number of ITDs affecting other putative driver genes in acute myeloid leukemia exome sequencing data.
INTRODUCTIONRecent advances in high-throughput sequencing technologies have enabled genome-wide detection of various genomic alterations in cancer cells, and a number of analytical tools have been developed for detecting single nucleotide variants, short indels () and structural variations (SVs) from cancer genome sequencing data. On the other hand, it is widely known that an internal tandem duplication (ITD) that involves several tens to several hundreds of nucleotides represents a common type of somatic alteration that plays an important role in cancer pathogenesis through either activating or inactivating affected genes. In particular, ITDs involving FMS-like tyrosine kinase 3 (FLT3) are among the most frequent genetic lesions, and are found in 30% of patients with acute myeloid leukemia (AML), leading to aberrant activation of the kinase and negatively affecting survival (). However, despite their potential importance in cancer development, somatic ITDs have been poorly focused because most current approaches are not sensitive enough to identify indels of more than several tens of base pairs or SVs within small-scale regions (51000 bp), rendering ITDs as 'blind spots' for most existing analytical methods. In this article, we present a novel software application, Genomon ITDetector, which is specifically designed for performing sensitive and genome-wide detection of somatic ITDs spanning several tens to several hundreds of base pairs from cancer genome sequencing data.
DISCUSSIONThe effectiveness of Genomon ITDetector for detecting somatic ITDs was demonstrated using both synthetic and real data. Still, there are several remaining issues. First, the current approach cannot detect ITDs with more than two duplicates. One possible solution would be to check whether the OIN in the assembled contig sequence is double, triple or greater of the PDNs. Second, the proposed approach is for somatic ITD detection only, not germ line detection. For the detection of germ line ITDs, alignment artifacts and germ line ITDs must be effectively distinguished. For this filtering, use of multiple non-matched control samples may provide a solution; however, the data cannot be used directly in our current method, and this problem requires further investigation.