Mathematical modeling has a key role in systems biology. Model building is often regarded as an iterative loop involving several tasks, among which the estimation of unknown parameters of the model from a certain set of experimental data is of central importance. This problem of parameter estimation has many possible pitfalls, and modelers should be very careful to avoid them. Many of such difficulties arise from a fundamental (yet often overlooked) property: the so-called structural (or a priori) identifiability, which considers the uniqueness of the estimated parameters. Obviously, the structural identifiability of any tentative model should be checked at the beginning of the model building loop. However, checking this property for arbitrary non-linear dynamic models is not an easy task. Here we present a software toolbox, GenSSI (Generating Series for testing Structural Identifiability), which enables non-expert users to carry out such analysis. The toolbox runs under the popular MATLAB environment and is accompanied by detailed documentation and relevant examples. Availability: The GenSSI toolbox and the related documentation are available at
INTRODUCTIONMathematical modeling can be regarded as the central element in computational systems biology. The process of developing a model involves several tasks, among which the estimation of unknown parameters of the model from a certain set of experimental data is of key importance (). This problem of parameter estimation, also known as the inverse problem, has many possible pitfalls, and modelers should be very careful to avoid them. Many of such pitfalls arise from a fundamental (yet often overlooked) property of this inverse problem: the so-called structural (or a priori) identifiability (; Srinath and Gunawan, 2010;). Global identifiability considers the issue of uniquely estimating all the free parameters of a model from data (). If a model is non-identifiable, then the estimated parameters will lead, irrespective of the applied method, to artifacts in the model calibration and errors in subsequent model predictions. Thus, there is a fundamental need of reliable methods and tools
CONCLUSIONHere we present a software toolbox, GenSSI, which can be used to test the structural identifiability of arbitrary non-linear dynamical models of biological systems (i.e. described by sets of non-linear ordinary differential equations). In case of detection of nonidentifiability for a given model, this toolbox can also be used to determine which subsets parameters can be identified (or at least locally identified), therefore guiding in the reformulation of the model when needed. GenSSI is cross-platform (using the MATLAB computing environment, available in most operating systems) and is easy to use, not requiring high-level programming or advanced mathematical skills from users.