Motivation: G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are probably the most attractive drug target membrane proteins, which constitute nearly half of drug targets in the contemporary drug discovery industry. While the majority of drug discovery studies employ existing GPCR and ligand interactions to identify new compounds, there remains a shortage of specific databases with precisely annotated GPCR-ligand associations. Results: We have developed a new database, GLASS, which aims to provide a comprehensive, manually curated resource for experimentally validated GPCR-ligand associations. A new text-mining algorithm was proposed to collect GPCR-ligand interactions from the biomedical literature, which is then crosschecked with five primary pharmacological datasets, to enhance the coverage and accuracy of GPCR-ligand association data identifications. A special architecture has been designed to allow users for making homologous ligand search with flexible bioactivity parameters. The current database contains $500 000 unique entries, of which the vast majority stems from lig-and associations with rhodopsin-and secretin-like receptors. The GLASS database should find its most useful application in various in silico GPCR screening and functional annotation studies. Availability and implementation: The website of GLASS database is freely available at
IntroductionG protein-coupled receptors (GPCR) represent one of the largest families of transmembrane proteins that bind extracellular molecules and activate intracellular signal transduction pathways, which mediate many physiological functions through their interaction with heterotrimeric G proteins. Many human diseases, including cancer and diabetes, have been found to be associated with the malfunction of the biological roles of GPCRs (). Currently, $3050% of drugs on the market target GPCRs, making them one of the most attractive membrane receptors for drug development (). While experiment-based assays for novelchemical compounds remain the standard procedure for drug discovery, in silico screening is gaining increasing acceptance as an important complementary method to narrow down the drug searching scope and to guide experimental design. Another advantage of the computational approach is due to its high speed and low cost, which enables high-throughput and large-scale database screening (). Both the experimental and computational drug discovery approaches rely on existing GPCR-ligand experimental data to provide insight for screening and selecting new drugs. A variety of GPCR-orientated databases, such as GPCRDB (), TinyGRAP (), GPCR-OKB (), GDD () and GPCR-RD (), have been developed, which generated important impacts on various molecule-level studies on the elucidation of GPCR structure and function. There are however very few databases that can provide comprehensive resources for GPCR-ligand interactions that are essential in assisting GPCR virtual screening studies (van). One difficulty in developing such databases is that the GPCRs can be associated with a large number of ligands in various binding affinities, and the GPCR-ligand association data in many chemical libraries are often mixed with various false-positives. A collection of GPCRligand associations with stringent experimental validations and careful human curation is essential to ensure the quality of the datasets. Second, with the success of the sequencing and structural genomics projects, the number of available GPCR and ligand interactions increase rapidly. But most of the new studies are scattered in a wide spread of publications and archives, which makes it difficult to keep the databases up to date. For example, GLIDA () was a useful GPCR-ligand binding database designed for chemical genomic drug discovery; but it has ceased updates to its server since October 2010. The current GLIDA library contains around 39 000 GPCR-ligand entries, whereas the amount of unique GPCR-ligand interactions available in the literature in our estimation is above 500 000 by the combination of the pharmacological database and literature search. The missing of such a substantial amount of new data significantly degrades the usefulness of the databases to the experimental and computational drug discovery studies. In this study, we have developed a new GPCR-ligand association (GLASS) database for use as a general platform in assisting GPCRrelated drug screening studies. Drawing from multiple primary data sources, GLASS focuses on a comprehensive and yet precise collection of the experimentally validated GPCR-ligand interactions with strong affinities. To ensure the completeness of the database and to keep it up to date, we incorporate a newly developed text-mining pipeline to search through PubMed literature to discover new GPCR-ligand interactions, which are then crosschecked with the primary pharmacological datasets to ensure the quality of data collection. All the GPCR-ligand association data are manually curated and made freely available to the community.