The open access comprehensive GlycoCD database application is for representation and retrieval of carbohydrate-related clusters of differentiation (CDs). The main objective of this database platform is to provide information about interactions of carbohydrate moieties with proteins that are important for identification of specific cell surface molecule with a focus on the integration of data from carbohydrate microarray databases. GlycoCD database comprises two sections: the carbohydrate recognition CD and glycan CD. It allows easy access through a user-friendly web interface to all carbohydrate-defined CDs and those that interact with carbohydrates along with other relevant information. Availability: The database is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONThe clusters of differentiation (CD) antigens are cell surfaceexpressed antigens defined by monoclonal antibodies. The great value of the CD nomenclature, validated and approved as part of the International Union of Immunological Societies nomenclature (), is to provide a unified system of classified antigens useful both for biomedical research and clinical practice. The CD antibodies have been categorized during the past 28 years in Human Leucocyte Differentiation Antigens (HLDA) workshops (). The CD antigens are expressed on human hematopoietic cells (T and B lymphocytes, natural killer cells, myeloid cells, erythrocytes and platelets), specific types of endothelial and epithelial cells. The information for CD antigens expands from cellular and tissue expression to biochemical structure, genetic background and to its functional impact in a given cellular environment. The interactions of the immune system are mediated by cell surface glycoproteins and glycolipids (). Most of the CD antibodies recognize the protein moiety of surface, membrane integral macromolecules, but some of them detect oligosaccharide structures that are linked to either glycoproteins or glycosphingolipids. During the HLDA conference 2000, a separate workshop on carbohydrate and lectin CDs was established considering the increasing interest and advance in research in unraveling cellular proteinglycan interactions (). The objective was to initiate a more comprehensive compilation of monoclonal antibody-defined carbohydrate structures and lectins differentially expressed on human leucocytes and to provide an appropriate classification within the CD nomenclature. Some carbohydrate CD antibodies were re-organized into subgroups of CDs because of their reactivity with variations of certain oligosaccharide structures. For example, CD15 (blood group Lewis x, Le x ) received additional subgroups of CD15s (sialyl Lewis x), CD15u (3sulfo Lewis x) and CD15su (6 sulfo-sialyl Lewis x). CD60 was subdivided into CD60a (the oligosaccharide structure of the disialo-ganglioside GD3 and related glycans), CD60b (9-O-acetylated sialic acid GD3) and CD60c (7-O-acetylated sialic acid GD3). CD75 comprises lactosaminyl sequences into CD75 (non-sialylated lactosamines) and CD75s (sialylated lactosamines) (). The oligosaccharides of the CD75s subgroup have a different functional impact as modulators of adhesion to certain lectins such as Siglecs (). Due to the high complexity of oligosaccharide structures, antibodies of a particular carbohydrate CD may bind to variations of the same oligosaccharide type and consequently display different cellular staining patterns. For instance, this may be due to variations in the linkage of the terminal sialic acid (2-6 versus 2-3), to oligosaccharide chains which extend the glycan epitope (glycotope) recognized by the respective antibody or by varying expression of the glycotope on different glycosphingolipids and/or glycoproteins on a specific cell type. In general, most carbohydrate CDs define histo-blood group antigens, which are characterized either by their different fucosylation or sialylation. This GlycoCD database now endeavours to provide in-depth information about glycan CD antigens and those CD-defined surface receptors (lectins), which bind to glycan structures.