We present a novel Golgi-prediction server, GolgiP, for computational prediction of both membrane-and non-membrane-associated Golgi-resident proteins in plants. We have employed a support vector machine-based classification method for the prediction of such Golgi proteins, based on three types of information, dipeptide composition, transmembrane domain(s) (TMDs) and functional domain(s) of a protein, where the functional domain information is generated through searching against the Conserved Domains Database, and the TMD information includes the number of TMDs, the length of TMD and the number of TMDs at the N-terminus of a protein. Using GolgiP, we have made genome-scale predictions of Golgi-resident proteins in 18 plant genomes, and have made the preliminary analysis of the predicted data. Availability: The GolgiP web service is publically available at
INTRODUCTIONThe Golgi apparatus is an essential cellular organelle found in most, if not all, eukaryotic cells, serving as an intermediate station of the secretory pathway that transports proteins out of a cell. Besides, Golgi is also a major site for protein post-translational modifications (e.g. glycosylation;) and synthesis of various polysaccharides. The plant cell walls are mainly comprised of lignins, glycosylated proteins and polysaccharides, most of which are synthesized in Golgi (). Identification of the Golgi-resident proteins represents a very challenging and a highly important problem for the understanding of the biological processes taking place in Golgi. Although there are 1183 mouse and human Golgi-resident proteins identified (), only a little over 400 plant Golgi proteins have been experimentally identified. A key challenging issue is that plant Golgi proteins do not seem to have obvious targeting signals as proteins targeted at other cellular compartments, such as nucleus or extra-cellular space. Most of the existing computational tools for subcellular localization predictions are designed for the general subcellular localization prediction, and their predictions for Golgiresident proteins are less than adequate (). Only one program has been specifically designed for the prediction * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of Golgi-localized proteins but it focuses only on transmembrane Golgi proteins (). The issue is that only 25% of Golgi proteins of Arabidopsis thaliana are estimated to contain transmembrane regions (), indicating the inadequacy of the current programs. Based on this consideration, we have designed a support vector machine (SVM)-based classifier, called GolgiP, to predict both Golgi-localized transmembrane proteins and non-transmembrane proteins. GolgiP currently provides multiple models for predicting plant Golgi proteins, based on the specific needs of a user.The performances are sorted by MCC.