We present GOssTo, the Gene Ontology semantic similarity Tool, a user-friendly software system for calculating semantic similarities between gene products according to the Gene Ontology. GOssTo is bundled with six semantic similarity measures, including both term-and graph-based measures, and has extension capabilities to allow the user to add new similarities. Importantly, for any measure, GOssTo can also calculate the Random Walk Contribution that has been shown to greatly improve the accuracy of similarity measures. GOssTo is very fast, easy to use, and it allows the calculation of similarities on a genomic scale in a few minutes on a regular desktop machine. Contact: alberto@cs.rhul.ac.uk Availability: GOssTo is available both as a stand-alone application running on GNU/Linux, Windows and MacOS from www.paccanaro-lab.org/gossto and as a web application from www.paccanarolab.org/ gosstoweb. The stand-alone application features a simple and concise command line interface for easy integration into high-throughput data processing pipelines.
INTRODUCTIONSemantic similarity measures have become important in bioinformatics as they provide a way of quantifying the functional relatedness between genes that is complementary to both experimental information and sequence-based approaches. This is done by annotating genes to the terms of a chosen ontology and then quantifying the similarity between these terms. Among the ontologies, the Gene Ontology (GO) () has become a standard and is the focus of this work. Several semantic similarity measures have been proposed. For example, those by, Jiang and Conrath (1997) and Lin (1998) are based on the information content of the lowest common ancestor of pairs of terms, and are often referred to as 'term-based'; simUI and simGIC () and GraSM () compare sets of terms rather than single terms using graph comparison approaches and are often referred to as 'graph-based'. An important recent development has been the introduction of the Random Walk Contribution which greatly improves semantic similarity measures (). In their paper, the authors argued that existing measures have two important deficiencies: first, they do not take into account the descendants of the terms; second, they do not model the inherent uncertainty in the current annotations and ontology structure. The Random Walk Contribution is a kind of 'add on' for existing similarity measures that enhances them to correct these two issues. Few software tools have been proposed for calculating semantic similarities, including ProteinOn () IT-GOM () and G-SESAME (). However, none of them can combine the Random Walk Contribution proposed by. Moreover, tools provided as stand-alone applications are not readily extendable with new semantic similarity measures, or are available only as packages running within environments such as R or MATLAB. Other tools are exclusively available online and their use is impractical for high-throughput analysis on large bodies of data. Most tools do not allow for a straightforward calculation of semantic similarities for a whole genome, or an easy updating of the GO annotations. In this article, we present GOssTo (Gene Ontology semantic similarity Tool), a new tool for calculating semantic similarities that overcomes all of the above limitations. GOssTo includes the Random Walk Contribution byand it supports both term-and graph-based similarity measures. GOssTo is available in downloadable binary form, with the entire source code released under GPLv3. GOssTo is easy to use and very fastTable 1 shows the time required for calculating the Resnik semantic similarity including the Random Walk Contribution for a few model organisms. GOssTo features a simple and concise command line interface and an application programming interface (API) for easy integration into highthroughput data-processing pipelines. GOssTo's design allows for user provided similarity measures to be independently *To whom correspondence should be addressed.