Motivation: Clustering according to sequence–structure similarity has now become a generally accepted scheme for ncRNA annotation. Its application to complete genomic sequences as well as whole transcriptomes is therefore desirable but hindered by extremely high computational costs. Results: We present a novel linear-time, alignment-free method for comparing and clustering RNAs according to sequence and structure. The approach scales to datasets of hundreds of thousands of sequences. The quality of the retrieved clusters has been benchmarked against known ncRNA datasets and is comparable to state-of-the-art sequence–structure methods although achieving speedups of several orders of magnitude. A selection of applications aiming at the detection of novel structural ncRNAs are presented. Exemplarily, we predicted local structural elements specific to lincRNAs likely functionally associating involved transcripts to vital processes of the human nervous system. In total, we predicted 349 local structural RNA elements.
INTRODUCTIONIn recent years, tiling arrays and high-throughput sequencing have strikingly driven the discovery of novel transcripts, of which an outstanding amount is not translated into proteins (ENCODE Project). These non-protein coding RNAs (ncRNAs) have moved to a key research in molecular biology, fundamentally challenging established paradigms and rapidly transforming our perception of genome complexity. There is mounting evidence that the eukaryotic genome is pervasively transcribed () and that ncRNAs function at various levels regulating gene expression and cell biology (). Recent advances in the computational de-novo prediction of ncRNAs enabling genome-wide analysis have uncovered a wealth of signals for potentially novel ncRNAs in genomic sequences from basically all kingdoms of life. Examples include metazoans with thousands of predicted ncRNA signals in human, fish or insects (). Consequently, the prediction, comparison and (functional) annotation of ncRNAs are major tasks of current RNA research. Annotation of ncRNAs, however, is still not part of generic annotation pipelines of genome or next-generation sequencing data and precise functional annotations of the majority of predictions remain elusive. One of the major reasons for the multitude of unannotated ncRNAs is that in contrast to protein-coding genes, ncRNAs belong to a diverse array of classes with vastly different structures, functions, and evolutionary patterns (). Albeit their heterogeneity, ncRNAs can be divided into RNA families according to inherent functional, structural, or compositional similarities. Today, the Rfam 10.1 database already lists 1973 different RNA families (). In contrast to RNA families, an RNA class groups together ncRNAs whose members have no discernible homology at the sequence level, but still share common structural and functional properties. Prominent examples are the two distinct classes of snoRNAs (box H/ACA and box C/D) and micro RNAs (miRNAs). Since an RNA-class consists of RNA with similar structure and function, clustering according to sequencestructure similarity has now become a generally accepted scheme for ncRNAs annotation. The quality and complexity of the clusters are however, largely determined by the pairwise sequence comparison method. The most generic methods, as introduced with LocARNA () and FoldAlign (), use derivates of the full Sankoff algorithm () of simultaneous alignment and folding. They suffer, however, from a very high computational complexity (at least O(n 4 ) in time) and are thus limited to relative small sequence sets. As poignantly stated by: 'Even using substantially more sophisticated techniques, genome-scale ncRNA analyses often consume tens to hundreds of computer years. These high computational costs are one reason why ncRNA gene finding is still in its infancy.' For this reason, many approaches use different heuristics to achieve a reasonable trade-off between time and quality. Oversimplifying and without completeness, given the variety of approaches present in literature, one can distinguish two main classes of clustering approaches. The first class uses simplifications in the representation of structures.use comparison tools that consider single-predicted structures such as RNAforester () or MARNA (). These comparison approaches heavily depend on the correctness of the structure, although computational prediction of secondary structures are known to be error prone. Other approaches such asuse simplified structural models. To some extend, the work bycan also be listed under this class as they use an approximate measure between two structural RNAs' SCFG models for clustering hits found by EvoFold ().
DISCUSSIONWe introduced for the first time an ultra-fast pipeline for large-scale comparison and clustering of RNAs according to sequence and structure, which is key to the functional annotation of ncRNAs. Strikingly, its core steps are alignment-free. As clearly indicated by the result, the approach is linear in time and thus scales to sets of hundreds of thousands of sequences. The largest dataset we considered in this study consists of 118 thousand sequences, and they can be clustered by the proposed pipeline on a single computer in 12.8 days. Furthermore, we have parallelized 5/9 phases of the pipeline: this allows to reduce the run-time for clustering the 3901 Rfam seed sequences from 36 to 3 h. When compared with the time required by an efficient pairwise sequencestructure alignment, namely LocARNA, we observe a 250-fold speedup. It indeed took us 370 days to perform the clustering based on this state-of-the-art complete all-against-all sequence/structure comparison. We have integrated the alignment-free clustering approach in a pipeline that uses LocARNA and Infernal to improve the initial clusters found by a neighborhood search. The latter, now allows us for the first time to compile RNA classes of ncRNA and determine associated consensus structures for large-scale datasets without resorting to alignment-based clustering. This is important as it is known that sequence alignments often fail at pairwise sequence identities below 60%. In addition, our pipeline exhibits an anytime characteristics, as we do not need to produce a complete hierarchical cluster tree, which is a computational bottleneck for large datasets. In contrast, we output as many best clusters as wanted by the user. The overall complexity of our pipeline is to a large extend determined by the number of reported clusters. We have evaluated the approach on several benchmark sets consisting of Rfam seed alignments, EvoFam families and known bacterial ncRNA. Here, we achieve a high overall clustering quality, even if the known RNA signal is embedded in flanking context. To further elucidate the capacity of our approach, we have also clustered datasets where no clustering approach has been applied so far. By processing the complete dataset to generate its density landscape, our method in particular enables us to likely detect previously missed structural classes. The screens of this pilot study only consisted of sequences from a single genome. Thus, we can cluster only RNA genes that are present in multiple copies within a genome. This implies that most i231