Profile-based similarity search is an essential step in structure-function studies of proteins. However, inclusion of non-homologous sequence segments into a profile causes its corruption and results in false positives. Profile corruption is common in multidomain proteins, and single domains with long insertions are a significant source of errors. We developed a procedure (HangOut) that, for a single domain with specified insertion position, cleans erroneously extended PSI-BLAST alignments to generate better profiles. Availability: HangOut is implemented in Python 2.3 and runs on all Unix-compatible platforms. The source code is available under the GNU GPL license at
INTRODUCTIONPSI-BLAST () is an indispensable tool for remote homology inference and structure-function predictions (). However, false positives in PSI-BLAST can cause errors in automated annotations (). One major source for such false positives is profile corruption, usually resulting from extension of alignments over non-homologous sequence regions (). For instance, for two 2-domain proteins, AB and A C, PSI-BLAST may extend a correct alignment of the homologous domains A and A to include sequences from the non-homologous domains B and C. Despite significant effort devoted to this multidomain problem, no satisfactory solution exists (;). Currently, the best approach is to start PSI-BLAST with precisely defined query sequence bounds (). However, we found that even a single, well-defined domain does not guarantee a corruption-free profile. Domains hosting insertions, which represent close to 5% of domains in the structural classification of proteins (SCOP) 1.75 database (), may generate a corrupted PSI-BLAST profile due to incorrect alignment extension around the insertion position. Our analysis shows that the N-and C-terminal segments of the host domain * To whom correspondence should be addressed.are frequently aligned as separate PSI-BLAST high scoring pairs (HSPs), and the two HSPs overlap when mapped onto the query sequence. Each alignment can be divided into two segments: (i) correctly aligned and (ii) incorrectly aligned or extended (and Supplementary). These incorrectly aligned 'overhangs' are detected and removed by the HangOut program to clean the profile and prepare it for consequent remote homology searches with various tools, such as PSI-BLAST and HHsearch.