Motivation: The functional mechanisms underlying disease association remain unknown for Genome-wide Association Studies (GWAS) susceptibility variants located outside coding regions. Synthesis of effects from multiple surrounding functional variants has been suggested as an explanation of hard-to-interpret findings. We define filter criteria based on linkage disequilibrium measures and allele frequencies which reflect expected properties of synthesizing variant sets. For eligible candidate sets, we search for haplotype markers that are highly correlated with associated variants. Results: Via simulations we assess the performance of our approach and suggest parameter settings which guarantee 95% sensitivity at 20-fold reduced computational cost. We apply our method to 1000 Genomes data and confirmed Crohns Disease (CD) and Type 2 Diabetes (T2D) variants. A proportion of 36.9% allowed explanation by three-variant-haplotypes carrying at least two functional variants, as compared to 16.4% for random variants (P ¼ 1:72 Â 10 À8). Association could be explained by missense variants for MUC19, PER3 (CD) and HMG20A (T2D). In a CD GWAS— imputed using haplotype reference consortium data (64 976 haplotypes)—we could confirm the syntheses of MUC19 and PER3 and identified synthesis by missense variants for 6 further genes (ZGPAZ, GPR65, CLN3/NPIPB8, LOC102723878, rs2872507, GCKR). In all instances, the odds ratios of the synthesizing haplotypes were virtually identical to that of the index SNP. In summary, we demonstrate the potential of synthesis analysis to guide functional follow-up of GWAS findings. Availability and implementation: All methods are implemented in the C/C þþ toolkit GetSynth, available at http://sourceforge.net/projects/getsynth/.
IntroductionGenome-wide Association Studies (GWAS), see e.g.and, detected a multitude of genetic risk variants associated with complex diseases and phenotypes. For a great portion of these variants, the underlying biological mechanisms are still unknown. While in public databases the gene closest to the strongest association signal is provisionally listed as the susceptibility gene, other genes nearby might embody the true functional origin and cause the association signal via more or less complicated patterns of linkage disequilibrium (LD). As pointedthere is no guarantee that causal variants are in particular high LD with the top association signal (we will call the tag variant throughout this work). For instance, interaction between multiple variants may interfere with the ability to find either of them separately, but create a signal at a distantly linked marker ()., see also, suggested that an association of a common variant with a complex disease can be synthetically created by multiple rarer functional variants from a surrounding genomic region. In this case the rarer variants occur more often or exclusively on a haplotype branch carrying a specific allele of the tag variant, generating in this way the strongest association signal at this locus. This situation is depicted inof. The idea can be quantified by checking whether the LD measures between tag variant and candidate variants yield jD 0 j % 1, while R 2 need not be large (). Examples for such synthetic associations have been reported from GWAS () and sequencing studies (). A statistical method to test a given set of variants for synthetic association with a quantitative trait has been described by (). The concept of synthetic association has also given rise to some debate: some authors considered the ubiquity of synthetic associations to be unlikely (), while others discussed whether synthetic associations should have already been detected by linkage analysis () and whether a rare-only model is applicable to a lot of GWAS findings (). In addition, the expected properties of synthetic associations were empirically assessed via simulation studies (), with partially contradictory results. The authors ofstated that rarer variants that contribute to a synthetic association might be as far as 2.5 Megabases (Mb) away, whereas the authors ofreported that in 90% of their simulations at least one rare causal variant was already captured within a window of size 100 kilobases (kb). In any case, it can be stated that until now there is no complete understanding of which role synthetic associations actually play in the etiology of complex diseases, and how frequent the phenomenon of synthesis really is. In view of the lacking consensus, we started an empirical evaluation of the frequency of the phenomenon. Until now, no methods have been provided to systematically search for sets of variants that synthesize the association of a common variant. A major reason for this is the computational load. Already within a 6100 kb region surrounding a susceptibility locus, typically 2000 variants are to be expected. With n eligible variants in an identified trait-related susceptibility region, there are 2 n  1 variant sets to be investigated. Even when only sets with, for instance, up to 6 variants shall be tested for potential synthesis, 8:84  10 16 different sets have to be investigated. In view of the large number, an efficient search engine is prerequisite for the detection of synthetic associations. Identification of such variant sets is highly relevant for the follow-up of association signals that were produced by GWAS or next generation sequencing (NGS) association studies, in order to come closer disease relevant biological function ().