Motivation: By collecting multiple samples per subject, researchers can characterize intra-subject variation using physiologically relevant measurements such as gene expression profiling. This can yield important insights into fundamental biological questions ranging from cell type identity to tumour development. For each subject, the data measurements can be written as a matrix with the different subsamples (e.g. multiple tissues) indexing the columns and the genes indexing the rows. In this context, neither the genes nor the tissues are expected to be independent and straightforward application of traditional statistical methods that ignore this two-way dependence might lead to erroneous conclusions. Herein, we present a suite of tools embedded within the R/Bioconductor package HDTD for robustly estimating and performing hypothesis tests about the mean relationship and the covariance structure within the rows and columns. We illustrate the utility of HDTD by applying it to analyze data generated by the Genotype-Tissue Expression consortium. Availability and Implementation: The R package HDTD is part of Bioconductor. The source code and a comprehensive users guide are available at
IntroductionThe term 'transposable data' refers to data that are naturally written in a matrix whose dimensions correspond to two distinct features of interest, while the term 'high-dimensional' reflects the fact that the dimension of the subject-specific data matrix is larger than the number of subjects. High-dimensional transposable data can be found in genetics, e.g. when, for each subject, gene expression levels are measured in multiple tissues (), in different fragments of the same tumour () or in a welldefined spatial order (), in yeast expression studies (), in protein-signaling networks (), in eQTL analysis () and in other studies with EEG, fMRI and time-series data (cf.). To analyze robustly such datasets, we developed the R package HDTD (High-Dimensional Transposable Data). In multiple-tissue gene expression studies, the rows correspond to genes and the columns to tissues, and genes and tissues might to be correlated with each other. Ignoring a potential tissue-wise correlation could be misleading in determining the strength of the gene-wise correlation () and it may hinder the discovery of differentially expressed genes, since traditional ANOVA-type tests suffer from extremely low power and/or false positive findings (). The unique feature of HDTD is the implementation of sound statistical methods that account for and estimate both the tissue-and gene-wise correlation, thus facilitating reliable inference about the form of the mean gene expression levels and the functional relationship among genes and/or tissues.