Motivation: Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been widely used in discovering the association between genotypes and phenotypes. Human genome data contain valuable but highly sensitive information. Unprotected disclosure of such information might put individuals privacy at risk. It is important to protect human genome data. Exact logistic regression is a bias-reduction method based on a penalized likelihood to discover rare variants that are associated with disease susceptibility. We propose the HEALER framework to facilitate secure rare variants analysis with a small sample size. Results: We target at the algorithm design aiming at reducing the computational and storage costs to learn a homomorphic exact logistic regression model (i.e. evaluate P-values of coefficients), where the circuit depth is proportional to the logarithmic scale of data size. We evaluate the algorithm performance using rare Kawasaki Disease datasets. Availability and implementation: Download HEALER at http://research.ucsd-dbmi.org/HEALER/
IntroductionGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) () have largely focused on the common disease gene discovery, which often involves large sample sizes. In GWAS, many common variations [e.g. Single-Nucleotide Polymorphisms (SNPs) with frequencies  1%] have been studied to uncover the risk of complex genetic disorders. One controversy in GWAS is whether multiple rare variations (with frequencies much 1%) may also result in certain risk. These unknown associations might be very important, as they could reveal the biologic cause of diseases and provide useful suggestions for treatments (). For example,show that rare variants (e.g. protein-modifying rare risk alleles) play a clear role in Mendelian disorders. There is increasing interest in the rare variants studies () in GWAS. However, rare variations must have much higher effects (e.g. odds ratios) than that of common SNPs in order to be detected by ordinary GWAS methods (e.g. logistic regression) (). These variants may be too rare, such that there are not enough participants with these rare alleles that could be identified in a study. When variants are very rare (i.e. lacking of enough samples), ordinary tests [e.g. Wald-test () in GWAS fail to capture true significant alleles, as the asymptoticapproximation assumption might be no longer valid. For example, in a recent study () with unbalanced case-control population, (i.e. the number of case patients is about 10 times less than that of the control population), the ordinary method identified hundreds of significantly rare SNPs that is related to breast cancer. However, a later study (shows that most of these significant rare SNPs are false positive after applying exact logistic regression (). The exact logistic regression is more robust in computing P-values for rare variants analysis with limited sample size (). The studies of rare variants also raise significant privacy concerns of participants. Rare variants can be highly unique to the specific population, which makes them more vulnerable to re-identification attacks. As discussed in a previous study,show that an individual can be uniquely identified by using as few as 75 independent SNPs. Recent studies () demonstrated that even anonymized genome data can leak signification personal information (e.g. name) of the participants. Moreover, even aggregated genome information (e.g. test statistics) can be used to recover sensitive personal information (). As genome data are vulnerable to various attacks (), it is imperative to develop protection methods to secure genome analysis. A number of technical solutions () have been proposed to protect genome privacy in data analysis. Existing studies can be categorized into two groups: (i) protecting the computation process () in genome data analysis, and (ii) protecting the genome data before computation () or research outcomes after computation (). In this work, we focus on the protection of the computation process of rare variants analysis in GWAS. In particular, we consider the use of homomorphic encryption techniques in designing secure protocols to learn an exact logistic regression model from encrypted data, which allow researchers to securely outsource the storage and computation of sensitive data (e.g. to commercial cloud computing services like Microsoft Azure or Amazon EC2). The development of homomorphic encryption-based methods to support secure genome data computation has been studied in (), where certain computation can be directly carried out over homomorphic-encrypted data. The resulting encrypted outcomes, when decrypted, match the result of the same operations performed on the plaintext. However, none of the aforementioned studies has addressed the problem of rare variants analysis in GWAS. In addition,recently proposed to tackle the secure rare-variants analysis using multi-party computation techniques. Their approach assumes multiple data owners and active participation of the owners in data storage and computation, which is completely different to our model as illustrated below.illustrates the application scenario of the proposed HEALER framework. Homomorphic encryption allows the encrypted rare disease variants to be stored and computed in a cloud server without requiring the participation of data owners, e.g. request for decryption keys. By encrypting rare variants with public key, data owners can directly upload them to the cloud service. Thus, the genetic association of rare disease variants with a phenotype can be securely evaluated with homomorphic computation over different cohorts. The final encrypted evaluation results are accessible to researchers, but it requires the private key for decryption from the trusted party. Remarkably, there is no interaction between the trusted party and the cloud service, which guarantees the confidentiality of uploaded sensitive information. Therefore, the proposed scheme enables secure outsourcing of the computation of rare disease variants to commercial cloud services, by which individuals could contribute to the rare disease analysis in GWAS in a secure manner protected by the homomorphic encryption schemes. To enable HEALER framework, we developed novel methods including: (i) secure rejection sampling and (ii) secure and efficient integer comparison to compute a homomorphic exact logistic regression model, (iii) parallel computation over homomorphicencrypted data to accelerate the proposed algorithm, (iv) a compression scheme to reduce the storage cost of homomorphic-encrypted data. We also compared the HEALER framework with other competing alternatives and conducted performance analysis of the proposed protocols in this article and the supplementary, including the acceptance rate of rejection sampling, circuit depth, and number of homomorphic operations. The rest of this article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we will introduce the exact logistic regression method and presents the implementation of homomorphic computation of exact logistic regression. Section 3 reports experimental results and Section 4 provides the discussion of the article. Section 5 concludes this article.
ConclusionThis article presented a novel HEALER framework for estimating the P-value of exact logistic regression parameters over homomorphic-encrypted data. Our algorithm supports secure outsourcing and mitigates the risk of analyzing sensitive data in an untrusted cloud environment (e.g. Amazon EC2 or Microsoft Azure). We proposed a new rejection sampling approach, secure integer comparison methods and parallelizable mechanisms to accelerate the execution of these algorithms, which make the computation of homomorphic encrypted exact logistic regression practical. We also employed a compression scheme to reduce the storage and communication cost of homomorphic-encrypted data. We demonstrated the computational feasibility of our proposed framework, which takes about 3 min to compute over 30 records in parallel.