Motivation: Herpesviruses are large DNA viruses causing a variety of diseases in humans and animals. To develop effective treatment, it is important to understand the mechanisms of their replication. One of the components of the herpesviral DNA replication system is a heli-case–primase complex, consisting of UL5 (helicase), UL52 (primase) and UL8. UL8 is an essential herpesviral protein involved in multiple protein–protein interactions. Intriguingly, so far no UL8 homologs outside of herpesviruses could be identified. Moreover, nothing is known about its structure or domain organization. Results: Here, combining sensitive homology detection methods and homology modeling, we found that the UL8 protein family is related to B-family polymerases. In the course of evolution, UL8 has lost the active site and has undergone a reduction of DNA-binding motifs. The loss of active site residues explains the failure to detect any catalytic activity of UL8. A structural model of human herpes virus 1 UL8 constructed as part of the study is consistent with the mutation data targeting its interaction with primase UL52. It also provides a platform for studying multiple interactions that UL8 is involved in. The two other components of helicase–primase complex show evolutionary links with a newly characterized human primase that also has DNA poly-merase activity (PrimPol) and the Pif1 helicase, respectively. The role of these enzymes in recovering stalled replication forks suggests mechanistic and functional similarities with herpesviral proteins.
INTRODUCTIONHerpesviruses are a large group of double-stranded (ds) DNA viruses responsible for a variety of human and animal diseases. Therefore, understanding herpesviral DNA replication is of great importance for the development of effective drugs. In addition, many herpesviral DNA replication proteins have functional counterparts in eukaryotes, thereby providing important insights into eukaryotic DNA replication mechanisms. Human herpesvirus 1 (HHV-1) has seven proteins essential for DNA replication. These include origin-binding protein UL9, DNA polymerase UL30 and its processivity factor UL42, single-stranded DNA binding (SSB) protein ICP8 (UL29) and the tripartite helicaseprimase complex consisting of UL5, UL52 and UL8. UL5 is a superfamily I DNA helicase () related to yeast Pif1 and bacterial RecD (). UL52 is a primase belonging to the superfamily of archaeo-eukaryotic primases (). UL8 does not have any known catalytic activity (). It appears to be important for the nuclear import of UL5 and UL52 and is known to interact not only with the UL5UL52 subcomplex, but also with UL30, ICP8 and UL9 (). Surprisingly, despite the essential role of UL8 in DNA replication, so far nothing is known about its structure and domain organization. Moreover, there are no known homologs of UL8 outside the herpesviruses (). Using a combination of sensitive homology detection methods and protein structure modeling, we explored the UL8 family and found that the C-terminal half of UL8 is related to B-family polymerases. This finding came as a surprise, because UL8 is devoid of catalytic activity. Our subsequent sequence and structure analysis revealed that UL8 has lost motifs important for the polymerase catalytic activity and has undergone a reduction of DNA-binding motifs. To see whether UL5UL52UL8 helicase primase is evolutionary conserved in herpesviruses, we further explored each of the three components. As a result, we identified 'missing' UL5 helicases in the family Malacoherpesviridae, thereby providing further support for the evolutionary conservation of the helicaseprimase complex. Interestingly, interactions related to those within the helicaseprimase complex have also been observed in eukaryotes.
DISCUSSIONOur finding that UL8 is a homolog of B-family polymerases and that it has lost the active site explains why no catalytic activity of UL8 could be found. What could be the evolutionary origin of UL8? One possibility is that UL8 originated from the duplication of herpesviral DNA polymerase, UL30. Alternatively, UL8 could be derived from some ancestral form of a B-family polymerase. However, the sequence similarity with B-family polymerases is low, precluding a straightforward answer to this question. The analysis of homologs of UL52 and UL5, the other two subunits of helicaseprimase complex, showed that their links to eukaryotic enzymes are even clearer. Thus, all three components of helicaseprimase complex have mechanistic and perhaps functional similarities with the corresponding eukaryotic proteins. For example, UL8, an inactive polymerase, may be compared with the C-terminal region of Pol", which corresponds to an inactivated exonuclease-polymerase module serving as a protein-binding platform (). UL5 has recently been found to interact with the polymerase UL30 (), whereas yeast Pif1 interacts with Pol (). UL52UL5 forms subassembly as part of helicase primase complex. An interesting question is whether their eukaryotic homologs interact or at least cooperate in certain conditions. Although the direct evidence is lacking, there are some hints that they might. For example, PrimPol and Pif1 both help to bypass difficult-to-replicate sites (). The observation of the correlated expansion of the PrimPol-like and Pif1 protein families in trypanosomes is another hint that they might be linked functionally if not physically. At least two pairs of trypanosomal PrimPol and Pif1 homologs participate in the same processes. Thus, TbPRI1 and TbPIF2 function in replication of DNA maxicircles while TbPRI2 and TbPIF1 are involved in replication and segregation of minicircles (). Obviously, differences between the herpesviral and the eukaryotic counterparts are to be expected. However, the consideration of similarities may provide help in advancing the knowledge in both systems.