Motivation: With complex traits and diseases having potential genetic contributions of thousands of genetic factors, and with current genotyping arrays consisting of millions of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), powerful high-dimensional statistical techniques are needed to comprehensively model the genetic variance. Machine learning techniques have many advantages including lack of parametric assumptions, and high power and flexibility. Results: We have applied three machine learning approaches: Random Forest Regression (RFR), Boosted Regression Tree (BRT) and Support Vector Regression (SVR) to the prediction of warfarin maintenance dose in a cohort of African Americans. We have developed a multi-step approach that selects SNPs, builds prediction models with different subsets of selected SNPs along with known associated genetic and environmental variables and tests the discovered models in a cross-validation framework. Preliminary results indicate that our modeling approach gives much higher accuracy than previous models for warfarin dose prediction. A model size of 200 SNPs (in addition to the known genetic and environmental variables) gives the best accuracy. The R 2 between the predicted and actual square root of warfarin dose in this model was on average 66.4% for RFR, 57.8% for SVR and 56.9% for BRT. Thus RFR had the best accuracy, but all three techniques achieved better performance than the current published R 2 of 43% in a sample of mixed ethnicity, and 27% in an African American sample. In summary, machine learning approaches for high-dimensional pharmacogenetic prediction, and for prediction of clinical continuous traits of interest, hold great promise and warrant further research.
INTRODUCTION
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we have demonstrated a practical approach for applying three commonly used machine learning techniques for continuous data, RFR, SVR and BRT, to create highly accurate predictive models using genome-wide genotype data and clinical variables. In an application to prediction of warfarin doseresponse in African Americans, all three methods tested, RFR, SVR and BRT, achieved better performance than currently published reports (IWPC), although the highest accuracy was achieved with RFR. This may be due to the robustness of RFR to overfitting in performing bootstrapping over thousands of trees. The results of this study indicate that even with a phenotype like warfarin maintenance dose that has many validated associated genetic variants of large effect, it is still important to include a large number of genotypic variables in a predictive model to capture the most genetic variance. Our results are consistent with the findings in () that show that including only those SNPs found to have genome-wide significance in GWAS studies results in poorer predictive performance, and that much better performance is obtained with larger models. In considering which machine learning method to apply to GWAS-based predictive modeling of a continous trait, therePage: 1388 13841389