We implemented a high-throughput identification pipeline for promoter interacting en-hancer element to streamline the workflow from mapping raw Hi-C reads, identifying DNA–DNA interacting fragments with high confidence and quality control, detecting histone modifications and DNase hypersensitive enrichments in putative enhancer elements, to ultimately extracting possible intra-and inter-chromosomal enhancer–target gene relationships. Availability and implementation: This software package is designed to run on high-performance computing clusters with Oracle Grid Engine. The source code is freely available under the MIT license for academic and nonprofit use. The source code and instructions are available at the Wang lab website (http://wanglab.pcbi.upenn.edu/hippie/). It is also provided as an Amazon Machine Image to be used directly on Amazon Cloud with minimal installation. Contact:
IntroductionGenome-wide chromosome conformation capture (Hi-C) has been utilized to reveal three-dimensional connectivity of chromatin regions in eukaryotic nuclei (). Because of its capability to capture all possible chromatin interactions in a genome, it has been recently employed to observe long-range regulatory elements with their geographically proximal target gene promoters (). Although there have been workflows successfully expediting the analysis of one-dimensional highthroughput sequencing results such as whole-exome sequencing, ChIP-seq, DNase-seq and RNA-seq, there are limited tools to untangle two-dimensional DNADNA physical interactions using Hi-C datasets. In an effort to reduce the obstacle of processing these largescale datasets and to establish an analysis protocol to detect candidate long-range regulatory elements, we implemented an automated workflow that processes Hi-C results starting from read mapping with quality controls and corrects for biases in interactions based on the linear distance, mappability, GC content and fragment lengths of each pair of Hi-C reads. This pipeline identifies candidate promoterinteracting enhancer elements by integrating Hi-C results with epigenomics data such as histone modifications and DNase hypersensitivity sites.