Motivation: T-cell epitopes serve as molecular keys to initiate adaptive immune responses. Identification of T-cell epitopes is also a key step in rational vaccine design. Most available methods are driven by informatics and are critically dependent on experimentally obtained training data. Analysis of a training set from Immune Epitope Database (IEDB) for several alleles indicates that the sampling of the peptide space is extremely sparse covering a tiny fraction of the possible non-amer space, and also heavily skewed, thus restricting the range of epitope prediction. Results: We present a new epitope prediction method that has four distinct computational modules: (i) structural modelling, estimating statistical pair-potentials and constraint derivation, (ii) implicit modelling and interaction profiling, (iii) feature representation and binding affinity prediction and (iv) use of graphical models to extract peptide sequence signatures to predict epitopes for HLA class I alleles. Conclusions: HLaffy is a novel and efficient epitope prediction method that predicts epitopes for any Class-1 HLA allele, by estimating the binding strengths of peptide-HLA complexes which is achieved through learning pair-potentials important for peptide binding. It relies on the strength of the mechanistic understanding of peptide-HLA recognition and provides an estimate of the total ligand space for each allele. The performance of HLaffy is seen to be superior to the currently available methods. Availability and implementation: The method is made accessible through a webserver http://pro line.biochem.iisc.ernet.in/HLaffy.
IntroductionRecognition of short peptides by HLA molecules is a fundamental requirement for triggering T-cell responses. HLA genes are highly polymorphic forming hundreds of different alleles (). The alleles understandably have a common scaffold and exhibit variations in their peptide binding pockets () so that each allele preferentially binds a distinct subset of peptides. In an individual, cells expressing up to six different alleles are present, each capable of recognizing a large number of peptides. Such multi-specificity enables them to recognize a wide array of). The number of possible nonameric peptides that are theoretically possible is as high as 512 billion. Experimental identification of such a large repertoire of epitopes for each allele is virtually impossible, making it important to have reliable and accurate methods for predicting epitopes for different alleles. The need for powerful methods to predict potential epitopes has become even more important as hundreds of bacterial and viral genomes have been sequenced, increasing the need for understanding their antigenicity profiles. A number of methods have been developed for predicting T cell epitopes over the last two decades (). They can be broadly divided into four classes, as methods based on: (i) sequence motif detection, (ii) empirical scoring matrices and profiles implicitly encoding more complex sequence patterns, (iii) machine learning algorithms applied to experimentally determined data and (iv) structure-based methods. The motif methods are the first to be developed among all the prediction methods and are based on the identification of preferred amino acid residues at different positions. Some positions which were identified as heavily contributing to recognition were termed 'anchor residues' in the nonameric peptides (). The motifs or patterns describing the positions of the anchors and the residue preferences were derived for different alleles (). Anchor motifs have been used to search for antigenic regions in sequences of infectious viruses, bacteria and parasites. The amino acid preferences in these motifs however turn out to be an insufficient criteria for recognition, leading to prediction accuracies of only about 70%. Although anchor residues contribute significantly to the HLA-peptide binding, large scale analysis of experimental data have shown that other residue positions on binder peptides contribute equally in stabilizing the peptide-HLA complex. Consequently new scoring matrices were derived by analyzing experimentally measured binding affinities for hundreds of different peptides to each allele (). However, these methods assume that the contribution of different residues were independent of each other and most models were additive in nature. Data-driven methods were developed to utilize available largescale experimental data. One such approach is regression analysis that estimates the response function, which in this case is binding affinity, from a given set of data and response variables, generally using a polynomial function. Regression analysis based methods were used to obtain quantitative prediction in terms of half lives of dissociation of b-microglobulin from the HLA complex. Other machine learning () and QSAR approaches () that have been attempted include artificial neural networks and hidden Markov models that correlate measurable properties of different peptides with their binding potential. Approaches that use explicit structural information in general are believed to provide detailed insights into the process of peptide recognition, thereby resulting in more accurate predictions. However, progress in this direction has been very slow, primarily because structural modelling is a computationally intensive process, rendering it feasible only on a small scale (). More recently, a method based on molecular dynamics simulations and estimation of free energy of binding between peptide and HLA molecules has been attempted (). The applicability of this method is seen to be limited due to the amount of time each simulation requires. Methods that indirectly capture structural information have also been used, which show reasonable prediction accuracies (). This work introduces a new method HLaffy, for prediction of peptide HLA binding affinity. The method stands on the strength of a mechanistic model of peptide-HLA recognition. Distinct advantages of this method are: (i) it uses structural information explicitly, (ii) it samples the naturally occurring peptide space in bacteria and viruses systematically and hence is not restricted by available experimental data, (iii) it assigns weights to different interactions and through that, it identifies important pair potentials and (iv) it uses a graphical model to represent the epitope pool efficiently. The method is implemented on a webserver, made accessible at http://pro line.biochem.iisc.ernet.in/HLaffy/.
ConclusionIn this study, we present a new method HLaffy, for predicting peptide ligands for HLA class-1 molecules, based on a multi-moduleHLaffy: peptide HLA affinity predictionworkflow. HLaffy first obtains a mechanistic understanding of the recognition specificity and is capable of explaining experimentally observed binding affinities for a large dataset of peptides. It then identifies the highest contributing pair potentials and learns crossresidue influences through graphical models. The implicit structural modelling is a new contribution towards understanding peptide recognition by HLA molecules and estimating their binding strengths. This leads to a phenomenal increase in coverage of the peptide space. Another novel aspect of this study is to obtain a high correlation of observed IC 50 values with interactions, which has been possible because of weighting different interactions and estimating their relative contributions through feature representation. A high correlation implies that the IC 50 values can be rationalized from the structures of peptide-HLA complexes. Sequence logos used widely in literature as a representation of the sequence patterns of epitopes is an elegant method to identify individual residue preferences but are not directly useful for identifying inter-residue dependencies. Besides these, another contribution from the study is a novel design strategy for constructing a representative peptide library. The graphical model used in this study is capable of capturing such dependencies systematically. HLaffy with its ability to sample the peptide space more comprehensively opens up new possibilities to explore the repertoire of epitopes that can be recognized by a given allele, providing estimates of the total epitope pool sizes for each allele. The importance of predicting epitopes for HLA molecules is well recognized in the field since it can be applied in diverse areas such as vaccine discovery, understanding disease susceptibilities, autoimmune disorders and in estimating success of organ transplants.