Motivation: A large fraction of eukaryotic proteins contain unstructured tails or linkers. The presence of flexible regions allows these systems to experience a high level of mobility facilitating their biological function. The complex nature of protein rotation in such flexible modular systems precludes a straightforward application of hydrodynamic methods to calculate their rotational mo-tional properties. We describe the workflow of HYdrodynamic CoUpling of Domains (HYCUD), a program for prediction of effective rotational correlation times in multidomain proteins. The usage of HYCUD is demonstrated by its application to the ribosomal protein L7/L12. Rotational correlation times predicted by HYCUD might be used to detect molecular switch events mediated by disorder–-order transitions in interdomain linkers. Availability and implementation: The source code and documentation are available at www. mpibpc.mpg.de/106144/software.
IntroductionThe function of biological macromolecules depends on their internal mobility supported by the presence of intrinsically disordered regions (). Reorientational motion of biomolecules can be followed through a variety of experimental techniques (). However, for slowly tumbling systems, the use of these experimental techniques is limited. On the other hand, theoretical prediction of rotational motional behavior through standard hydrodynamic methods () is complicated in these systems by the presence of several potentially coupled motions (). To overcome these problems, modification of rigid-body hydrodynamics () as well as Brownian dynamics of coarse-grained models with the inclusion of hydrodynamic interactions () have been employed. Here, we describe the workflow of a recently developed alternative approach () called HYdrodynamic CoUpling of Domains (HYCUD) to predict the rotational correlation time (s c ) of protein domains within flexible modular systems. The details of the HYCUD method, together with its application to the flexible two-domain ribosomal protein L7/L12 and protein X of Sendai virus, are reported.