Motivation: Protein–protein interactions play an essential role in many cellular processes. The rapid accumulation of protein–protein complex structures provides an unprecedented opportunity for comparative studies of protein–protein interactions. To facilitate such studies, it is necessary to develop an accurate and efficient computational algorithm for the comparison of protein–protein interaction modes. While there are many structural comparison approaches developed for individual proteins, very few methods are available for protein–protein complexes. Results: We present a novel interface alignment method, iAlign, for the structural alignment of protein–protein interfaces. New scoring schemes for measuring interface similarity are introduced, and an iterative dynamic programming algorithm is implemented. We find that the similarity scores follow extreme value distributions. Using statistical models, we empirically estimate their statistical significance, which is in good agreement with manual classifications by human experts. Large-scale tests of iAlign were conducted on both artificial docking models and experimental structures. In a benchmark test on 1517 dimers, iAlign successfully detects biologically related, structurally similar protein–protein interfaces at a coverage percentage of 90% and an error per query of 0.05. When compared against previously published methods, iAlign is substantially more accurate and efficient. Availability: The iAlign software package is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONVirtually all biological processes are dependent on protein protein interactions. The role of proteinprotein interactions can be structural, e.g. stabilization of homo-oligomers or macromolecular assemblies and/or functional, e.g. inhibition of antigens or enzymes (). Given the essentiality of proteinprotein interactions for a cell, one ultimate goal of current research is to identify and elucidate all protein protein interactions (). Toward this goal, one promising avenue and necessary task is the structural determination * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of all representative proteinprotein complexes at high resolution. Over the past two decades, there has been an exponential growth in the number of solved protein complex structures (). As structural genomics initiatives select more protein complexes as targets, it is anticipated that the growth rate of protein complex structures will be further accelerated (). These rich structural data allow us to characterize proteinprotein interactions at the atomic level. By analyzing various properties of a proteinprotein interface, such as hydrophobicity, hydrogen bonding, buried surface area, topology, planarity, compositions and so on, one can gain insights into the mechanisms of proteinprotein recognition (). However, these analyses are typically performed for individual protein complexes, and they do not provide detailed structural alignments between protein complexes. It is well known that the structures of proteins are more likely to be conserved than their sequences (). Therefore, structural comparison often provides evolutionary insights that are not obvious in sequence comparison. In the era of structural genomics, structural comparison is very relevant because significant structural similarity may guide the study of biological relationships, e.g. whether two proteins are evolutionarily related and/or fulfill similar functions (). Consequently, many computational tools have been developed for structural alignment of individual proteins, such as DALI (), CE () and TM-align (). Extensive classifications of protein domains based on their structural, sequence and functional similarity have also become available, such as SCOP () and CATH (). Since proteinprotein interactions are responsible for the stability and/or function of protein complexes, it makes sense to directly compare the interaction modes of protein complexes and to categorize these complexes according to their interaction modes. One simple strategy is to utilize the alignments of individual protein structures and define interaction modes by the orientation of two complexes and/or the overlap in the interfaces (). While these studies are informative, they have two assumptions: first, the individual corresponding proteins from two complexes are sufficiently similar in structure. Second, the combination of individual protein alignments produces a good interface alignment. However, these assumptions are often not true in biologically interesting cases. One example is shown in. Two-headed tomato inhibitor-II (TI-II) simultaneously inhibits two molecules ofCartoon representation. The coordinates were taken from a crystal structure (PDB code 1oyv). Two subdomains (1 and 2) of TI-II are shown in blue and green, and the two subtilisins are shown in red and orange. Molecular visualizations were generated with VMD (protease subtilisin (). The two interaction sites, located in the two subdomains of TI-II, are well separated (). Obviously, these two interaction sites cannot be aligned in the comparison of the inhibitor against itself. Moreover, due to the different topologies exhibited in the two TI-II subdomains (), most structural alignment programs only detect weak similarity between them, and cannot properly align the two interaction sites even when one attempts to align the two subdomains. In contrast, it is straightforward for iAlign to identify highly significant similarity between the two proteinprotein interfaces (), suggesting that the same inhibition mechanism is employed. In a second strategy, one can extend a structural alignment algorithm for individual proteins to the entire protein complex, e.g. MM-align (). An intrinsic limitation of such an approach is that it does not differentiate between interface regions from non-interface regions. As a result, a significant similarity score does not necessarily mean that two complexes have similar interaction modes. An illustration of this issue is the following: Suppose that a protein A forms complexes with two different partners B and C. Assuming no significant structural changes of A, the comparison of two complexes A/B and A/C will lead to a significant score because of the alignment of A to itself, yet A may associate with B and C in totally different ways. This is particularly problematic when the size of protein A is much bigger than the sizes of B and C. Thus, the similarity between these two A proteins dominates the structural comparison, regardless of the actual interaction modes, which could in fact be quite different. In addition, the alignment of full complexes does not necessarily provide the best alignment of interfaces. In the TI-II/subtilisin example mentioned above, the two interaction sites on the inhibitor still cannot be properly aligned by MM-align. Thus, the development of a dedicated method for comparing proteinprotein interfaces is necessary for studying proteinprotein interaction modes. An early approach employed a geometric hashing algorithm (). More recently, methods that compare physical chemical interactions, non-covalent interactions or contact maps have been proposed in I2I-SiteEngine (), Galinter () and CMAPi (), respectively. None of these studies, however, provides an assessment of statistical significance of the interface similarity. Moreover, these methods were tested on small datasets, and it is not clear how well they perform in large-scale benchmarks. In particular, it has not been established that interface comparison is useful for the detection of biological relationships. To address these issues, we present a novel method, iAlign, for the structural comparison of proteinprotein interfaces. Below, we first introduce scoring functions for measuring similarity between proteinprotein interfaces. We then describe the alignment algorithm and statistical models for the estimation of statistical significance. Large-scale benchmark tests were performed on both docking models and experimental structures. In addition, iAlign is compared with MM-align and I2I-SiteEngine. Finally, we discuss both the advantages and limitations of our approach.
DISCUSSIONComparative studies of protein structures provide valuable insights into the biological relationship between proteins, especially those with distant evolutionary relationship undetectable from sequence information alone. During the past two decades, many computational methods have been developed for protein structural comparison; some well-known examples include DALI (), CE () and TM-align (). However, these methods are designed for comparing the global tertiary structures of individual proteins. Considering that proteinprotein interactions play an essential role in a cell, structural comparison of proteinprotein interfaces may provide additional insights that are not obvious in standard structural comparisons of individual proteins. The main purpose of this work is to introduce iAlign, an accurate and efficient computational method for protein interface comparison, and to demonstrate that such a comparison is indeed helpful for deciphering biological relationships between proteins. Like structure comparisons of individual proteins, it is important to define a measure that effectively characterizes the level of structural similarity. One advantage of the TM-score, first introduced for measuring the similarity between monomeric protein structures, is that the TM-score is approximately length independent for globular structures (). This property allows one to estimate statistical significance according to the values of the score (an mTM-score 0.4 is considered significant). However, it is not clear whether the TM-score can be applied to proteinprotein interfaces, which are often flat and discontinuous. We show that the interfacial TM-score (iTM-score) can be applied to measure the similarity between proteinprotein interfaces, and that the property of length independence is still maintained. In addition, we designed a new measure, the IS-score, which compares not only geometric distances, but also contact patterns not considered by the iTM-score. As a result, the IS-score is more specific and significantly better than the iTM-score in differentiating closely related protein protein complexes, e.g. near-native docking models (Supplementary Results). Moreover, we employed statistical models to estimate the significance of the iTM/IS-scores. In large-scale benchmark tests on 1517 dimers, our estimates agree well with the SCOP classification, despite the fact that SCOP was not used for deriving the statistical models. In the predictions of biological relationships, the P-values of iTM/IS-score yield significantly more accurate results than the scores. In general, accurate predictions were obtained by iAlign with the P-values of both scores. For example, about 90% coverage is achieved at 0.05 EPQ. There is unlikely to be a consensus on the definition of the optimal similarity metric for proteinprotein interface comparison. While geometry-based similarity measures are used in iAlign, measures based on physical chemical properties were proposed in I2I-SiteEngine (). Benchmark results show that iAlign is significantly more accurate and two orders of magnitude more efficient than I2I-SiteEngine. However, the difference in accuracy does not mean that physical chemical properties are not important for interface comparison. The better accuracy of iAlign is mainly due to the length independence of the iTM/IS-score and a sound assessment of statistical significance. It is known that the space of tertiary structures of individual protein domains is very limited, largely because only certain ways of secondary structure packing are physically viable (). As a consequence, two evolutionarily unrelated proteins may converge to a similar structural fold (). This interesting phenomenon unfortunately creates a challenge for predicting biological relationships from protein structure. In this study, we demonstrate that comparison of proteinprotein interfaces may be utilized for differentiating biological relationships. This works because proteinprotein interactions are important for their stability and/or function, leading to the conservation of a specific interaction mode during the course of evolution. However, we emphasize that interface comparison is not a replacement for, but rather is complementary to, structural comparison of individual proteins. This point can be illustrated with one example. Suppose protein A and its homolog A interacts with two different proteins B and C, respectively, and the proteinprotein interfaces of complexes A/B and A /C are dissimilar. An interface alignment of A/B and A /C gives an insignificant score, whereas an alignment between A and A yields a significant score. While the score of interface similarity is still informative, indicating that A/B and A /C exhibit different interaction modes, the homologous relationship between A and A is detected only through the alignment of individual protein structures. Therefore, one expects that a combination of both types of structural comparisons should provide a more comprehensive description of proteinprotein relationships than using either comparison metric alone. Toward this direction, considerable efforts have been invested recently in classifying proteinprotein interfaces (). Since two biologically unrelated protein complexes may display similar interfaces (), the question arises in how similar two proteinprotein interfaces have to be for a reliable prediction on their biological relationship. With the P-value estimation provided by iAlign, one can quickly set a suitable P-value