Motivation: miRNAs play crucial roles in human diseases and newly discovered could be targeted by small molecule (SM) drug compounds. Thus, the identification of small molecule drug compounds (SM) that target dysregulated miRNAs in cancers will provide new insight into cancer biology and accelerate drug discovery for cancer therapy. Results: In this study, we aimed to develop a novel computational method to comprehensively identify associations between SMs and miRNAs. To this end, exploiting multiple molecular interaction databases, we first established an integrated SM-miRNA association network based on 690 561 SM to SM interactions, 291 600 miRNA to miRNA associations, as well as 664 known SM to miRNA targeting pairs. Then, by performing Random Walk with Restart algorithm on the integrated network, we prioritized the miRNAs associated to each of the SMs. By validating our results utilizing an independent dataset we obtained an area under the ROC curve greater than 0.7. Furthermore, comparisons indicated our integrated approach significantly improved the identification performance of those simple modeled methods. This computational framework as well as the prioritized SM-miRNA targeting relationships will promote the further developments of targeted cancer therapies.
IntroductionmiRNAs are non-coding small RNAs with post transcriptional regulatory functions and are dysregulated in most of human cancers (). Approximately half of the known miRNAs are located in cancer-associated genome regions or fragile sites (). Cumulative studies demonstrated that the mature miRNAs as well as their precursors could be targeted by small molecular drugs (). A recent clinical trial revealed SPC349, a newly developed drug, could successfully inhibit miR122 which plays important roles in the duplication of hepatitis C viruses (). Several approaches then were developed to investigate the interactions between small molecules and miRNA. Structure-based approaches, such as molecular docking, is useful for identifying small molecular compounds that target miRNAs (). Jamal et al employed a chemical descriptors-and machine learning-based method, which is the first and most comprehensive computational analysis to predict small molecule modulators of miRNA (). Meanwhile, based on the hypothesis that similar small molecules tend to target similar proteins, several computational systems biology approaches based on large scale molecular networks have been applied to identify molecular interactions related to small molecules (). In this study, taking together the advantages of above structureor experiment-based methods and the genome-wide exploration of biological network based approaches, we firstly apply network retrieval methods on integrated biological interactions to predict small molecule-miRNA associations for understanding miRNA binding activities of small molecules. This study provides researchers a practical method to identify the biological regulations of small molecules and will facilitate the further discovery of chemical drug on miRNA mediated human complex diseases.