Motivation: Identification of microRNA (miRNA) transcriptional start sites (TSSs) is crucial to understand the transcriptional regulation of miRNA. As miRNA expression is highly cell specific, an automatic and systematic method that could identify miRNA TSSs accurately and cell specifically is in urgent requirement. Results: A workflow to identify the TSSs of miRNAs was built by integrating the data of H3K4me3 and DNase I hypersensitive sites as well as combining the conservation level and sequence feature. By applying the workflow to the data for 54 cell lines from the ENCODE project, we successfully identified TSSs for 663 intragenic miRNAs and 620 intergenic miRNAs, which cover 84.2% (1283/1523) of all miRNAs recorded in miRBase 18. For these cell lines, we found 4042 alternative TSSs for intragenic miRNAs and 3186 alternative TSSs for intergenic miRNAs. Our method achieved a better performance than the previous non-cell-specific methods on miRNA TSSs. The cell-specific method developed by Georgakilas et al. gives 158 TSSs of higher accuracy in two cell lines, benefitting from the employment of deep-sequencing technique. In contrast, our method provided a much higher number of miRNA TSSs (7228) for a broader range of cell lines without the limitation of costly deep-sequencing data, thus being more applicable for various experimental cases. Analysis showed that upstream promoters at À 2 kb to À 200 bp of TSS are more conserved for independently transcribed miRNAs, while for miRNAs transcribed with host genes, their core promoters (À200 bp to 200 bp of TSS) are significantly conserved. Availability and implementation: Predicted miRNA TSSs and promoters can be downloaded from supplementary files.
IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small ($22 nt), non-coding RNAs that negatively regulates gene expression by binding to the 3'-untranslated region of mRNAs. Studies so far have revealed that miRNAs are involved in almost all the key biological processes, such as development, differentiation, apoptosis, cell proliferation and carcinogenesis (). To understand the underlying mechanism of the miRNA-mediated regulatory pathways, it is important to know where the miRNAs are produced from in the genome and V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com which genes they are targeting. While the latter aspect has been intensely studied for both animals and plants system in the recent years (), the picture of transcription of miRNAs is far from complete, especially for the transcriptional start sites (TSSs) of miRNAs. In general, miRNA genes are firstly transcribed into primary miRNAs (pri-miRNAs) by RNA polymerase (Pol) II or III in nucleus (). Then, the RNase Drosha processes pri-miRNAs into precursor miRNAs (premiRNAs) (), which later are exported into the cytosol and turn to mature miRNAs with the help of Dicer (). The process of miRNA transcription is basically the same as that of protein-coding genes; however, both 5'and 3'-ends of pri-miRNA are subject to quick degradation. The full-length transcript of a miRNA gene is very difficult to be retained (). Therefore, it is hard to accurately locate the TSS of miRNA. The database miRT collected predicted miRNA TSSs from different sources () and proved helpful for experimental validation (). The methods of the identification of miRNA TSSs available so far are mainly based on the cap analysis of gene expression (CAGE), RNA polymerase II (Pol II) data or histone modification data. For example, CAGE tags () were used to identify miRNA TSSs by considering its possibility to capture the 5' cap (). However, the rapid processing of the primary miRNA transcript by Drosha produces uncapped pre-miRNAs that cannot be captured by CAGE technology.predicted miRNA TSSs by modeling the RNA Pol II binding patterns.developed a method to predict the core promoters of miRNAs with Support Vector Machine models based on RNA Pol II data. More methods were developed by integrating the histone modification data.identified miRNA TSSs by combining the information of RNA Pol II, H3K4me3 and H3K9/14A data. However, these studies were limited to small amount of miRNAs due to the insufficiency of Pol II data and ignored the case of Poly III transcription in one aspect. In further aspect, they discarded the cell-specific information of miRNA TSSs by pooling the Pol II data from experiments. Annotating the cell-specific information of miRNA TSSs is important because it has been proved that miRNA is of higher tissue specificity than protein-coding genes (). Most recently, Georgios et al. developed an algorithm 'microTSS' for integrating RNA-Sequencing data with H3K4me3, Pol II and DNase-seq data to identify the tissue-specific TSSs of intergenic miRNAs in high resolution (). To overcome the effect of Drosha processing and capture the primiRNAs of low abundance, microTSS required high deep sequencing data which seems not easy to obtain for the large number of cell lines and various cellular environmental conditions. So far, miRNA TSSs of very few cell lines have been predicted in a cell-specific way. An automatic and systematic method that could identify miRNA TSSs accurately and cell specifically in a broad range of cell lines is still in urgent requirement. Here, we developed a workflow to identify miRNA TSSs in 54 cell lines based on H3K4me3 and DNase I-hypersensitive sites (DHSs), which combined the features of species conservation and sequences. The proximal H3K4me3 region to each pre-miRNA in each cell line is considered as the potential region containing the TSS of the miRNA. DHSs are potential transcription factor binding sites, and their existence of them in the promoter region can assure the function of the identified TSSs. The accuracy of our predicted miRNA TSSs is verified in several ways, including comparing the results with the miRNA TSSs that are identified by previous studies, showing expressed sequence tag (EST) evidence for them and analyzing their global conservation. Known CAGE tags () showed a higher signal at the TSSs that were identified using our approach; however, the signal levels were not comparable with those of protein-coding genes, which indicates the effect of the rapid degradation of the 5 0 cap of miRNA transcript and proves the previous viewpoint that CAGE data is inadequate for the prediction of miRNA TSSs. Current models of miRNA biogenesis were also confirmed by our finding that the CAGE signal detected in nucleus at the identified miRNA TSSs was much higher than that detected in cytosol, whereas the nuclear and cytosolic CAGE signals for protein-coding genes are comparable. In addition, the analysis on the predicted TSSs showed the promoters upstream the independent TSSs of either intragenic or intergenic miRNAs are more conserved than that of the host gene TSSs by which some intragenic miRNAs are transcribed. In cases that miRNAs were broadly activated in various cell lines, alternative TSSs and promoters were used in different cell lines. Then they could be regulated in a promoter-specific manner.
DiscussionIn this study, we developed a method for miRNA TSS prediction by integrating the information of experimental data of H3K4me3 and DHS, the species conservation and sequence features. Compared with other methods that are based on histone modification (), we used DHSs data to assure the function of promoters upstream of the predicted TSSs. In addition, instead of pooling data of different cell lines (), the information from 54 cell lines was processed separately in our workflow. This proves useful for conducting experiments and analyzing the cell specificity of miRNA TSSs. To evaluate the performance of our method, a set of experimentally verified miRNA TSSs were collected from literature as benchmark data and our method performs best comparing with other predictions. To evaluate the performance of our method in a cell-specific way, a set of cell-specific validated miRNA TSSs in hESC cells were used to make an independent comparison. Our method performed better than those non-cell-specific methods but worse than microTSS. However, the input data for our method were more easily acquirable than microTSS, which enabled us to make predictions in a broader range of 54 cell lines with an acceptable precision (77.1%). In our method, we set a distance threshold to discriminate a candidate TSS from its nearby annotated host TSS. Only the candidate TSS that is more than this threshold distance away from its nearby host TSS was considered as independent TSS. We set this distance threshold to 150 bp based on the length of an H3K4me3 peak, assuming that there is only one TSS in one H3K4me3 peak region.The influence of this threshold on the prediction was checked. The number of intergenic and intragenic miRNAs stays at about 620 and 663, respectively, as the variation of threshold (Supplementaryin Supplementary File S2). For the number of TSSs, on average, every intergenic/intragenic miRNA loses about 0.0014/0.0026 TSSs as the threshold increases by 1 bp (Supplementaryin Supplementary File S2). The accuracy evaluated by experimentally validated TSSs is not influenced by the change. Therefore, the influence of changing the threshold to TSS prediction is limited. It has always been a dispute whether CAGE data are able to efficiently capture the miRNA TSS because of the transient nature of miRNA primary transcripts. To clarify this issue, we analyzed the CAGE signal at predicted miRNA TSS and found the nuclear CAGE signal was much higher than the cytosolic CAGE signal at TSS location. It is evident that the CAGE signal at miRNA TSS would be reduced if the nuclear and cytosolic CAGE signals were pooled together. To deal with this problem, a deep-sequencing approach was employed to increase the CAGE signal at miRNA TSS by increasing the total count of reads (). However, the deep sequencing data may also increase the 'noise' signal in the background region and promoter region of protein-coding gene. To properly and efficiently use CAGE data, maintaining the full miRNA primary transcript is necessary. Such as in Caenorhabditis elegans (), full transcripts could be maintained when RNAs were isolated from nucleolus. Alternatively, inhibition of Drosha could help to maintain full transcripts for deep sequencing (). However, this kind of data are very limited at present time. In our result, we noticed that some of the miRNAs had quite long primary transcripts. For example, hsa-mir-548as is embedded in its host gene, GPC5, and its host transcript is over 1000 kb. The long pri-miRNA transcript might provide the possibility of more alternative TSSs. On the basis of the analysis of species conservation of miRNA promoter, we found that for the upstream promoters of TSS which were regions of [2000 bp, 200 bp], the mean conservation in the case that miRNAs are independently transcribed was significantly higher than that in the case that miRNAs are co-transcribed with the host genes. However, at the core promoter region which is, the conservation behaves in opposite. This observation showed a different pattern of conservation between the promoters of host-gene-dependently and independently transcribed miRNA genes.found the promoters of intergenic miRNAs were even more conserved than those of the intragenic miRNAs that are co-transcribed with the host genes in opossum.found only 27 conserved host-intragenic miRNA pairs from 849 intragenic miRNAs in humans, indicating the poor conservation for the promoters of host-genes-dependent miRNAs. Our result is consistent with these reports and draws a better explanation for these observations. The different pattern of conservation on the core promoters and upstream promoters may indicate a different evolution process for host gene-dependently and independently transcribed miRNA genes. MiRNAs are mainly expressed in a cell-specific manner (), which could originate from the use of selectively activated TSSs and specific promoters. However, it should be noticed that there is no unambiguous correspondence between expression of a gene and its active TSS, neither for protein coding nor for miRNA genes. As reported for protein-coding genes, many genes do not produce full length transcripts, nonetheless experience transcript initiation (). As reported from microTSS, for 118 predicted TSSs, 57 miRNAs were expressed in mESC. Similarly in our result, for 653 predicted TSSs, 146 miRNAs were expressed in A549 (GSE24565). So current methods could predict the possibly active TSSs, but there still needs more efforts to fill in the gap between the transcription and expression of miRNAs. Anyway, to know the active transcription start site is the first step. In conclusion, we predicted the miRNA TSSs for 54 cell lines and several observations were made about the cell line specificity of different types of TSSs, the conservation of miRNA promoters and the long non-coding RNAs related to pri-miRNAs. These results from this research could benefit the understanding of the specific expression of miRNAs and their exact regulation network in different cells.