Motivation: Although genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have identified thousands of variants associated with common diseases and complex traits, only a handful of these variants are validated to be causal. We consider causal variants as variants which are responsible for the association signal at a locus. As opposed to association studies that benefit from linkage disequilibrium (LD), the main challenge in identifying causal variants at associated loci lies in distinguishing among the many closely correlated variants due to LD. This is particularly important for model organisms such as inbred mice, where LD extends much further than in human populations, resulting in large stretches of the genome with significantly associated variants. Furthermore, these model organisms are highly structured and require correction for population structure to remove potential spurious associations. Results: In this work, we propose CAVIAR-Gene (CAusal Variants Identification in Associated Regions), a novel method that is able to operate across large LD regions of the genome while also correcting for population structure. A key feature of our approach is that it provides as output a minimally sized set of genes that captures the genes which harbor causal variants with probability q. Through extensive simulations, we demonstrate that our method not only speeds up computation , but also have an average of 10% higher recall rate compared with the existing approaches. We validate our method using a real mouse high-density lipoprotein data (HDL) and show that CAVIAR-Gene is able to identify Apoa2 (a gene known to harbor causal variants for HDL), while reducing the number of genes that need to be tested for functionality by a factor of 2.
IntroductionGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) have been extremely successful in reproducibly identifying variants associated with various complex traits and diseases (). The most common type of genetic variants comes in the form of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which we make the focus of this study. Because of the correlation structure in the genome, a phenomenon referred to as linkage disequilibrium (LD) (), each GWAS-associated variant will typically have hundreds to thousands of other variants which are also significantly associated with the trait. Identifying the variants responsible for the observed effect on a trait is referred to as fine mapping (). In the context of association studies, the genetic variants which are responsible for the association signal at a locus are referred to in the genetics literature as the 'causal variants'. Causal variants have biological effect on the phenotype. Generally, variants can be categorized into three main groups. The first group is the causal variants which have a biological effect on the phenotype and are responsible for the association signal. The second group is the variants which are statistically associated with the phenotype due to LD with a causal variant. Even though association tests for these variants may be statistically significant, under our definition, they are not causal variants. The third group is the variants which are not statistically associated with the phenotype and are not causal. We note that this usage of the term causal has little to do V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.