Motivation: High-throughput sequencing technologies enable the genome-wide analysis of the impact of genetic variation on molecular phenotypes at unprecedented resolution. However, although powerful , these technologies can also introduce unexpected artifacts. Results: We investigated the impact of library amplification bias on the identification of allele-specific (AS) molecular events from high-throughput sequencing data derived from chromatin immunoprecipi-tation assays (ChIP-seq). Putative AS DNA binding activity for RNA polymerase II was determined using ChIP-seq data derived from lym-phoblastoid cell lines of two parent–daughter trios. We found that, at high-sequencing depth, many significant AS binding sites suffered from an amplification bias, as evidenced by a larger number of clonal reads representing one of the two alleles. To alleviate this bias, we devised an amplification bias detection strategy, which filters out sites with low read complexity and sites featuring a significant excess of clonal reads. This method will be useful for AS analyses involving ChIP-seq and other functional sequencing assays. Availability: The R package absfilter for library clonality simulations and detection of amplification-biased sites is available from http://
INTRODUCTIONThe advent of high-throughput sequencing technologies has enabled us to study the relationship between genomic variants and various molecular phenotypes at single basepair resolution. To elucidate the molecular mechanisms underlying allele-specific (AS) gene regulation, such as those affected by cis-regulatory variants (), several studies have started to probe allele-or individual-specific changes in transcription factor (TF) binding and chromatin states (), revealing that such changes are abundant and often correlate with gene expression differences. To detect these changes, specialized computational workflows have been developed to eliminate several possible sources of bias inherently linked to the analysis of AS behavior. Although the analysis may seem straightforward, several technical hurdles need to be overcome to ensure reliable results. These include, for example, the reference allele mapping bias, i.e. the tendency of reads to map more frequently/better to the reference allele than the alternative allele (), biases linked to duplicated genomic regions (), quality of genotype calls (), or the statistical tests used (). Here, using RNA polymerase II chromatin immunoprecipitation assay (ChIP) sequencing data from two parentdaughter trios from the 1000 genomes project, we studied another significant source of bias, namely, library amplification, which can introduce a large number of false-positive AS DNA binding (ASB) events. To address this bias, we developed a two-tiered amplification bias detection strategy that filters out many of these likely false-positive sites and greatly improves the overall reliability of the data. This pipeline should prove useful for many studies aiming to use ChIP-sequencing (ChIP-seq) technology to identify AS molecular changes (e.g. in proteinDNA binding or chromatin structure).
DISCUSSIONIt is now well recognized that high-throughput sequencing assays are susceptible to significant, often non-intuitive artifacts when used to detect AS molecular events (). Here we report another such artifact intrinsic to deeply sequenced ChIP-seq libraries and likely other sequencing assays subject to PCR amplification of a small amount of starting material. Specifically, we demonstrate that on identifying putative sites with AS POLR2B occupancy, we retain a clear excess number of sites that exhibit monoallelic DNA binding behavior. We show that many of these sites suffer from PCR amplification biases, likely introduced during standard Illumina library preparation. In a systematic study of basecomposition biases in Illumina sequencing libraries, PCR during library preparation was identified as the principal bias source (). Although experimental strategies have been proposed to reduce this bias, it is widely accepted that it will be difficult to completely eliminate it, unless PCR amplification is avoided altogether. However, PCR-free libraries require a substantial amount of input material, rendering this rather unfeasible for approaches such as ChIP-seq where the sample material is often limiting (). Consequently, PCR amplification bias should be accounted for when using ChIP-seq to detect AS molecular events involving transcription factors, cofactors, and histone modifications. As observed in, all ChIP-seq libraries suffered from this bias, although the extent differed substantially between factors and libraries with 826% (first and third quartile) of all accessible heterozygous SNP sites exhibiting low read alignment complexity across nine additional assays profiled in the same individuals as POLR2B. The later analysis included a previously published dataset on CCCTC-binding factor (CTCF) binding () in which 11% of all accessible sites for AS analysis were flagged as biased. Here we show that one of the sources of this bias is sequencing depth given that the proportion of MA binding events increases with increasing sequencing depth. One simple strategy to deal with this issue is to simply remove all clonal reads from the dataset (). However, previous and our own studies demonstrate that many clonal reads likely constitute true signals (). Removing all duplicate reads from the POLR2B libraries leads to a strong reduction in the overall number of significant ASB sites as well as to a depletion in sites with moderate ASB signals. Irrespective of the strategy, removing all A B. Consistency of allelic direction before and after filtering for amplification-biased sites. (A) Reference allele ratios at shared ASB sites between pairs of unrelated individuals. Sites were accessible and significant in both individuals. Data from all paired individuals were pooled. Blue and red dots correspond to unbiased and biased sites, respectively. Colored lines show linear regression fits using all testable sites before filtering (black), unbiased sites (blue) and sites biased in one or both individuals (red), respectively. (B) Paternal allele ratios of significant ASB site pairs that are located within POLR2B peaks. Data from all individuals were pooled. Blue and read dots correspond to unbiased and biased site pairs, respectively. Colored lines show linear regression fits using all testable site pairs (black), unbiased site pairs (blue) and site pairs with bias in one or both sites(s) (red), respectively clonal reads seems a rather overly cautious way of bypassing the PCR amplification bias and is in fact counterproductive as it lowers the overall statistical power to detect ASB sites and unnecessarily discards much of the sequencing data.
CONCLUSIONWe have presented a method to identify and reduce the bias of clonal amplification in AS analysis of ChIP-seq data. This approach analyzes the read alignment distribution around heterozygous SNP sites and removes highly clonal, lowcomplexity sites based on expectations about the distribution of reads covering SNP sites. Given the current interest in understanding the interplay between DNA variants and gene regulation, this approach should be of general interest.