Motivation: Eukaryotic gene expression (GE) is subjected to precisely coordinated multi-layer controls, across the levels of epigenetic, transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulations. Recently, the emerging multi-dimensional genomic dataset has provided unprecedented opportunities to study the cross-layer regulatory interplay. In these datasets, the same set of samples is profiled on several layers of genomic activities, e.g. copy number variation (CNV), DNA methylation (DM), GE and microRNA expression (ME). However, suitable analysis methods for such data are currently sparse. Results: In this article, we introduced a sparse Multi-Block Partial Least Squares (sMBPLS) regression method to identify multi-dimensional regulatory modules from this new type of data. A multi-dimensional regulatory module contains sets of regulatory factors from different layers that are likely to jointly contribute to a local gene expression factory. We demonstrated the performance of our method on the simulated data as well as on The Cancer Genomic Atlas Ovarian Cancer datasets including the CNV, DM, ME and GE data measured on 230 samples. We showed that majority of identified modules have significant functional and transcriptional enrichment, higher than that observed in modules identified using only a single type of genomic data. Our network analysis of the modules revealed that the CNV, DM and microRNA can have coupled impact on expression of important oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes. Availability and implementation: The source code implemented by MATLAB is freely available at: http://zhoulab.usc.edu/sMBPLS/.
INTRODUCTIONEukaryotic gene expression (GE) is a complex process controlled at multiple levels, including epigenetic, transcriptional and post-transcriptional regulation. Dynamic and precise coordination of these regulatory processes is essential to maximize the efficiency and specificity in GE. Recent studies support the view that, rather than a simple 'step-by-step' production line, the GE machine is governed by multiple, complex and extensively coupled networks (). The development of high-throughput genomic technologies has enabled researchers to obtain a global view of gene regulation. Microarray and sequencing technologies can not only measure genome-wide GE levels but also profile DNA modifications (e.g. CNV), epigenetic regulation (e.g. DNA methylationand histone modifications) and post-transcriptional regulation (e.g. microRNA expression). However, most genome-wide studies have been restricted to only one aspect of regulation such as studies based on GE profiles (). Recently, a new type of large-scale multi-dimensional genomic dataset has been gaining in popularity. In these datasets, the same set of samples is profiled on several layers of genomic activity, e.g. CNV, DM, GE and ME. The Cancer Genomic Atlas (TCGA) () project and the NCI60 () project provide this type of comprehensive genomic characterization for a cohort of cancer samples and cancer cell lines, respectively. Multi-dimensional datasets provide unprecedented opportunities to discover connections between the different layers of GE regulation. The emerging large-scale multi-dimensional genomic data calls for novel computational methods. In fact, as the cost of sequencing falls, multi-dimensional characterization of samples will soon become standard practice. However, suitable analysis methods are currently sparse. In particular, since the different types of genomic data have different scales and units, we cannot simply aggregate them for analysis. Previous relevant effort has mostly focused on two-dimensional genomic datasets. For example, various eQTL methods can jointly analyze single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and GE data to identify regulatory SNPs (); multivariate regression can correlate GE and transcription factor (TF) binding data to associate TFs with their target genes (); and the Ping-Pong algorithm integrates GE and drugresponse data (). Recently, several methods have been developed to analyze genomic datasets with more than two dimensions. For example, the multivariate model developed byand the sparse regression method proposed by, both can learn multi-dimensional genomic *To whom correspondence should be addressed.