Motivation: Protein–ligand binding sites are the active sites on protein surface that perform protein functions. Thus, the identification of those binding sites is often the first step to study protein functions and structure-based drug design. There are many computational algorithms and tools developed in recent decades, such as LIGSITE cs/c , PASS, Q-SiteFinder, SURFNET, and so on. In our previous work, MetaPocket, we have proved that it is possible to combine the results of many methods together to improve the prediction result. Results: Here, we continue our previous work by adding four more methods Fpocket, GHECOM, ConCavity and POCASA to further improve the prediction success rate. The new method MetaPocket 2.0 and the individual approaches are all tested on two datasets of 48 unbound/bound and 210 bound structures as used before. The results show that the average success rate has been raised 5% at the top 1 prediction compared with previous work. Moreover, we construct a non-redundant dataset of drug–target complexes with known structure from DrugBank, DrugPort and PDB database and apply MetaPocket 2.0 to this dataset to predict drug binding sites. As a result, 74% drug binding sites on protein target are correctly identified at the top 3 prediction, and it is 12% better than the best individual approach. Availability: The web service of MetaPocket 2.0 and all the test datasets are freely available at http://projects.biotec.tu-dresden.de/metapocket/ and http://sysbio.
INTRODUCTIONProteins perform their biological functions in biological processes mainly by interacting with other molecules such as other proteins, small molecules, DNAs and RNAs. Usually not all the residues on a protein surface participate in these interactions. Thus, identification of these functional sites is of great importance to understanding the function of a protein and the mechanism of the interactions. In addition, knowledge of these functional sites can be used to guide the mutagenesis experiments. There exist a number of cavities or * To whom correspondence should be addressed. pockets on protein surface where small molecules bind. Therefore, identification of such cavities is often the starting point in protein ligand binding site prediction for protein function annotation and structure-based drug design. Proper ligand binding site detection is a prerequisite for proteinligand docking and high-throughput virtual screening to identify drug candidates in drug discovery processes. Many computational algorithms and tools have been developed in last two decades to identify pocket for proteinligand binding site prediction. Most of the existing methods can be classified into two types: geometry based and energy based. The geometry-based methods can be further classified into grid based, sphere based and -shape based (). In the gridbased methods, the protein structure is projected into a 3D grid and the grid points are categorized into different types according to their positions related to the protein. Then the solvent grid points are clustered using some geometry attributes and those grid points near the pocket sites can be recognized. LIGSITE (), LIGSITE CS (), PocketPicker (), GHECOM () and ConCavity () are the representatives of this type of method. In the sphere-based approaches, the common strategy is to fulfill protein surface with spheres of different radius layer by layer and a cutting method is applied during the fulfilling process. The final pocket sites are those regions that are rich with fulfilled spheres. This kind of methods include SURFNET (), PASS (), PHECOM () and POCASA (). Approaches based on -shape theory () include CAST () and Fpocket (). CAST computes the triangulations of the protein's surface atoms and these triangulations are grouped by letting small-sized ones flow toward the neighboring larger one. The pocket sites are the collection of empty triangles. Different from CAST, Fpocket uses the idea of -sphere which is a sphere contacting four atoms on its boundary and containing no inside atom. The next step is to identify clusters of spheres close together and those clusters are potential pocket sites. In comparison to geometry-based method, Q-SiteFinder () aims to find pocket sites by computing the interaction energy between protein atoms and a small molecule probe. In Q-SiteFinder, layers of methyl (CH3) probes are initialized on protein surface to calculate the van der Waals interaction energy between the protein atoms and the probes. Then the probes are clustered into many groups and are ranked by the total energy of probes. Those clusters with high energy will be the potential ligand binding sites. SiteHound (; Hernandez) is similar to Q-SiteFinder but it includes Lennard-Jones and electrostatics energy terms and uses different types of probes to calculate interaction energy. However, it is difficult to compare their performance systematically because of different evaluation criteria and dataset being used. In our previous work (), we compared LIGSITE cs , SUFNET, PASS and Q-SiteFinder using the same dataset and criteria. Later on, we combined these four methods and introduced a new consensus tool called MetaPocket to improve the prediction success rate (). Because there are many new tools developed recently, we continued our work on MetaPocket by including four more free available tools: Fpocket, GHECOM, ConCavity and POCASA. These tools were chosen because they are freely available either with source code or executable binary. In this work, we improve the workflow and the way of mapping ligand-binding residues and propose a new dataset for drugtarget complexes. The web server design architecture is also improved as we developed a new on-line visualization system. We named the new version MetaPocket 2.0 (MPK2), in contrast to the old version of MetaPocket 1.0 (MPK1). We demonstrated that MPK2 performed better than MPK1 and each of the individual methods by extensive validation and comparison. First, we applied MPK2 to the original three datasets of 48 bound/unbound and 210 bound complexes as we used before in our previous work (). We proved that MPK2 improved the success rate up to 6% than MPK1. Second, we built a novel dataset of drugtarget complexes and applied both MPK1 and MPK2 to this new dataset. MPK2 also showed better performance than its previous version with an improvement of up to 6% for the success prediction rate. Furthermore, we compared MPK2 to each single method and showed that MPK2 achieved 12% success rate over the best single method.
DISCUSSIONAlthough many computational approaches have been developed to identify pocket for ligand binding sites prediction, there are a few methods that predict protein druggability (). How to discriminate druggable cavities from non-druggable ones is still a challenge problem (). Nayal and Honig used the program SCREEN () to locate and analyze the surface cavities of a non-redundant set of 99 proteins co-crystallized with drugs and they found that using cavity size alone as a criterion predicted drug binding sites with 72% coverage. With aid of Random Forests and 408 physicochemical, structural and geometric features, the prediction coverage was improved to 89% (). In another recent work, different pocket descriptors including pocket volume/size, solvent accessible surface area, hydrophobicity score, etc., have been integrated as a drug score in the Fpocket program package to score the druggability of cavities (). As shown in, MetaPocket 2.0 can detect about 74% of the drug binding sites at the top 3 predictions using a simple scoring function (Z-Score). In order to gain better druggability prediction accuracy, we are planning to develop new druggability prediction method which will consider many physicalchemical and structural/sequence features. This is beyond the scope of this work and hence is not described here. Nevertheless, we proposed a dataset of drugtarget complexes with available structures in this work, which can be further used to evaluate new structure-based drugability prediction methods. To make our tool available to the community, we developed a new web server for MPK2 with better design and software architecture. In the new web server, eight single methods are called in parallel to reduce computational time. Each of eight single methods is treated as a plug-in in MPK2 and thus it is easy to add other new predictors when available. With this design pattern, the new web server is much more extensible than its previous version. It is important to mention that some of the eight methods might fail to return any prediction results for some reasons. This plug-in pattern makes our server automatically detect the failed methods and the algorithm is only applied to those results from successful methods. This feature makes MPK2 server more robust than MPK1. The users can provide a PDB ID and a chain ID or upload their own structures. The server will output the prediction results from eight single methods and the meta-pocket sites of MPK2 based on those results. The predicted pocket sites and those surrounding residues can be downloaded as standard PDB files or directly be visualized in the server based on JMOL (http://www.jmol.org) plug-in. It only takes about 10 s to 0.5 min to finish pocket identification depending on the size of protein. We envisage that our web server will become an all-in-one tool for proteinligand binding site prediction to the community and provide useful guide to structure-based functional annotation, site-directed mutagenesis experiments, proteinligand docking and large-scale virtual screening.