Motivation: Next-generation sequencing and exome-capture technologies are currently revolutionizing the way geneticists screen for disease-causing mutations in rare Mendelian disorders. However, the identification of causal mutations is challenging due to the sheer number of variants that are identified in individual exomes. Although databases such as dbSNP or HapMap can be used to reduce the plethora of candidate genes by filtering out common variants, the remaining set of genes still remains on the order of dozens. Results: Our algorithm uses a non-homogeneous hidden Markov model that employs local recombination rates to identify chromosomal regions that are identical by descent (IBD = 2) in children of consanguineous or non-consanguineous parents solely based on genotype data of siblings derived from high-throughput sequencing platforms. Using simulated and real exome sequence data, we show that our algorithm is able to reduce the search space for the causative disease gene to a fifth or a tenth of the entire exome. Availability: An R script and an accompanying tutorial are available at
INTRODUCTIONThe identification of genes underlying Mendelian disorders for the past several decades has mainly proceeded by means of positional cloning to identify chromosomal linkage intervals followed by the sequencing of candidate genes (). Efforts at diseasegene identification involving linkage analysis or association studies usually result in a genomic interval of 0.510 cM containing up to 300 genes (). Although computational methods can be used to prioritize candidate genes (), sequencing large numbers of candidate genes remains a time consuming and expensive task, and it is often not possible to identify the correct disease gene by inspection of the list of genes within the interval. Recently, whole-exome sequencing, i.e. the targeted capture of protein coding exons followed by massively parallel, 'next-generation' sequencing (NGS), has been demonstrated as an effective approach to identify genes underlying Mendelian disorders using a small number of affected individuals (). Sequenced individuals typically have on the order of five to ten thousand variant calls representing either non-synonymous substitutions in protein coding sequences, alterations of the canonical splice-site dinucleotides or small indels (NS/SS/I) (). Even after filtering out common variants using data from dbSNP, the HapMap project and related resources such as the 1000 Genomes project, the number of potentially disease-causing NS/SS/I variants can remain high if the exome of a single patient is considered in isolation. Many disease-causing mutations were completely unsuspected on the basis of previous knowledge (), and software tools that aim at predicting the damaging effect of non-synonymous variants () are currently unable to reliably distinguish between disease-causing mutations and other variants. Groups who have performed diseasegene identification projects by exome sequencing () have developed analysis strategies based upon searching for potentially damaging rare variants found in the same gene in sets of multiple unrelated patients affected by the same Mendelian disorder. Although this strategy has been applied successfully in sequencing projects with two affected individuals () and occasionally even with a single affected individual (), in many cases multiple candidate genes remain after applying computational filters based on rarity or presence of a mutation in multiple affected patients (). This means that additional analysis of multiple candidate genes or other procedures would often be needed to identify the disease gene following exome sequencing of single families with a Mendelian disorder. We will refer to the above-described procedure for searching for a disease gene by exome sequencing in multiple unrelated patients as
DISCUSSIONThe analysis of chromosomal regions that are identical by descent is a fundamental tool in linkage analysis of pedigree data and in population genetics studies such as genome-wide association studies (). In this work, we have presented a method for detection of IBD = 2 regions in the exome sequences of two or more related individuals affected with an autosomal recessive disease. In contrast to homozygosity mapping approaches designed for the analysis of children of consanguineous matings (), our procedure was developed to work for consanguineous or non-consanguineous families. With the recent advent of exome and genome sequencing for medical diagnostics, there is a pressing need for computational procedures that make maximum use of the information provided by the sequences for the rapid and correct identification of medically relevant mutations. Recent results have shown that even in populations such as Europeans that are well represented in dbSNP and HapMap, very high numbers of novel SNPs still remain to be found (). This is likely to be even more the case in other population groups, and this will be an important issue given that many families affected by rare recessive syndromes come from small populations for which only scarce variational data are available. The main drawback of filtering approaches that rely on a computational prediction of pathogenicity, as well as filtering approaches that focus on sets of variants that intersect in all analyzed samples of affected individuals (), is the possibility of false negative results. Not all disease-associated mutations are predicted to be pathogenic by current algorithms (), and not all disease-causing mutations are called to the correct genotype in all samples (). The benefit of error-robust IBD = 2 classification is thus 2-fold: on the one hand, it is an effective tool for reducing the genomic search space, and on the other hand, it is an effective means for identifying sequencing errors. The posterior probability computed by our algorithm additionally provides an estimator of how likely the classification is to be correct. The interpretation of these values is difficult. It has to be noted, that error probabilities, as well as IBD = 2 classification probabilities are often of a conditional nature. The constraint of being a rare variant increases the error probability tremendously. That is, a variant call at a dbSNP130 position is much more likely to be a correct one, compared with a call at a non-dbSNP position. The same holds true for IBD = 2 classification errors. A limitation of our method is the fact that regions of high linkage disequilibrium in a population () are more likely to be falsely classified as an IBD = 2 region. In future work, we plan on analyzing how homozygosity runs as well as population-specific linkage disequilibria may be incorporated to further reduce error rates in IBD = 2 classification.