Motivation: Accurate prediction of genes encoding small proteins (on the order of 50 amino acids or less) remains an elusive open problem in bioinformatics. Some of the best methods for gene prediction use either sequence composition analysis or sequence similarity to a known protein coding sequence. These methods often fail for small proteins, however, either due to a lack of experimentally verified small protein coding genes or due to the limited statistical significance of statistics on small sequences. Our approach is based upon the hypothesis that true small proteins will be under selective pressure for encoding the particular amino acid sequence, for ease of translation by the ribosome and for structural stability. This stability can be achieved either independently or as part of a larger protein complex. Given this assumption, it follows that small proteins should display conserved local protein structure properties much like larger proteins. Our method incorporates neural-net predictions for three local structure alphabets within a comparative genomic approach using a genomic alignment of 22 closely related bacteria genomes to generate predictions for whether or not a given open reading frame (ORF) encodes for a small protein. Results: We have applied this method to the complete genome for Escherichia coli strain K12 and looked at how well our method performed on a set of 60 experimentally verified small proteins from this organism. Out of a total of 11 407 possible ORFs, we found that 6 of the top 10 and 27 of the top 100 predictions belonged to the set of 60 experimentally verified small proteins. We found 35 of all the true small proteins within the top 200 predictions. We compared our method to Glimmer, using a default Glimmer protocol and a modified small ORF Glimmer protocol with a lower minimum size cutoff. The default Glimmer protocol identified 16 of the true small proteins (all in the top 200 predictions), but failed to predict on 34 due to size cutoffs. The small ORF Glimmer protocol made predictions for all the experimentally verified small proteins but only contained 9 of the 60 true small proteins within the top 200 predictions.
INTRODUCTIONIncreasingly, small proteins have been found to be important functional elements in cellular biology. Members of this class of molecules have been associated with a diverse set of functions including the regulation of amino acid metabolism (), iron-homeostasis (), spore development () and antimicrobial activity (). Despite the recent discoveries of functionally relevant small proteins, there is still relatively little known about how widespread and critical small proteins are. Furthermore, the advent of next-generation sequencing technologies has enabled transcriptional profiling of complete genome sequences (). In the yeast genome, these efforts have led to the expansion of the transcriptome (). The problem of discriminating small protein-encoding sequences from other small RNAs will only increase as transcriptional profiling efforts expand. Due to the lack of introns and alternative splicing mechanisms, prokaryotic organisms represent a unique setting for the elucidation of novel small proteins. Within this context, any open reading frame (ORF) is potentially a protein-encoding gene. For prokaryotic genomes, the most accurate way to predict a gene is via similarity to a protein in another genome. This technique is problematic, however, due to limited numbers of experimentally verified small proteins in sequence databases. Further complicating the problem is a contamination of sequence databases caused by the propagation of dubious ORF predictions via homology-based annotation efforts (). In situations where there is no matching protein, sequence composition-based methods are traditionally used. There are several automated gene finders that fall into this category such as GLIMMER (), ORPHEUS (), GeneMark () and EasyGene (). GLIMMER uses interpolated Markov models to distinguish coding from non-coding DNA. The program combines first through eighth order Markov models and weights them by their predictive power. ORPHEUS begins by a database similarity search. The genes with matches in the database are then used to create a statistical profile of protein coding regions and ribosome binding sites. This profile is then used to make genome-wide predictions for protein-coding genes. The original GeneMark program used
DISCUSSIONWe have developed a method that uses traditional measures, protein conservation and codon bias, as well as local protein structure properties to generate predictions that a small ORF encodes for a protein. The framework for all our calculations is comparative genomics using whole genome alignments between closely related species. We have shown that within this context, multiple alignment information can be very valuable. As we expected, sequence composition and protein-like conservation alone do not perform as well as our combined approach. Specifically, we were unable to identify any of the validated small proteins within the top 200 predictions when we used a single-genome codon bias metric as our lone data source. This is especially interesting because this approach is one of the standard 'off-the-shelf' tools used to distinguish protein-coding sequences. While this approach may work for longer sequences, our results show that small proteins will be missed by such efforts. For our analysis of the E.coli K12 genome, we intentionally omitted all ribosome binding site data as a possible scoring feature. This was done for two reasons. In several bacterial genomes, there are a large number of leaderless protein genes, so we created a method that did not rely on strong ribosome binding sites. Furthermore, a majority of the experimentally validated small proteins in this genome were identified in large part due to a strong ribosome binding site prediction near the ORF start site. Therefore,