Motivation: Major tumor sequencing projects have been conducted in the past few years to identify genes that contain driver somatic mutations in tumor samples. These genes have been defined as those for which the non-silent mutation rate is significantly greater than a background mutation rate estimated from silent mutations. Several methods have been used for estimating the background mutation rate. Results: We propose a new method for identifying cancer driver genes, which we believe provides improved accuracy. The new method accounts for the functional impact of mutations on proteins, variation in background mutation rate among tumors and the redundancy of the genetic code. We reanalyzed sequence data for 623 candidate genes in 188 non-small cell lung tumors using the new method. We found several important genes like PTEN, which were not deemed significant by the previous method. At the same time, we determined that some genes previously reported as drivers were not significant by the new analysis because mutations in these genes occurred mainly in tumors with large background mutation rates. Availability: The software is available at: http://linus.nci.nih.gov/ Data/YounA/software.zip Contact:
INTRODUCTIONMajor tumor sequencing projects () have been conducted and initiated in the past few years to identify genes that are frequently mutated and thereby are expected to have primary roles in the development of tumor. One of the challenges in interpreting this data is distinguishing driver mutations, which have a role in oncogenesis or in the cancer phenotype from passenger mutations that accumulate through DNA replication but are irrelevant to tumor development. To find these driver genes, each gene is tested for whether its mutation rate is significantly higher than the background (or passenger) mutation rate. The background mutation rate is estimated based * To whom correspondence should be addressed. on silent mutations which do not change amino acid encoding and which are therefore considered to be passenger mutations. All current methods for estimating the background mutation rate are based on a common approach in which background nonsilent mutation rate  N is estimated as a product  S R, where the background silent mutation rate  S is obtained by dividing the observed number of silent mutations by the number of base pairs sequenced and R is the average ratio of the number of potential non-silent mutations to the number of potential silent mutations. Having estimated the background non-silent mutation rate  N , each gene can be tested whether the number of mutations is significantly greater than that expected under the background mutation rate using a binomial test. The methods used for calculating R vary.calculated R in the following way. They mutate each nucleotide of each codon in silico to determine whether it results in a non-silent or silent mutation. They then calculate the average of each hypothetical non-silent or silent mutation by weighting it according to its relative frequency. Some investigators () further divide mutations into several types according to the nucleotide and the neighboring nucleotides of the mutations. They estimate a separate background mutation rate for each mutation type by multiplying relative frequencies of each mutation type by the background rate  N. They then test each gene by using a likelihood ratio test to assess whether the number of mutations occurring in the gene is unlikely under the background mutation rates. There are three shortcomings in the approaches previously developed for identifying driver genes. First, previous approaches ignore the fact that different types of mutations can have different impact on proteins. Non-silent mutations include missense mutations which change an amino acid to another amino acid, nonsense mutations which change an amino acid to a stop codon, mutations in splice sites and insertions or deletions (indels). The indels can also be divided into two types namely, inframe indels and frameshift indels according to whether it changes the reading frame. Since frameshift indels and nonsense mutations change all the amino acids that come after the amino acid where the mutation occurred, they have the greatest impact on the protein function. Mutations in splice sites also have strong impact since they disrupt splicing. Also different types of missense mutations may have different impact based on how similar are the chemical properties of the original and new amino acids. Several studies also have shown that the selection pressures vary by mutation type and sequence location in cancer mutation datasets.developed tests to examine the significance of selection toward missense, nonsense and splice site mutations in somatic cancer mutation datasets. They found that the selection pressures for nonsense and splice mutations are much higher than those for missense mutations. Alsofound that somatic cancer mutation datasets have a significant enrichment for mutations disrupting phosphorylation sites. If two genes A and B have a similar number of mutations, but all mutations in gene A are expected to affect its protein function significantly while those in gene B are not, then the gene A is more likely to be a driver gene than gene B. However, the current methods are not able to differentiate genes A and B since they ignore the information of mutation types. A second limitation of previous approaches is that they ignore the fact that different samples have different background mutation rates. Tumors differ substantially with regard to the number of somatic mutations accumulated. Samples are exposed to different levels of mutagens (for example, smoking) and some samples have mutations in genes that repair mutations. Therefore, some samples have much higher background mutation rate than others. This can be seen infor the data fromwho sequenced 623 genes in 188 tumor samples to identify 1013 nonsilent mutations and 108 silent mutations.shows the distribution of the number of mutations that occurred in each of the 188 samples. It shows that the number of mutations per sample ranges from 0 to 54. If a gene has mutations only in the samples with high background mutation rate, then those mutations are more likely byproducts of the high background mutation rate rather than the cause of a cancer. In contrast, if a gene has mutations only in the samples with low background mutation rate, then the gene is more likely to be a driver gene even if the number of mutations is small. If we assume the same background mutation rate across samples, the analysis will be biased toward falsely identifying as drivers those genes that have mutations in highly mutated samples and falsely missing those genes with a small number of mutations in samples with low mutation rates. Third, previous approaches ignore the fact that a different number of non-silent mutations can occur at each base pair according to the genetic code. For example, consider a codon TGG which encodes the amino acid Tryptophan. Since this is the only codon encoding Tryptophan, any mutation at any nucleotide of the codon would change the amino acid. Therefore any mutation results in a nonsilent mutation. In contrast, six codons encode the same amino acid arginine: AGA, AGG, CGA, CGG, CGC and CGT. Therefore within the codon CGA, no non-silent mutations can occur at the third position of the codon and only two non-silent mutations can occur at the first position. If a protein A consists mostly of tryptophan, and a protein B consists mostly of arginine, the gene A encoding the protein A is susceptible to more non-silent mutations than the gene B encoding the protein B. Thus, methods ignoring this difference will tend to misclassify as drivers genes rich in codons with limited redundancy and misclassify as non-drivers genes rich in codons with substantial redundancy. In this article, we propose and evaluate a new method for identifying driver genes. In Section 2, we will define P-values for testing whether a gene is a driver gene. In Section 3, we will evaluate the new method using lung tumor genome sequences.
DISCUSSIONWe have developed a new method for identifying driver genes that has several methodological advantages compared with the previously used methods. First, we assign scores to non-silent mutations according to their expected impacts on the protein function so that the genes with more 'driver-like' mutations will get smaller P-values. Second, we permit each sample to have a different background mutation rate. This has the effect of reducing the false positives and increasing true positives, which was confirmed by the simulation study. Third, instead of assuming separate background mutation rates for non-silent and silent mutations, we assume that each passenger mutation is generated from one background mutation rate process and that whether the mutation is non-silent or silent depends on the genetic code. Thus, our model accounts for the variable number of possible non-silent mutations that can occur at each base pair according to the genetic code. This takes into account the difference in the number of possible non-silent mutations between genes according to the codon usage within genes. Fourth, we take into account uncertainties in the background mutation rate by using empirical Bayes methods. These methodological advances contributed to identifying a different set of driver genes when compared with those identified by. First, we did not find the genes CDH11 and PDGFRA whichfound significant. These genes are not selected by our method because they are mainly mutated in the highly mutated samples and the scores of the mutations are not high. Second, we found PTEN, NRAS, LTK, ZMYND10, EPHA7, MYO3B, NTRK2 and TFDP1, whichdid not find significant. It shows that our method is more sensitive in finding genes whose total number of mutations is small. Although we believe that our method provides an improvement over the previous methods, there is room for improvement by extending our approach. First, we measure the functional impact of mutations by the significance of the change to amino acids caused by the mutation. However, the functional impact is also dependent on the position in which a mutation occurs. For example, all three mutations in NRAS occurred in the exact same base pair position, which implies that the mutation in the specific position is crucial to the function of the protein. If a score for each position can be estimated that measures the significance of the position in protein function, it can be used in our test statistics in the same way as the mutation score T ij. Second, the current scoring system which assigns mutation scores in the order: missense mutation  inframe indel  mutation in splice sites  frameshift indel = nonsense mutation may be biased toward identifying tumor suppressor genes over oncogenes. Loss-offunction mutations such as frameshift indels or nonsense mutations occur more frequently in tumor suppressor genes than in oncogenes. Our use of the BLOSUM80 matrix to refine the scoring of missense mutations helps in the identification of new oncogenes. Alternative scoring systems can be used, however, to increase sensitivity for identifying oncogenes. For example, we can assign the same scores as the current method to the missense mutations, but reduced scores to indels, mutation in splice sites or nonsense mutations. Third, we may refine our background mutation model inso that all six types of mutations, A:T  G:C, A:T  C :G, A: T  T :A,G:C  A:T , G:C  T :A, G:C  C :G have separate mutation rates. We separate the rates of mutations according to the mutation types (transition or transversion), base pair types (A:T or G:C) and their context (CpG dinucleotide contexts). Therefore, we did not separate the rates of the two types of mutation for each Page: 181 175181