iMAT is an Integrative Metabolic Analysis Tool, enabling the integration of transcriptomic and proteomic data with genome-scale metabolic network models to predict enzymes metabolic flux, based on the method previously described by Shlomi et al. The prediction of metabolic fluxes based on high-throughput molecular data sources could help to advance our understanding of cellular metabolism, since current experimental approaches are limited to measuring fluxes through merely a few dozen enzymes.
INTRODUCTIONModern genomic sequencing technologies have enabled the rapid reconstruction of metabolic networks, giving rise to more than 50 highly curated metabolic reconstructions published to date (), spanning all three domains of life including Eukaryota, Bacteria and Archaea. Additional computational methods to automatically reconstruct metabolic network models have recently resulted in draft network reconstructions for 160 microbial species (). Such reconstructed metabolic network models have been commonly used for metabolic phenotype prediction, metabolic engineering, studies of network evolution and biomedical applications (). These studies employ various constraint-based modeling (CBM) methods to analyze the network function by solely relying on simple physical chemical constraints (). Utilizing gene and protein expression to predict metabolic flux is a challenging task due to the complex mapping between the two. Previous studies have found a strong qualitative correspondence between gene expression and measured () as well as predicted () metabolic fluxes in microbes. However, the correlation between expression and metabolic flux is generally moderate and in some cases significant transcriptional changes do not reflect changes in flux, and vice-versa, * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the last two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. significant changes in measured flux may not reflect transcriptional changes (). These discrepancies may result from post-transcriptional regulatory processes that effect the actual levels of enzymes translated and from metabolic regulation, representing the effect of metabolite concentrations on the actual enzyme activity through allosteric and mass action effects (). Several CBM methods for analyzing and predicting metabolic flux distributions based on gene expression data have been suggested previously. The methods ofand Becker and Palsson (2008) use gene expression data to identify genes that are absent or likely to be absent in certain contexts and search for metabolic states that prevent (or minimize) the flux through the associated metabolic reactions.consider data on both lowly and highly expressed genes in a given context as cues for the likelihood that their associated reactions carry metabolic flux, and employ constraint-based modeling (CBM) to accumulate these cues into a global, consistent prediction of the metabolic state. The latter method was shown to accurately predict human tissue metabolism, based on tissue-specific gene and protein expression data. Its application has demonstrated that in many cases, the activity of genes responsible for metabolic diseases is not directly manifested in enzyme-expression data, though can still be correctly predicted by expression integration with the metabolic network. The implementation of the method based oninvolves solving multiple, complex Mixed-Integer Linear Programming (MILP) optimization problems, requiring extensive parallel computing resources, and hence has not been readily accessible for the research community since its publication. Here, we present an integrative metabolic analysis tool (iMAT) that is a web-based implementation based on the method ofThe new tool will serve the community by enabling the prediction of the metabolic state of an organism in a specific condition given pertaining gene and protein expression data. We provide below a high-level description of the iMAT server with an illustrative example of applying it to a toy model.