Motivation: Antibodies are currently the most important class of biopharmaceuticals. Development of such antibody-based drugs depends on costly and time-consuming screening campaigns. Computational techniques such as antibody–antigen docking hold the potential to facilitate the screening process by rapidly providing a list of initial poses that approximate the native complex. Results: We have developed a new method to identify the epitope region on the antigen, given the structures of the antibody and the antigen—EpiPred. The method combines conformational matching of the antibody–antigen structures and a specific antibody–antigen score. We have tested the method on both a large non-redundant set of antibody–antigen complexes and on homology models of the antibodies and/or the unbound antigen structure. On a non-redundant test set, our epitope prediction method achieves 44% recall at 14% precision against 23% recall at 14% precision for a background random distribution. We use our epitope predictions to rescore the global docking results of two rigid-body docking algorithms: ZDOCK and ClusPro. In both cases including our epitope, prediction increases the number of near-native poses found among the top decoys. Availability and implementation: Our software is available from
INTRODUCTIONAntibodies are the key protein factors in the acquired immune responses in vertebrates. The most common human antibody isotype is the IgG, which is one of the main mediators of secondary immune responses (). Antibodies have a conserved structure with 41700 solved structures available in the Protein Data Bank (). Most of the variability in antibodies (both sequence and structure) can be found in the antigen binding site, which is chiefly composed of the complementarity-determining region loops (CDRs) (). The affinity and specificity of the antibody's cognate antigen can be effectively modulated by only a few mutations to the CDRs (). Owing to their malleable binding properties, antibodies are currently one of the most important biopharmaceuticals (). The majority of the technologies used for artificial antibody design are based on costly screening campaigns. However, there is a growing number of computational methods aimed at aiding the process of artificial antibody design (). Two areas of computational antibody design are the focus of this manuscript: B-cell epitope prediction (e.g. EL) and global antibodyantigen docking (e.g.). Given a sequence or structure of an antigen, in silico B-cell epitope prediction aims to identify a set of residues on the antigen capable of binding an antibody (). Many successful B-cell epitope prediction methods rely on structural information but sequence alone can also produce useful predictions (). The majority of current methods operate without antibody information, aiming to identify all potential antibody binding sites (). Attempting to map all epitopes might not be optimal because some antigens, such as hen egg white lysozyme, have been shown to form complexes with many different antibodies. These bind to different areas, meaning that most of the lysozyme's surface constitutes a part of some epitope (). Moreover, it has been shown that two different therapeutic antibodies, Gevokizumab and Canakinumab, activate two distinct pathways by binding to different epitopes of IL-1 (). In this article, we create antibodyspecific epitope predictions, as we believe these will be more useful for the development of therapeutic antibodies (). Computational B-cell epitope prediction provides information about the regions of the antigen bound by the antibody but it does not directly contribute to the knowledge of the particular antibody residues that need to be mutated so as to modify its function. This problem can be tackled by antibodyantigen docking, which, given the structure of the antibody and the antigen, provides a list of putative orientations of the two molecules with respect to each other. Antibodyantigen docking requires different methodology from that used for the corresponding problem concerning non-antibody targets (). This is because antibodies use different residues in their binding sites when compared with both general proteins and antigens and thus an asymmetric scoring system is required that accounts for these discrepancies (In this manuscript, we focus on epitope prediction and global docking and how those two methods in concert can facilitate computational artificial antibody design. We develop an antibody-specific epitope prediction method EpiPred, which uses geometric matching of the antibody and antigen interfaces coupled with an antibodyantigen-specific knowledge-based potential. We use our epitope predictions to rescore the global docking results of two fast rigid-body docking algorithms, ZDOCK and ClusPro server in antibody mode (). We demonstrate that including the epitope information in our global docking pipeline enriches the top decoys with more native poses.