Motivation: The accurate inference of gene trees is a necessary step in many evolutionary studies. Although the problem of accurate gene tree inference has received considerable attention, most existing methods are only applicable to gene families unaffected by horizontal gene transfer. As a result, the accurate inference of gene trees affected by horizontal gene transfer remains a largely unaddressed problem. Results: In this study, we introduce a new and highly effective method for gene tree error correction in the presence of horizontal gene transfer. Our method efficiently models horizontal gene transfers, gene duplications and losses, and uses a statistical hypothesis testing framework [Shimodaira–Hasegawa (SH) test] to balance sequence likelihood with topological information from a known species tree. Using a thorough simulation study, we show that existing phylogenetic methods yield inaccurate gene trees when applied to horizontally transferred gene families and that our method dramatically improves gene tree accuracy. We apply our method to a dataset of 11 cyanobacterial species and demonstrate the large impact of gene tree accuracy on downstream evolutionary analyses. Availability and implementation: An implementation of our method is available at http://compbio.
IntroductionGene trees and species trees are the two fundamental types of phylogenetic trees. Although species trees represent the evolutionary history of a set of organisms (or taxa), gene trees represent the evolutionary history of a given gene family. Gene trees play a fundamental role in understanding gene family evolution (), and are used for inferring evolutionary events such as gene duplication and horizontal gene transfer (), inferring orthologs, paralogs and xenologs (), reconstructing ancestral gene content, and dating gene birth (). These powerful applications of gene trees depend on the ability to infer them accurately. However, unlike species tree construction, which can benefit from the use of well-behaved orthologous gene families or multi-gene species tree reconstruction methods (), accurate gene tree inference is confounded by the fact that most genes lack sufficient information to confidently support one gene tree topology over another. Indeed, previous studies () have shown that even the most accurate phylogeny reconstruction methods, such as neighbor joining (NJ) () or maximum likelihood (ML) [e.g. RAxML (), PhyML (, that make use of sequence information alone, often produce erroneous estimates of the gene tree topology. To overcome this limitation, many species tree aware methods have been developed for gene tree inference. These methods make use of a known species tree and a reconciliation model that makes it possible to extract topological information from the species tree and use it to guide gene tree inference. Some of these methods, such as TreeBest (), PrIME-GSR (DLRS) (A  kerborg et al., 2009) and SPIMAP (), reconstruct a gene tree directly from sequence data, but most, such as NOTUNG (), tt (G recki and Eulenstein, 2011), TreeFix (), AnGST () and MowgliNNI (), take in previously reconstructed gene trees and error-correct them using the reconciliation model. In essence, these methods are based on the observation that any deviation of the gene tree from the species tree topology is due to the effect of evolutionary phenomena such as gene duplication, gene loss, horizontal gene transfer (or simply transfer for short) and incomplete lineage sorting (ILS). In many eukaryotes (especially multi-cellular eukaryotes), duplication and loss play the dominant role in gene family evolution. This motivates the well-studied duplication-loss reconciliation model () that accounts for any discordance between the gene tree and species tree by invoking duplication and loss events. Almost all existing species tree aware gene tree inference methods are based on the duplication-loss reconciliation model (A ). However, gene families evolution is often more complex and is driven not just by duplication and loss but also by transfer events; this is common, for example, in microbial gene families. As a result, methods based on the duplication-loss model perform poorly and cannot be used for gene trees affected by transfer. Moreover, due to the complexity of the reconciliation model based on duplication, transfer and loss (DTL-reconciliation model), there has been little systematic development of species tree aware methods for handling gene families with transfer. Consequently, gene trees affected by transfer are difficult to infer accurately. Two error-correction methods, AnGST () and MowgliNNI (), have recently been proposed for gene families with transfer. Both work by considering alternative gene tree topologies, reconciling them to the species tree and choosing the gene tree that yields the best (most parsimonious) reconciliation. AnGST accounts for uncertainty in gene tree topologies by taking as input, not a single gene tree, but a set of gene trees (e.g. bootstrap replicates) and creating a new gene tree that minimizes the reconciliation cost by piecing together clades from the set of input gene trees. MowgliNNI deals with topological uncertainty by considering alternative gene tree topologies obtained by performing nearest neighbor interchange (NNI) operations (see, e.g.) on branches of the original input gene tree that have lower support than some user-specified threshold and selecting a gene tree topology with minimum reconciliation cost as the inferred gene tree. Although AnGST and MowgliNNI are excellent first attempts, they have several limitations. First, they are both based on a simple parsimony criterion that ignores sequence support for the inferred gene trees, making them prone to over-fitting the gene tree to the species tree topology. Second, both consider only a limited search space, affecting their ability to recover the true gene tree topology. Third, MowgliNNI requires the input species trees be fully dated (i.e. all species tree nodes must be relatively ordered by time), which is notoriously difficult to do accurately (). In this study, we introduce a principled error-correction based approach for species tree aware gene tree inference of gene families with transfer. Our method TreeFix-DTL attempts to find a tree that has the lowest reconciliation cost, under the DTL-reconciliation model, among all gene trees that have a likelihood that is 'statistically equivalent' to that of the ML tree. By balancing sequence likelihood with species divergence information from the species tree topology, TreeFix-DTL avoids the pitfalls of the existing approaches and finds more accurate gene trees. Similar ideas have been successfully used before in the context of gene tree error correction under the duplication-loss model (). The idea of statistical equivalence of gene tree likelihoods has been previously used to define 'islands' of trees () and has also been used to study the congruence between species tree and gene tree topologies in bacteria (). To evaluate the performance of TreeFix-DTL, we develop a thorough simulation framework that accounts for variations in species tree sizes, rates of gene evolution, alignment lengths, rates of duplication, transfer, and loss, (DTL) and species tree errors. We use this framework to compare TreeFix-DTL to AnGST, MowgliNNI, RaxML, NOTUNG and TreeFix. RaxML is one of the most widely used phylogeny reconstruction programs, while NOTUNG and TreeFix are two well-known species tree aware gene tree error-correction methods based on the duplication-loss model. We observe that TreeFix-DTL outperforms all other methods and improves the accuracy of gene trees across all simulation parameters. Specifically, the contributions of this work are as follows: 1. We demonstrate that methods that do not model transfer events do not work well for gene families with transfer. We test the performance of NOTUNG and TreeFix on simulated gene families with transfer and observe that they show poor performance even on datasets with low rates of transfer. 2. We introduce TreeFix-DTL, a statistically founded approach for species tree aware gene tree error correction in the presence of transfer. We show that TreeFix-DTL outperforms all other methods at accurate gene tree inference and achieves a great improvement in accuracy compared with RAxML. 3. We show that more accurate gene trees greatly improve the inference of evolutionary events. We reconcile gene trees reconstructed using RAxML and those inferred using TreeFix-DTL, AnGST and MowgliNNI with their corresponding species trees and show that improved topological accuracy translates into a direct improvement in correctly inferring evolutionary events like duplications, transfers, and losses (DTLs). 4. We show that TreeFix-DTL leads to an almost 10-fold reduction in the number of inferred transfer events on a dataset of 11 cyanobacterial species. We apply TreeFix-DTL to a published dataset of 11 cyanobacterial species that has been previously analyzed for horizontal gene transfer and ILS, and demonstrate that, strikingly, most of the evolutionary inferences drawn using the original dataset change when TreeFix-DTL gene trees are used.Throughout the rest of this study, all trees are assumed to be binary and, unless otherwise stated, gene trees are assumed to be unrooted and species trees rooted.
DiscussionIn this study, we have shed light on the complications of gene tree inference in the presence of horizontal gene transfer and demonstrated that our new method, TreeFix-DTL, outperforms all existing methods at accurately inferring gene trees with transfer. TreeFix-DTL builds more accurate gene trees by addressing the problem of phylogenetic uncertainty. Several complementary approaches exist to help build more accurate gene trees. These include methods for constructing more accurate sequence alignments (e.g.), more accurate substitution models that can better model the evolutionary process (e.g.), etc. Treefix-DTL can be used in conjunction with these approaches to further improve gene tree accuracy. Our results show that, even after error correction with TreeFixDTL or other methods, the inferred gene trees are often not perfectly correct (). This is due to the fact that perfect inference requires that each clade in the gene tree be inferred correctly. Thus, even though gene tree error correction greatly improves the accuracy of the gene trees, we caution against assuming that the inferred gene trees represent fully accurate evolutionary histories. In our analysis, we observed that AnGST performed quite well on our test datasets, delivering consistently good results and even surpassing the accuracy TreeFix-DTL in some cases. Thus, the simple approach used by AnGST may be worth studying and refining further and could be especially useful when rapid error correction is desired. One of the difficulties with using AnGST is that users must decide on the number of bootstrap replicates to use as input for AnGST. The number of bootstrap replicates used has a direct impact on the accuracy of the inferred gene tree; using too few bootstraps reduces the search space, but using too many leads to over-fitting. The accuracy and scalability of TreeFix-DTL can be further improved by making the local search step more efficient. More efficient search techniques or faster algorithms for local search would make it possible to efficiently handle larger input instances and to further improve gene tree accuracy. Currently, if TreeFix-DTL encounters multiple gene trees with statistically equivalent likelihood and with the same minimum reconciliation cost, it outputs the gene tree with the highest likelihood score. In the future, it might be instructive to consider all gene trees with statistically equivalent likelihood scores and minimum reconciliation costs, and to study the similarities and differences in the alternative gene tree topologies. TreeFix-DTL assumes that among all statistically equivalent candidates for the gene tree, the one with minimum reconciliation cost is most likely to be the true tree. However, the true evolutionary history of a gene family need not always be most parsimonious. It may therefore help to relax this assumption and to develop such an approach further, possibly by incorporating probabilistic models of DTL-reconciliation (e.g.) that would allow for integrating over all possible reconciliations for a given gene tree.Improved gene tree error correctionFinally, in this study, we have focused specifically on gene trees affected by duplications, transfers, and losses and do not explicitly model ILS. Therefore, TreeFix-DTL may remove weak, but biologically meaningful, signals of deep coalescence since such events are intrinsically orthogonal to the species tree under the DTL-model. This could partially account for our finding of low ILS rates within cyanobacteria.