Motivation: Cancer development is a complex and heterogeneous process. It is estimated that 5–10% of human genes probably contribute to oncogenesis, whereas current experimentally validated cancer genes only cover 1% of the human genome. Thus hundreds of cancer genes may still remain to be identified. To search for new genes that play roles in carcinogenesis and facilitate cancer research, we developed a systematic workflow to use information saved in a previously established tumor-associated gene (TAG) database. Results: By exploiting the information of conserved protein domains from the TAG, we identified 183 potential new TAGs. As a proof-of-concept, one predicted oncogene, fyn-related kinase (FRK), which shows an aberrant digital expression pattern in liver cancer cells, was selected for further investigation. Using 68 paired hepato-cellular carcinoma samples, we found that FRK was up-regulated in 52% of cases (P50.001). Tumorigenic assays performed in Hep3B and HepG2 cell lines revealed a significant correlation between the level of FRK expression and invasiveness, suggesting that FRK is a positive regulator of invasiveness in liver cancer cells. Conclusion: These findings implied that FRK is a multitalented signal transduction molecule that produces diverse biological responses in different cell types in various microenvironments. In addition, our data demonstrated the accuracy of computational prediction and suggested that other predicted TAGs can be potential targets for future cancer research. Availability: The TAG database is available online at the Bioinformatics Center
INTRODUCTIONHepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) is the fifth most common cancer worldwide () and shows high prevalence in Asia and Africa (). According to the annual report from the Bureau of Health Promotion, Department of Health, Taiwan (http://www.bhp.doh.gov.tw/ bhpnet/portal/Default.aspx), HCC is the second most common cancer in the Taiwanese population but is the leading cause of cancer-related death in Taiwanese males. Although recent studies have revealed many genetic and epigenetic changes that lead to the aberrant activation of several signaling cascades, including epidermal growth factor receptor and Ras/extracellular signalregulated kinase (), the pathogenesis of HCC is heterogeneous among patients (), so the molecular mechanisms of hepatocarcinogenesis remain largely unclear. Cancer development is a complex and heterogeneous process and it may be brought about by multiple causes, including chemical and physical mutation, viral or bacterial infection and hereditary mutations (). Furthermore, cancer is considered to be a genetic disease and develops, at least in part, because of DNA damage (). Generally speaking, genes involved in tumorigenesis are divided into two basic categories based on their actions: oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes (TSGs) (). While oncogenes encode proteins that control cell proliferation and/ or apoptosis (), a TSG is a protein that protects a cell from entering the course of carcinogenesis (). It has been suggested that 510% of human genes probably contribute to oncogenesis (), whereas current experimentally validated cancer genes only cover 1% of the human genome (), suggesting that hundreds of cancer genes still remain to be identified. A structural element is the signature of a protein that specifies the unique function of that protein. Typically, structural elements like domains or motifs provide clues to the functions of otherwise uncharacterized proteins and are often used to search for novel members of a protein family (). Many new proteins belonging to various families have been identified through in silico approaches in humans and other species (). For example, based on the well-known five major cysteine-rich domains,found a novel gel-forming mucin (MUC19/ Muc19) in glandular tissues using a hidden Markov modelbased genome-wide search approach. Another example is the identification of new claudin family members with a PSI-BLAST-based approach (). These studies *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. demonstrate that computer-assisted approaches are efficient and flexible for identifying novel members of domain-sharing protein families. We hypothesized that genes involved in tumorigenesis, especially functionally distinct groups of genes like oncogenes and TSGs, code for global protein families; thus the members within a group may share common domains that are signatures of their unique pathophysiological function. If so, the well-characterized tumor-associated protein domains can be used to search for novel proteins that may be involved in tumorigenesis. To test this hypothesis, we first established a tumor-associated gene (TAG) database (http://www.binfo.ncku.edu.tw/TAG/) to provide information about commonly shared functional domains in well-characterized oncogenes and TSGs (). Using TAG genes as a training set followed by computer-assisted searching in the human genome, we identified 183 candidates with the potential to be involved in tumorigenesis. For a proof-of-concept study, one candidate, Fyn-related kinase (FRK), was chosen and its oncogenic potential for invasiveness in HCC was validated.
DISCUSSIONProtein kinase is an enzyme that modifies other proteins by phosphorylation of tyrosine or serine/threonine amino-acid residues. This usually results in a functional change of the target protein. PTKs, which can be classified into receptor and non-receptor types, are a large and diverse multigene family involved in the regulation of a range of cellular processes, including proliferation, migration, differentiation, death and cell-to-cell communication in multicellular organisms (). In humans, perturbation of PTK signaling by mutations and other genetic alterations results in deregulated kinase activity and leads to the development of many diseases () and malignant transformation (Blume). Although the products of oncogenes can be classified into six broad groups (transcription factors, chromatin remodelers, growth factors, growth factor receptors, signal transducers and apoptosis regulators;), 470% of the known oncogenes and proto-oncogenes involved in cancers code for PTKs (). Thus it was not surprising that the computational search using known oncogenes as the training set showed that 450% of the predicted TAG oncogenes belonged to this specific family. And the consequences of dysfunction of these PTKs no doubt would be tumor formation. On the other hand, a tumor suppressor is a protein that either has a dampening or repressive effect on the regulation of the cell cycle or promotes apoptosis, and sometimes both, so it protects a cell from entering the path to carcinogenesis (). The functions of tumor-suppressor proteins fall into many categories including proteins that are responsible for DNA damage () and involved in cell adhesion (). In agreement with these principles, we found that the properties of the predicted TSGs were mainly binding ability and involvement in the processes of responses to stimuli. As the most significant process involving these predicted TSGs was vascular development-angiogenesis, and angiogenesis is considered to be an important step toward metastasis, these data suggested that the newly predicted TSGs may participate in the control of tumor metastasis. FRK (also known as RAK) is a 54-kDa PTK that belongs to the Src non-receptor tyrosine kinase family () and shares about 50% amino-acid identity with Fyn, Src and Lyn (). Because FRK has different structural features that comprise a putative bipartite nuclear localization signal in the SH2 domain () and is uniquely localized in the nucleus (), FRK is known to have a different set of substrates from other Src family members. FRK is expressed