Motivation: Bioimages of subcellular protein distribution as a new data source have attracted much attention in the field of automated prediction of proteins subcellular localization. Performance of existing systems is significantly limited by the small number of high-quality images with explicit annotations, resulting in the small sample size learning problem. This limitation is more serious for the multi-location proteins that co-exist at two or more organelles, because it is difficult to accurately annotate those proteins by biological experiments or automated systems. Results: In this study, we designed a new protein subcellular localization prediction pipeline aiming to deal with the small sample size learning and multi-location proteins annotation problems. Five semi-supervised algorithms that can make use of lower-quality data were integrated, and a new multi-label classification approach by incorporating the correlations among different organelles in cells was proposed. The organelle correlations were modeled by the Bayesian network, and the topology of the correlation graph was used to guide the order of binary classifiers training in the multi-label classification to reflect the label dependence relationship. The proposed protocol was applied on both immunohistochemistry and immunofluorescence images, and our experimental results demonstrated its efficiency. Availability and implementation: The datasets and code are available at: www.csbio.sjtu.edu.cn/ bioinf/CorrASemiB.
IntroductionA cell contains $10 9 proteins functioning in different organelles (), and knowledge of the subcellular localization of those proteins can provide important clues for understanding their functions (). For example, mitochondria are responsible for cellular aerobic respiration and producing energy while Golgi apparatus act to process and package the biological macromolecules. Annotating proteins subcellular patterns using biological experiments is in general too expensive in both time and costs, so various automated systems have been developed in these years. The data source to the automated predictors can be either protein amino acid sequence or microscopy bioimage. The sequence-based annotation methods usually utilize the homology transfer or targeting signal to predict the location motif (). Different from the 1D amino acid sequence, the 2D bioimage-based pattern analysis can get more intuitive and quantitative spatial distribution information. The bioimage analysis hasgained popularity with the rapid advance of microscopic imaging and image processing over the past two decades (). Many protein bioimage repositories with annotations of subcellular location have been constructed in recent years. For instance, the human protein atlas (HPA, http://proteinatlas.org) stores millions of microscopic images of immunohistochemistry (IHC) and immunofluorescence (IF) showing the spatial distribution of proteins in cells (). However, the proportion of reliable data in the HPA is still small, where only $13% protein samples in HPA have high-quality IHC images (), and less than half of the IF images have high-reliability subcellular annotations. Under this situation, previous efforts that trained statistical supervised classifiers in the feature space extracted from just high-quality and high-reliability images will not only reduce the generalization ability, but also cause a waste of a large ratio of lower-quality and unlabeled data, using which can be a solution to the current difficulty of small sample size of high-quality samples. Semi-supervised learning is a branch of statistical machine learning that is able to incorporate the unlabeled samples into model construction. According to the way of how to use unlabeled samples, semi-supervised approaches can be grouped in three different types. The first is the heuristic-based approach that uses unlabeled data within a supervised learning framework. For example, one of the earliest semi-supervised methods is a heuristic method, which is also known as self-training (). It trains classifier and predicts unlabeled data to generate more labeled samples that can be used as additional training data for updating the classifier iteratively. Later on, other variants of heuristic-based approaches have been developed, such as co-training () and CoForest method (). Recently, our group also developed a knowledge-guided semi-supervised protocol following this direction, named AsemiB (). It uses cross-class transferred knowledge as a guide to add the unlabeled samples, which has achieved encouraging performance. The second group is the graph-based methods, which usually use a graph where nodes stand for the samples and edges represent the pairwise relationship between samples. Subsequently, they propagate labels from labeled nodes to unlabeled nodes (). The third type is known as the transductive learning, which is usually built on the cluster assumption that the data tends to form discrete groups, thus they attempt to place decision boundaries in low-density regions (). Obviously, the mathematical hypotheses of the above semisupervised learning algorithms are different. To test the detailed performance of different types of semi-supervised protocols on tackling the small size of high-quality samples problem in bioimaging-based protein subcellular location prediction, five widely used semi-supervised algorithms from the three different types are systematically investigated in this study. Our results showed that they performed very differently on the benchmark datasets, and also demonstrated that an ensemble of them would generate better accuracy than any single algorithm. Another challenge in protein subcellular location prediction is handling the multi-location proteins, which simultaneously localize at two or more organelles. A recent study of applying fluorescentprotein tagging techniques on mammalian cells showed that multilabel proteins account for $60% (). This is a very high ratio posing the importance of a classification system that is capable of effectively learning the multiplex features. The core difference of a multi-label classification system from a single-label one is that it should be able to assign a set of labels to the query rather than one single label. The binary relevance (BR) idea has been widely used to construct the multi-label classifier (). It transforms one multi-label problem into several independent binary classification problems ignoring the dependence relationship among classes (). Such independence assumption has problems on the topic studied in this paper. Actually, there are underlying correlations among subcellular locations in cells (). These correlations can be spatial proximity, functional correlations, or other such reasons that can make some organelles have a higher probability of appearing simultaneously in annotations. For example, the proteins colocalizing in plasma membrane and endosomes are very common than other cases because endosomes are derived from the plasma membrane (). Modeling and incorporating such underlying correlations in classification would have important effects on prediction results (). In this article, we modeled the label correlations among subcellular locations by a Bayesian graph model, and subsequently used it to guide both the order of binary classifiers training and as additional features fed in each classifier. In this way, the label dependence can be properly modeled, which was implemented in the proposed ensemble semi-supervised framework for further performance enhancement.