Motivation: When analysing gene expression time series data, an often overlooked but crucial aspect of the model is that the regulatory network structure may change over time. Although some approaches have addressed this problem previously in the literature, many are not well suited to the sequential nature of the data. Results: Here, we present a method that allows us to infer regulatory network structures that may vary between time points, using a set of hidden states that describe the network structure at a given time point. To model the distribution of the hidden states, we have applied the Hierarchical Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Model, a non-parametric extension of the traditional Hidden Markov Model, which does not require us to fix the number of hidden states in advance.
INTRODUCTIONThe analysis of gene expression data in the field of systems biology is a challenging problem for a number of reasons, not least because of the high dimensionality of the data and relative dearth of data points. A number of approaches have been taken to inferring regulatory interactions from such data, often using graphical models or sparse regression techniques L bre, 2009; Opgen). These problems are further compounded by the nature of the biological systems under consideration, owing to the influence of unobserved actors that may alter the behaviour of the system. Often experiments are performed for long periods during which it is natural to expect the regulatory interactions at work to change. The time scales of regulatory responses to stimuli often differ from those of signalling and metabolic responses, and so it may be that responses to stimuli, around which experiments are often designed, take place in several phases each having different time scales. Previous studies have attempted to address this problem by introducing changepoints in the time series, allowing the inferred network structure to differ between the resulting segments of the time series. For example in, a changepoint model is applied in which Dynamic Bayesian Networks are inferred for each segment of the time series. However, such approaches may place strong prior assumptions on the number of changepoints that can be observed, and do not adjust for the complexity of the observed data automatically. Instead in, an allocation sampler is used in combination with Bayesian Networks to assign each observation to a group, but unlike changepoint models, this method treats the observations as being exchangeable, ignoring the fact that the data are sequential. The similar methodology in Ickstadt (2011) uses a more flexible non-parametric prior on group assignments, applied to the modelling of molecular interactions using Bayesian Networks, but suffers the same drawbacks in not recognizing the sequential nature of the data. A solution to the related, but different problem of inferring networks from multiple datasets that may vary in their underlying structure owing to changes in conditions, is presented in. By applying a hierarchical model, it is possible to model the interactions that may be shared for a number of different experimental conditions while also modelling the interactions specific to certain cases. However, this method treats the whole time series for a condition as a single static network, rather than allowing the network structure to change within a time series. Here, we present a methodology that allows us to infer network structures that may change between observations in a nonparametric framework while modelling the sequential nature of the data. To that end, we have used the infinite hidden Markov model of, also known as the hierarchical Dirichlet Process Hidden Markov Model (HDP-HMM) (), in particular the 'Sticky' extension of, in conjunction with a Bayesian network model of the gene regulatory network structure. The HDP-HMM allows the number of different states of the network structure to adapt as necessary to explain the observed data, including a potentially infinite number of states, of course restricted in practice by the finite number of experimental observations. In the previous work of, it was demonstrated that the HDP-HMM outperforms a Dirichlet Process mixture for Gaussian graphical models on heterogeneous time series. We apply our methodology to both simulated data and gene expression data for Arabadopsis thaliana and Drosophila melanogaster, demonstrating its effectiveness in detecting changes in network structure from time series data, and compare its performance and accuracy to existing methods. We also consider the biological implications of our results and present hypotheses as to their significance.