Motivation: It is popular to explore meaningful molecular targets and infer new functions of genes through gene functional similarity measuring and gene functional network construction. However, little work is available in this field for microRNA (miRNA) genes due to limited miRNA functional annotations. With the rapid accumulation of miRNAs, it is increasingly needed to uncover their functional relationships in a systems level.
INTRODUCTIONmicroRNAs (miRNAs) are endogenous small non-coding RNA molecules that can regulate gene expression at the posttranscriptional level by binding with 3 untranslated regions (UTRs) of the target mRNAs through base pairing. This results in the cleavage or translation inhibition of target mRNAs (). miRNAs are considered to represent one of the most important components of the cell. They play critical roles in * To whom correspondence should be addressed. many important biological processes, and are therefore associated with various diseases (Esquela). Thus far, thousands of miRNAs have been identified. For example, among humans, more than 700 miRNAs have been reported in miRBase (). In order to better understand miRNAs, it is increasingly necessary to measure their functional similarity and to further construct a network based on such. For protein-coding genes, measuring gene functional similarity and the construction and analysis of gene functional networks have obtained important results (). For example, Horvath et al. developed a gene functional network construction method based on gene expression similarity and identified an important molecular target (ASPM) of glioblastoma after applying their method to glioblastoma gene expression data (). One class of widely used methods related to gene functional similarity and the construction of a gene functional network is by measuring their sequence or expression similarities (). Another class of methods to infer functional similarity of protein-coding genes is based on gene ontology (GO) data (). For miRNAs, although sequence or expression similarities can interpret part of the functional similarity, like protein-coding genes, the correlation between gene functional similarities and gene sequence or gene expression similarities does not always exist (). The functional similarity of two miRNAs may be indirectly inferred based on their targets. However, it is difficult for this method to achieve high reliability because miRNA targets are mostly obtained by in silico prediction, which shows high false positives and false negatives (). Furthermore, although methods of measuring protein-coding gene functional similarity based on GO can achieve better results (), these methods are not applicable for miRNA genes because the function of most miRNAs remains unknown and no such function annotation database is available. Therefore, a new method is required to measure miRNA functional similarity and to further construct a miRNA functional network for this purpose. It has been reported that genes with similar functions are often implicated in similar diseases and vice versa (). This observation also exists in miRNAs (). Moreover, according to prior knowledge, the relationships of different diseases can be represented in a structure of directed acyclic graph (DAG). Therefore, the functional similarity of miRNAs can be evaluated byquantitatively measuring the similarity of disease DAG associated with these miRNAs. This observation provides a chance to infer miRNA functional similarity through their associated disease DAGs. However, this method is only applicable if there are sufficient miRNAdisease association data. Fortunately, in recent years, more miRNAdisease associations have been reported (). For example, a human miRNA disease database (HMDD) has recently recorded 2205 human miRNAdisease associations (). Here, based on the miRNAdisease association data and disease DAG, we presented a method, MISIM (miRNA similarity), to measure the functional similarity of miRNAs and to further construct miRNA functional networks according to the calculated functional similarity. We validated our method by comparing it with other potential miRNA functional similarity inferring methods, such as miRNA family, miRNA cluster and miRNA expression similarity. Results show that our method is reliable. More importantly, our method allows the discovery of novel miRNA pairs with high functional similarity, and can predict novel function and associated disease by analyzing the miRNA functional network.
DISCUSSIONIn summary, we presented a method for measuring miRNA functional similarity and construction of miRNA functional networks. Results show that our method is reliable and can be used to infer potential function and/or associated diseases for miRNAs. Moreover, a web-accessible program that implements the method of MISIM is also available at http://cmbi.bjmu.edu.cn/misim. As described above, since MISIM has calculated miRNA functional similarity based on miRNAdisease association data and the disease DAG, MISIM may generate bias in some cases, especially when little disease association data is available for a miRNA. Therefore, in the future, MISIM will improve greatly when more miRNAdisease association data and more accurate disease relationship are available. We believe that with the rapid increase of miRNAdisease association data (), MISIM will play more important roles in the analysis of miRNAs.