Motivation: A number of statistical phylogenetic methods have been proposed to identify type-I functional divergence in duplicate genes by detecting heterogeneous substitution rates in phylogenetic trees. A common disadvantage of the existing methods is that autocorrelation of substitution rates along sequences is not modeled. This reduces the power of existing methods to identify regions under functional divergence. Results: We design a phylogenetic hidden Markov model to identify protein regions relevant to type-I functional divergence. A C++ program, HMMDiverge, has been developed to estimate model parameters and to identify regions under type-I functional divergence. Simulations demonstrate that HMMDiverge can successfully identify protein regions under type-I functional divergence unless the discrepancy of substitution rates between subfamilies is very limited or the regions under functional divergence are very short. Applying HMMDiverge to G protein α subunits in animals, we identify a candidate region longer than 20 amino acids, which overlaps with the α-4 helix and the α4-β6 loop in the GTPase domain with divergent rates of substitutions. These sites are different from those reported by an existing program, DIVERGE2. Interestingly, previous biochemical studies suggest the α-4 helix and the α4-β6 loop are important to the specificity of the receptor–G protein interaction. Therefore, the candidate region reported by HMMDiverge highlights that the type-I functional divergence in G protein α subunits may be relevant to the change of receptor–G protein specificity after gene duplication. From these results, we conclude that HMMDiverge is a useful tool to identify regions under type-I functional divergence after gene duplication. Availability: C++ source codes of HMMDiverge and simulation programs used in this study, as well as example datasets, are available at
INTRODUCTIONAn important challenge in the post-genomic era is the identification of biological sequences that contribute to functional divergence of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. duplicate genes. After gene duplication, homologous regions, e.g. protein motifs or protein domains, may evolve at different rates between two duplicates because of the discrepancy of functional constraints that results from functional divergence. Therefore, the difference of substitution rates between two duplicate subfamilies can be used as a proxy of functional divergence, which is referred to as type-I functional divergence () or rate shifting (). Alternatively, substitution rates in both duplicate genes may increase immediately after gene duplication due to relaxed functional constraints, but decrease at a late stage due to increased functional constraints. The sequence regions or sites that are conserved within subfamilies but diverged between them may be relevant to functional divergence, which is referred to as type-II functional divergence (), conservationshifting () or 'constant but different' (). A number of statistical models have been proposed to detect protein regions or amino acid sites relevant to functional divergence based on the heterogeneity of substitution rates in duplicate genes (). The idea of these existing methods is to detect the discrepancy of substitution rates using an extended phylogenetic model in which the substitution rates could be different between different branches. A common drawback of the existing methods is that any autocorrelation of substitution rates along sequences is not modeled. Most phylogenetic methods assume that every site evolves independently. However, this simple assumption is frequently violated. In a recent work,performed a whole-genome level study on the correlated evolution of nearby residues in Drosophilid proteins. A strong autocorrelation was found between non-synonymous substitutions but not between synonymous substitutions, which suggests autocorrelation at protein level (). In addition, it has been found that positive selection varies between protein secondary structures (). Therefore, a number of neighboring pairs of sites may show correlated substitution patterns, such as the correlated substitution rates. Unfortunately, most existing methods for identifying functional divergence do not model the autocorrelation of substitutions. Instead, independence of substitution rates across sites is assumed in most of the existing methods (). These methodsPage: 177 176183