Motivation: To understand the dynamic nature of the biological process, it is crucial to identify perturbed pathways in an altered environment and also to infer regulators that trigger the response. Current time-series analysis methods, however, are not powerful enough to identify perturbed pathways and regulators simultaneously. Widely used methods include methods to determine gene sets such as differentially expressed genes or gene clusters and these genes sets need to be further interpreted in terms of biological pathways using other tools. Most pathway analysis methods are not designed for time series data and they do not consider gene-gene influence on the time dimension. Results: In this article, we propose a novel time-series analysis method TimeTP for determining transcription factors (TFs) regulating pathway perturbation, which narrows the focus to perturbed sub-pathways and utilizes the gene regulatory network and protein–protein interaction network to locate TFs triggering the perturbation. TimeTP first identifies perturbed sub-pathways that propagate the expression changes along the time. Starting points of the perturbed sub-pathways are mapped into the network and the most influential TFs are determined by influence maximization technique. The analysis result is visually summarized in TF-Pathway map in time clock. TimeTP was applied to PIK3CA knock-in dataset and found significant sub-pathways and their regulators relevant to the PIP3 signaling pathway. Availability and Implementation: TimeTP is implemented in Python and available at http://bio health.snu.ac.kr/software/TimeTP/.
IntroductionOur goal in this article is to develop a computational method to perform analysis of time series transcriptome data in terms of biological pathways and also to determine regulators for differentially expressed gene (DEG) sets or perturbed pathways. Analyzing transcriptome data can be done in many different ways for different purposes. Thus there are numerous computational methods and we begin by surveying the literature in the categories such as (i) methods for determining perturbed pathways, (ii) methods for analyzing time series transcriptome data, (iii) methods for the pathway based analysis of time series data and (iv) methods for identifying regulators while analyzing time series data.
ConclusionWe presented TimeTP, a four-step approach to locate perturbed sub-pathways and their regulators from time-series transcriptome data. TimeTP has two novel contributions: estimation of delay between two expression vectors that leads to the construction of a time bounded sub-graph, and introduction of the influence maximization technique into the analysis of times series data in search of TFs that are involved in perturbed pathways. TimeTP is the firstsub-pathway mining tool for time-series data that analyzes and visualizes the explicit expression pattern, providing a holistic picture of the pathway perturbation dynamics. In particular, TF-Pathway map in time clock enables user to navigate the perturbation propagation route along time. Analysis of the PIK3CA knock-in dataset shows that TimeTP can capture the perturbation in PI3K-Akt signaling, confirming the main objective of the biological experiment and re-producing consequent changes in the downstream pathways. Especially, FOXO4 is expected to be the master regulator of the perturbation of five pathways in TF-Pathway map, which is in an agreement with the fact that FoxO TFs are the known targets of Akt. As well as the perturbation in FoxO and Wnt signaling pathway directly affected by FoxOs, TimeTP suggests the late activation of ErbB pathway that highlights the same assumption of previous study, a positive feedback loop of the Akt signaling. In addition, TFs predicted and ranked by TimeTP include three important TFs from the original article of the dataset while MRA or DREM failed to discover any TF in the list. TimeTP supports various types of dataset with flexible parameters that can be adjusted for the search of regulators. We believe that TimeTP will be a very valuable tool to identify both perturbed pathways and their regulators, especially in analysis of time series sequencing data.