Motivation: Protein function depends on its structural stability. The effects of single point variations on protein stability can elucidate the molecular mechanisms of human diseases and help in developing new drugs. Recently, we introduced INPS, a method suited to predict the effect of variations on protein stability from protein sequence and whose performance is competitive with the available state-of-the-art tools. Results: In this article, we describe INPS-MD (Impact of Non synonymous variations on Protein Stability-Multi-Dimension), a web server for the prediction of protein stability changes upon single point variation from protein sequence and/or structure. Here, we complement INPS with a new pre-dictor (INPS3D) that exploits features derived from protein 3D structure. INPS3D scores with Pearsons correlation to experimental DDG values of 0.58 in cross validation and of 0.72 on a blind test set. The sequence-based INPS scores slightly lower than the structure-based INPS3D and both on the same blind test sets well compare with the state-of-the-art methods. Availability and Implementation: INPS and INPS3D are available at the same web server: http:// inpsmd.biocomp.unibo.it.
IntroductionStability of protein variants may or may not be different for wild type. This information is relevant to understand the relation between protein variants and insurgence of diseases (). Several methods have been developed so far to predict stability change in protein variants, either based on protein sequence or structure features (). Recently we developed INPS (), a sequence-based method devised to predict protein stability change (DDG) upon single-point variations, well comparing with the state-of-the-art methods. Here we present a web server, INPS-MD that includes the sequence-based INPS, and a new method INPS3D, exploiting descriptors derived from the protein 3D structure. Benchmark results, performed on two experimentally derived datasets of variations, show that the structure-based INPS-3D performs better than the sequence-based INPS when predicting the change in protein stability upon variation. INPS-MD is available at http://inpsmd.biocomp.unibo.it.