Motivation: Functional interpretation of miRNA expression data is currently done in a three step procedure: select differentially expressed miRNAs, find their target genes, and carry out gene set overrepresentation analysis. Nevertheless, major limitations of this approach have already been described at the gene level, while some newer arise in the miRNA scenario. Here, we propose an enhanced methodology that builds on the well-established gene set analysis paradigm. Evidence for differential expression at the miRNA level is transferred to a gene differential inhibition score which is easily interpretable in terms of gene sets or pathways. Such transferred indexes account for the additive effect of several miRNAs targeting the same gene, and also incorporate cancellation effects between cases and controls. Together, these two desirable characteristics allow for more accurate modeling of regulatory processes. Results: We analyze high-throughput sequencing data from 20 different cancer types and provide exhaustive reports of gene and Gene Ontology-term deregulation by miRNA action. Availability and Implementation: The proposed methodology was implemented in the Bioconductor library mdgsa. http://bioconductor.org/packages/mdgsa. For the purpose of reprodu-cibility all of the scripts are available at https://
IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small non-coding RNA molecules which participate in post-transcriptional gene regulation (). They bind to target mRNAs with partial complementarity, causing translational repression or target degradation (). Aberrant miRNAs expression has been reported to be linked to disease () and so many genomic experiments are now being conducted with the aim of clarifying the relationship between miRNA levels and phenotype. These experiments generally use microarrays or high-throughput sequencing to record miRNA expression between different biological conditions, followed by differential-expression analysis to evaluate the association of each miRNA to phenotype. It is common in such analyses to first select the significantly different miRNAs, and then explore their target genes to infer possible functional consequences of the deregulation of these miRNAs. Gene function databases, such as the Gene Ontology (GO) (), KEGG () or Reactome () are commonly used in this second step. Some authors prefer to first annotate miRNAs onto the functions of their target genes, and then do the functional interpretation at the miRNA level (). Despite being less instinctive or intuitive, this approach has been shown to reduce the effect of biased database information. This two-step paradigm, known as over representation analysis (ORA), has been extensively used in gene expression experiments and is now, the exclusive method used for miRNA functional profiling. But even in the gene expression context, ORA approaches have been legitimately criticized and some major drawbacks have been described (). Most concerning of these disadvantages is the loss of information caused by using only a few genes and the egalitarian treatment of these selected genes, a problem that arises again in the miRNA scenario. In differential gene-expression analyses for instance, ORA only considers genes which show large expression differences, whereas small changes in functionally related gene sets may be more relevant to the underlying biology. Similar biases occur when analyzing miRNA expression data, but in this case the effect is doubled. On one hand, some genes may be regulated by a big change in a single miRNA. If this occurs in an experiment, the miRNA will be identified as differentially expressed and therefore ORA can be used, with the above mentioned limitations. On the other hand, some other less-robust gene deregulations may go unnoticed because the miRNAs causing them do not appear among the most differentially expressed candidates, thus, in such cases the combined gene set effect will be missed. Furthermore, genes can also be inhibited by the additive effect of several small miRNA changes (). This scenario is common but is usually neglected in the ORA because the causative miRNAs are unlikely to be selected in the two-stages approach. Finally, a gene may be regulated by several miRNAs with opposite expression patterns (). This may induce compensatory effects that, presumably, are not considered by ORA approaches. As a simple example of this later situation we can think about a gene modulated by two miRNAs, one of them up regulated in experimental cases and the other up regulated in controls. The gene will be down regulated or inhibited in both conditions and hence, is irrelevant for case-control comparison. Despite this, ORA algorithms are likely to identify such genes as relevant in the comparison, because their regulatory miRNAs will have been selected in the differential-expression step of the analysis (). Thus, the application ORA methodology intrinsically implies a relatively naive understanding of biology. In the context of gene expression, the limitations of ORA have already been surpassed by gene set analysis (GSA) methods (). GSA approaches which can successfully model the importance of weaker, but coordinated changes in sets of functionally related genes, therefore reinforcing genomic data interpretation. But, even though GSA methods have been available for a long time for gene-based experiments, to our knowledge, no GSA-like methodologies have so far been proposed for functional profiling of miRNA measurements. This lack of GSA-style applications to miRNA data is not really surprising for two reasons: first, functional annotation is normally attached to genes, thus, in order to interpret miRNA data (for instance in terms of GO or KEGG), scientists must first define how miRNA and database information should be linked. For this purpose, meaningful miRNA-to-gene transfer of the experimental evidence is implicitly necessary. Second, most GSA algorithms are such that the gene-level analysis and the enrichment steps are strongly interdependent and cannot easily be split up. Such lack of flexibility of most GSA algorithms hinders their re-implementation and usage in the miRNA context. For instance in the classical GSEA algorithm (), the statistical significance of the enrichment is evaluated using a phenotype-based permutation applied to the geneexpression data matrix. Thus, the differential-expression step is carried out within the re-sampling schema, and cannot be changed without rewriting the algorithm. In this paper, we propose a novel GSA-type methodology for functionally interpreting miRNA expression data. Taking advantage of the additive inhibitor effect that miRNAs may have on genes, we first propose a meaningful procedure for transferring miRNA differential expression evidence to the gene level via a differential inhibition score. Then we use logistic regression models () to interpret this gene inhibition information in terms of gene sets. To exemplify the applicability of our method here we analyze 20 different real datasets taken from The Cancer Genome Atlas project (). Tumor samples are compared to normal tissue in a differential miRNA expression analysis and then, functional profiling in terms of GO is carried out for each of them. Several GO terms already known to be cancer related appear as deregulated in the different cancers, validating the suitability of our approach. We hope our algorithm, implemented in the R/ Bioconductor package mdgsa (), will be useful to data analysts, but also that the extensive supplementary materials presented in this paper would constitute a valuable asset.