GView is a Java application for viewing and examining prokaryotic genomes in a circular or linear context. It accepts standard sequence file formats and an optional style specification file to generate customizable, publication quality genome maps in bitmap and scalable vector graphics formats. GView features an interactive pan-and-zoom interface, a command-line interface for incorporation in genome analysis pipelines, and a public Application Programming Interface for incorporation in other Java applications. Availability: GView is a freely available application licensed under the GNU Public License. The application, source code, documentation, file specifications, tutorials and image galleries are available at
INTRODUCTIONThe commercial introduction of next-generation sequencing technology has reduced the time and expense of genome sequencing to such an extent that it is now possible for virtually any microbiology lab to generate genome sequences for the microorganisms that they study. Visualizing the genomic features contained in these sequences is important to aid biologists in understanding the genetic basis of microbial traits, and to convey this information to others. A number of software packages already exist for this purpose (Supplementary). Early software packages like GenomePlot () and GenoMap () generate circular genome maps in bitmap (PNG, JPG) formats, but do not support standard sequence file formats and have limited customizability. CGView () and Circos () can generate very high quality, highly customizable circular maps in bitmap and scalable vector graphics (SVG) formats, and can be incorporated in pipelines, but have limited interactivity, and like their predecessors, require custom input formats. DNAPlotter () generates interactive, high quality, customizable circular and linear maps, but does not support SVG image output, and cannot save the customizations applied to a genome map for later use. The motivation behind GView is to provide in a single application the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. best features of all these microbial genome viewing packages: easeof-use; customizability; interactivity; ability to generate circular and linear maps; ability to read standard sequence file formats; ready incorporation in pipelines and third-party applications; and the ability to generate aesthetically pleasing, publication quality image output.