Motivation: An autoimmune disorder occurs when the immune system mistakenly attacks and destroys its own healthy body tissues. The initiation of a geoepidemiological database, for recording autoim-mune incidents with a focus to clinical manifestations, demographic parameters and geographic background is crucial to detect correlations. Results: The dAUTObase collects an ever increasing number of pub-lications—currently counting 435—on autoimmune diseases frequencies in various populations and ethnic groups. The respective data have been hosted by a web application developed for the task. It uses three data visualization tools: the PivotViewer, the Disease Treemap and the Disease World Map, to assist the effective data querying. Availability and implementation: The dAUTObase 2.0 version (www. biodata.gr/dautobase) needs no registration for querying, but data entry and modification is reserved for registered users (curators-administrators).
INTRODUCTIONThe autoimmune diseases result from a dysfunction of the immune system due to which elements of the organism (cells, tissues or whole organs) are subjected to immune attack by agents of its own immune system. The immune response is complicated and entails numerous, different and complex mechanisms of control and regulation; still, its core discriminative power stems from the specificity of the antigenantibody interaction. Most of the classified autoimmune diseases target nervous tissue, but the cumulative prevalence lies with endocrine system, which is implicated in more high-prevalence autoimmune syndromes (). Autoimmune disorders are mostly of unknown etiology, as they constitute a heterogeneous group as far as demographic profile and primary clinical manifestations are considered, but with a common denominator: the effector of tissue and organ injury is an erroneous immune response to self antigens. Cases of comorbidity () might link more than one results to a single cause, which is in stark contrast to the usual approach of multifactorial diseases, whence a number of causes play a contributory role towards one, given result/syndrome (). This clustering allowed the notion of 'autoimmune disease class', where syndromes of similar pathogenesis but different anatomic manifestation or epidemiology are grouped together (). Considerable evidence supports a role for genetic, environmental and other factors in inducing autoimmune disorders (). The epidemiological indices for the same disease vary between patients from different geographical regionsup to 10, ()and in many cases variations are observed within the same country, as happens with psoriasis in Australia were the native (Aborigines) population is much less affected than recent immigrants from Europe (). Geoepidemiology aims at analyzing the spatial distribution of disease incidents to identify risk populations and possible causal factors. The first requirement from epidemiological surveys is to estimate disease incidence in order to focus the investigation on high-incidence areas and subsequently to determine spatial risk factors such as UV and natural radioactivity exposure, inhalation of iodine, ambient temperature and locally available foodstuff (). Although different geographic distribution is a well-substantiated fact in many cases, such as the almost complete lack of psoriasis in the natives of the Andes mountains compared with the high incidence in Europe amongst native Europeans (), rate variation across the map may also reflect differences in the quality of data (e.g. in the diagnosis, classification or reporting of the incidents as exemplified by) rather than true differences in incidence rates (). Additionally, people and communities tend to cluster in space in systematic ways that may be highly predictive of disease risk (). Such spatially organized socioeconomic patterns may have important influence on the rates of diseases observed in small areas (). The dAUTObase is the first attempt to register a great number of epidemiological studies on autoimmune diseases, to combine them with geographical and statistical parameters and to visualize the results in order to mine valuable data, that is, relations between specific autoimmune diseases and regions/populations/ society mechanics. Such correlations may greatly assist decisions on public health policies, encourage sensible research prioritization and form the basis for a temporal versus spatial/population database of the evolution of such diseases from an epidemiological point of view. Recent advances in data availability and analytic methods have created new opportunities for investigators to improve on the traditional reporting of disease at national or regional scale. They also present new challenges because, as the scale of the investigation becomes broader, local variations in data quality are likely to be shadowed in the greater picture (), whereas at the small-area scale, these variations could lead to serious biases if not reported. By employing data mining techniques, a great number of epidemiological studies were screened with initial emphasis on 22 autoimmune diseases. Data mining was performed on specific indices: incidence, prevalence, mortality, age at onset etc. Similar attempts for the compilation and development of epidemiological databases are numerous and proven, but the emphasis of such endeavours rests mostly on infectious diseases (). To date, there are several data repositories that fall under the banner of autoimmune diseases databases, such as 'The Autoimmune Disease Database' () and 'The ARRC Research Database Register' (The Autoimmune Resource  Research Centre Research Database Register. Available at: http://www.autoimmune.org.au/arrc-research-participant-database/.aspx). However, these databases, which are mostly literature derived, focus on the documentation of autoimmune diseases and their causative background, mainly genetic or/and the clinical manifestations; they provide no epidemiological aspect as to population distribution, much less to geographical distribution, national, regional or global. To this end, we are currently experimenting with various visualization techniques in an effort to promote a novel and promising approach in the study of autoimmune diseases, called 'geoepidemiological databases'. The aim of such databases is the study of the descriptive epidemiology of autoimmune diseases and the risk assessment as to their comorbidity in both individual and population levels. In this work, we present the development of interactive webbased data visualization and querying tools for dAUTObase (http://www.biodata.gr/dautobase). These tools allow users to compare the epidemiological indices of the documented in dAUTObase autoimmune diseases among different populations and thus identify hidden relationships between individual pieces of information (). More specifically, we have built an elegant webbased multimedia frontend which is based on a software tool launched by Microsoft, namely the PivotViewer (Microsoft times, while the animations and natural transitions provide context and prevent users from feeling overwhelmed by large quantities of information. The dAUTObase PivotViewer application enables users to interact with thousands of objects at once, and categorize and browse data in multiple ways revealing hidden associations and discovering tracks and trends. The dAUTObase queries can also be performed utilizing the Flare Visualization Toolkit, an open-source library. Because it includes a wide variety of features, ranging from basic charts to complex interactive graphs, it supports data management, visual encoding, animation and interaction techniques. In dAUTObase, Flare implements an alternative representation of the underlying data collection, the Disease Treemap, an easy way of analyzing large amounts of data in a small space (Treemap: TreemapAvailable at: http://www.cs.umd.edu/hcil/treemap/). Finally, dAUTObase queries output can also be visualized by using an alternative interface based on the JQVMap which enables the change of the look and feel of the maps by adding colours, events, and interactivity. We have utilized the JQVMap technology to implement the Disease World Map.
DISCUSSIONThe databases are important tools for the huge load of data gathered around the globe in various fields of medical and biomedical interest: genomics, proteomics, structural biology, epidemiology feature prominently among so many others. The geoepidemiological aspect of autoimmune diseases entails the dynamic to assist in both the elucidation of pathogenetic mechanisms and the emergence of population (), ethological () and other, community-derived patterns (). Recording incidents meticulously and with an epidemiological focus might help unravel the complex interactions between the various genetic contributors and environmental or social factors that alleviate or bolster such hereditary background (). Moreover, better population-scale planning of healthcare services could be achieved (). dAUTObase will be further expanded to become a dynamic tool for all the researchers who deal with autoimmunity. The thorough and systematic study of the epidemiology of autoimmune diseases can pave the way to new perspectives in terms of medical care utilization and patient quality of life. In this work, we present the integration of novel visualization tools within the dAUTObase 2.0 version in an attempt to provide a state-of-the-art data and querying visualization environment for the epidemiological study of autoimmune diseases. The net utility of the dAUTObase lies in three discrete applications, the audience of which might diverge: (i) The solid recording and compilation of published autoimmune epidemiological data in a single platform and the compilation of the source references so as to be reviewed, compared and downloaded by the user. Such an application, which is the most basic, is helpful in identifying gaps in epidemiological research and vigilance and the design of further research projects by healthcare policymakers, epidemiologists and population biologists/population geneticists. (ii) The second application is the classification and organization of epidemiological data on a geographical basis, were population groups and nationalities are secondary parameters in sorting. This way, a world map of autoimmunity is morphing, for the first time. Through this map commercial and public interests can prioritize the offering of products and services (research and healthcare, the latter in both preventive and therapeutic contexts) in different areas. The third application (iii) is entwined with the very design and the tools provided by the database; the different visualization tools allow access to different levels of compiled data in an intuitive manner and facilitate combination and/or correlation of different databits and bytes in order to form hypotheses, draw conclusions or simply detect tendencies in autoimmune diseases' aetiology and patterns-such as co-morbidity patterns and geography-based incidence biases. Except their potential to increase our basic knowledge by observation and extrapolation such data initiate new fields and contexts for researchers of autoimmune physiology, genetics and therapeutics as much as physicians, health professionals and policymakers. The current version of the dAUTObase complies to no standards of granulation for ethnicity and other population groups, nor with standardized terminology and systematic reference; it is devoted in recording data published in PubMed-indexed papers, as a measure of quality control. At present, the dAUTObase offers a solid and massive recording of epidemiological indices of autoimmune syndromes sorted by natural and political geography; priority is given to incidence and prevalence, with four fields each (general incidence/prevalence, incidence/prevalence for men and women separately, year of incidence/date of prevalence) but other indices, (such as mortality, morbidity, age at onset) are also included as mentioned earlier. Although by themselves general incidence and prevalence rates provide a rather poor context of geoepidemiology, they are adequate for initial applications and drawing of rough conclusions. As the database is scalable and additional data types can be imported within a short time upon decision, other indices, to be added as more data become available and recordable, are to further the usefulness of the database to more elegant and specific issues. Meticulously kept epidemiological records, easily accessible to all interested parties, will allow an 'alert' function whenever a study produces significantly different indices than the ones recorded in the dAUTObase. In such cases, the publication might be subject in a quality control step, and if found valid, scientists and authorities should scrutinize the reason for such deviations. Further still, records will allow comparative studies, where comorbidity tendencies and wide-scale biases might be detected faster and in more intuitive and direct ways than with traditional tools. Of course the granulation will never suffice for establishing comorbidity traits within families or, even less, for substantiating a siblings' concordance and other family bias as in Myasthenia Gravis (); population-wide traits, though, as the NorthSouth gradient which is instrumental for the Hygiene Theory (will be easily detectable, if the number of studies in developing countries offers an argumentum ex silentio, meaning that no publications on autoimmune diseases means no such incidents and rather than failure to report them (). The issue of comorbidity is just the tip of the iceberg: significant deviations in similar but geographically distant populations would point to significant environmental or ethological biases and causative agents, whereas similarities in colocated, mixed population groups would advocate against significant genetic contribution in syndrome aetiology. On the contrary, similarity in indices observed in ethnically relative populations located in distant regions or in a dispersed pattern, would point towards an increased genetic contribution to the disease phenotypes; such are Crohn's disease and IPEX-Immunodysregulatory Polyendocrinopathy and Enteropathy X-linked (). Last, but not least, such retrospective, whole-population queries might provide insight in long term, low incidence effects of different environmental or technological factors in generating disease phenotypes, which in many an autoimmune syndrome are due to acquired deregulation/dysregulation without serious genetic background. Of course, as the database is a recording and sorting tool rather than an exploratory method, its usefulness depends on the input achieved. And this is subject to funding and policy issues, especially among the developing countries. However, the emergence of the dAUTObase enables prompt use of high-volume and high-quality data, as they become published and available, for compiling larger and more coherent pictures on the issue of autoimmune diseases. The integration of the current visualization tools leaves enough to be desired, as the tools stem from different technologies, a fact synonymous to hardship in seamless integration. However, the preparation of a user manual to guide users through the functionalities of the visualization tools is now in progress. Furthermore, in the near future, we are planning to experiment on more querying options and alternative visualization types and techniques capable of manipulating multidimensional data, in order to create a global visualization framework which is to allow the conduct of multifaceted comparative studies of the querying results by the users. The administration environment of dAUTObase is another aspect which we consider of great importance. The system supports multiple user profiles, permitting scaled access to the information with users divided into three main groups according to their privileges, namely the administrators, the curators and the simple users. Data entry and modification in dAUTObase is possible only for registered users that is, administrator and curators; the data entered into the system by curators are incorporated into the dAUTObase collection only after their successful approval by the administrator who is responsible for their validity. Querying needs no registration. This way, researchers worldwide could concurrently contribute the epidemiological data of their country of origin and thus dAUTObase can become the first worldwide up-to-date and comprehensive geoepidemiological data repository. An external user can become a curator so that he/she can upload data in the dAUTObase collection, by contacting the administrator via the website (http://www.bio data.gr/dautobase/). After approval by the administrator, he/ she can acquire data entry and modification rights only for those data entered by him/her and under no circumstances can alter data entered by others. Data mining techniques to further enhance and automate the discovery of valuable information are also due for incorporation and the dAUTObase dataset is going to be exposed through web services based on the open data protocol (Open Data Protocol, Available at: http://www.odata.org/) giving the ability to the research community to freely exploit our data.