Motivation: Nucleosome positioning participates in many cellular activities and plays significant roles in regulating cellular processes. With the avalanche of genome sequences generated in the post-genomic age, it is highly desired to develop automated methods for rapidly and effectively identifying nucleosome positioning. Although some computational methods were proposed, most of them were species specific and neglected the intrinsic local structural properties that might play important roles in determining the nucleosome positioning on a DNA sequence. Results: Here a predictor called iNuc-PseKNC was developed for predicting nucleosome positioning in Homo sapiens, Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster genomes, respectively. In the new predictor, the samples of DNA sequences were formulated by a novel feature-vector called pseudo k-tuple nucleotide composition, into which six DNA local structural properties were incorporated. It was observed by the rigorous cross-validation tests on the three stringent benchmark datasets that the overall success rates achieved by iNuc-PseKNC in predicting the nucleosome positioning of the afore-mentioned three genomes were 86.27%, 86.90% and 79.97%, respectively. Meanwhile, the results obtained by iNuc-PseKNC on various benchmark datasets used by the previous investigators for different genomes also indicated that the current predictor remarkably outperformed its counterparts. Availability: A user-friendly web-server, iNuc-PseKNC is freely accessible at http://
INTRODUCTIONThe basic unit of eukaryotic chromatin is nucleosome. Each nucleosome contains a 147-bp core DNA () that is tightly wrapped in 1.67 left-handed super-helical turns around a histone octamer () as shown in. The histone octamer is formed by eight histones, of which two are of H2A, two of H2B, two of H3 and two of H4, and these histones bear highly conservative property in organism evolution (). Under the effect of histone H1, the nucleosome core particle forms a stable structure by further packaging into an advanced structure (). Adjacent nucleosomes are linked via a short DNA sequence, called the linker DNA, which ranges from 10 to 100 bp (). By modulating the accessibility of genomic regions to regulatory proteins (), it was observed that the packaging of DNA around the histone octamer played important roles in many biological processes such as transcriptional control, DNA replication, DNA repair and RNA splicing (). Therefore, it is fundamentally important for indepth understanding the subsequent steps of gene expression toreveal the mechanism involved in controlling nucleosome positioning. High-throughput techniques, such as chromatin immunoprecipitation (ChIP) coupled with microarrays (ChIP-chip) and ChIP coupled with sequencing techniques (ChIP-Seq), have been developed. Also, high-resolution nucleosome-positioning maps are now available for several model organisms including Homo sapiens (), Caenorhabditis elegans (), Drosophila melanogaster (, b) and Sacchoromryces cerevisiae (). These high-resolution data provided unprecedented opportunities, or made it feasible to develop computational methods for accurately predicting nucleosome positioning by feature extraction approaches.for the first time found that a 10-bp interval repetition of AA/TT/TA occurred in the 147-bp core region of nucleosomes.demonstrated that CA dinucleotide played an important role in nucleosome positioning, and the sequences containing the fragment TATAAACGCC had high binding affinity to histone.found that $50% of nucleosome placements were prefigured by genome sequence. It was also observed that nucleosome deficiency always appeared in poly (dA:dT) fragments (). Subsequently, Liu et al. () found that the 1011 bp periodicity signals for some particular dinucleotides, such as AA, TT, TA and GC, were more pronounced in the DNA nucleosomal sequences than in the linker DNA sequences. The above findings have demonstrated that nucleosome positioning is sequence-dependent to some extent. Based on the characteristics of nucleosome positioning sequence (or nucleosomal sequences), various computational methods () were proposed for predicting nucleosome positioning in different genomes. All these methods could yield quite encouraging results, and each of them did play a role in stimulating the development of this area. However, further work is needed due to the following reasons. (i) The datasets constructed in those methods were too small to reflect the statistical profile of nucleosomes. (ii) No cutoff threshold () was imposed to rigorously exclude the redundant samples or those with high sequence similarity with others in a same dataset. (iii) No web-server was provided to most of these methods, and hence their usage is quite limited, especially for the majority of experimental scientists. (iv) All the local DNA structural properties () and their impacts to the global sequence effects were ignored; however, it was demonstrated that this kind of properties might play important roles in determining the rotational positioning of DNA around the histone octamer (). The present article was initiated in an attempt to improve the prediction of nucleosomes from the above four aspects. According to a comprehensive review () and demonstrated by a series of recent publications (), to establish a really useful statistical predictor for a biological system, we need to consider the following procedures: (i) construct or select a valid benchmark dataset to train and test the predictor; (ii) formulate the biological samples with an effective mathematical expression that can truly reflect their intrinsic correlation with the target to be predicted; (iii) introduce or develop a powerful algorithm (or engine) to operate the prediction; (iv) properly perform cross-validation tests to objectively evaluate the anticipated accuracy of the predictor; (v) establish a user-friendly web-server for the predictor that is accessible to the public. Below, let us describe how to deal with these procedures one by one.