Inversions are a common form of structural variation, which may have a marked effect on the genome and methods to infer quantities of interest such as those relating to population structure and natural selection. However, due to the challenge in detecting inversions, little is presently known about their impact. Software to simulate inversions could be used to provide a better understanding of how to detect and account for them; but while there are several software packages for simulating population genetic data, none incorporate inversion polymorphisms. Here, we describe a software package, modified from the forward-in-time simulator FREGENE, which simulates the evolution of an inversion polymorphism, of specified length, location, frequency and age, in a population of sequences. We describe previously unreported signatures of inversions in SNP data observed in invertFREGENE results and a known inversion in humans. Availability: C++ source code and user manual are available for download from http://www.ebi.ac.uk/projects/BARGEN/ under the GPL licence.
INTRODUCTIONAn inversion mutation both reorientates and flips over the strands of a stretch of DNA sequence. Recombinations are typically only viable between sequences in the same orientation, leading to the separate evolution of inverted and non-inverted sequences at the locus (). While sequencing may distinguish inverted and non-inverted sequences directly, genotyping cannot because: (i) unlike copy number variants, the allele intensity is unaltered, and (ii) the alleles on the inverted sequence are mapped to their location on the reference genome rather than their actual location. However, their effect on recombination may leave a discernible pattern on local linkage disequilibrium (LD). While most research on inversion polymorphisms has been performed in Drosophila, recent analyses of sequence () and SNP data () indicate that inversions are a common form of structural variation in the human genome. Studies have shown that inversions may effect genome-wide recombination rates and be associated with natural selection and disease (Antonaccil * To whom correspondence should be addressed). There has also been concern that inversions may bias statistical methods for inferring quantities of interest such as those relating to population structure and recent selection (). Therefore, statistical methods have been developed to detect inversion polymorphisms from population SNP data (), and methods for inferring population genetic parameters may need revising to account for their presence. However, to test methods for detecting inversions and assess the robustness of population genetic methods to the presence of inversions, software to simulate genetic data incorporating inversions is required. To our knowledge, the only strategy adopted to simulate data with inversions consists of reorientating a proportion of sequences at a locus in the HapMap data (). While this strategy is simple and should produce data that reflects some features of inversion loci, reorientating contemporary genetic data does not model the evolution of the inversion through time. In particular, the suppression of recombination between inverted and non-inverted sequences, which results in their subsequent independent segregation, is not modelled but has specific effects on the data (Section 3). FREGENE is a software package that simulates population sequence data forwards through time by simulating every meiotic and mutation event in a population of sequences over a fixed number of generations (). By simulating data forward-in-time, FREGENE allows complex scenarios of demography and recombination to be modelled simultaneously. This enables the generation of data closely matching the features of data from the major genotyping projects (). Here we modify the software to produce an affiliated program, invertFREGENE. This is the first software package to simulate genetic data with inversions and exploits the forward-in-time approach to model the fundamental features of an inversion as it segregates.