Motivation: Coexisting in a DNA system, meiosis and recombination are two indispensible aspects for cell reproduction and growth. With the avalanche of genome sequences emerging in the post-genomic age, it is an urgent challenge to acquire the information of DNA recombination spots because it can timely provide very useful insights into the mechanism of meiotic recombination and the process of genome evolution. Results: To address such a challenge, we have developed a predictor, called iRSpot-EL, by fusing different modes of PseKNC (pseudo K-tuple nucleotide composition) and mode of DACC (dinucleo-tide-based auto-cross covariance) into an ensemble classifier of clustering approach. 5 fold cross tests on a widely used benchmark dataset have indicated that the new predictor remarkably outper-forms its existing counterparts. Particularly, far beyond their reach, the new predictor can be easily used to conduct the genome-wide analysis and the results obtained are quite consistent with the experimental map. Availability: For the convenience of most experimental scientists, a user-friendly web-server for iR-Spot-EL has been established at http://bioinformatics.hitsz.edu.cn/iRSpot-EL/, by which users can easily obtain their desired results without the need to go through the complicated mathematical equations involved.
IntroductionRecombination plays an important role in genetic evolution, which describes the exchange of genetic information during the period of each generation in diploid organisms. Recombination provides many new combinations of genetic variations and is an important source for biodiversity, which can accelerate the procedure of biological evolution. Knowledge of recombination spots may also provide very useful information for in-depth understanding the reproduction and growth of cells. Therefore, it is highly demanded to develop computational methods for predicting the recombination spots.Actually, many efforts have been made in this regard. For instance, based on the gapped dinucleotide composition features,) developed a predictor called RF-DYMHC to do the job.), using the kmer approach and the increment of diversity combined with quadratic discriminant analysis, developed the IDQD predictor for the same purpose. In the above two predictors, however, only the local DNA sequence information was utilized, and hence their prediction quality may be limited. To improve this situation, recently two new predictors, iRSpot-PseDNC () and iRSpot-TNCPseAAC () were developed. The former was based on the DNA local structural properties () and pseudo dinucleotide composition (); while the latter based on the DNA trinucleotide composition () as well as the corresponding pseudo amino acid components (). Each of the aforementioned methods has its own advantage, and did play a role in stimulating the development of this important area. Meanwhile, they also have some disadvantages, as reflected by the following facts. (1) Although powerful predictors have been proposed, there is no efficient approach to combine them to further improve the predictive performance. (2) None of these methods allows users to set the desired parameters for prediction, and hence it is difficult for them to optimize the predictor system according to the need of their focus. (3) Except the RF-DYMHC (), all the other predictors cannot be directly used for genome-wide analysis. Even for the RF-DYMHC predictor, its approach is not accurate because the window size therein is arbitrary. The current study was initiated in an attempt to address these shortcomings by developing a more powerful predictor for identifying DNA recombination spots. The proposed predictor is called iRSpot-EL, where " i " stands for " identify " , " RSpot " for " recombination spot " , and " EL " for " ensemble learning ". To develop a new predictor usually consists of two purposes. One is to stimulate theoretical studies in the relevant areas, and the other is to make experimental scientists easier to get their desired information. To realize these, the rest of this article is presented according to the following five guidelines (): (1) benchmark dataset, (2) sample representation, (3) operation algorithm, (4) validation, and (5) web-server.