An ultrafast DNA sequence aligner (Isaac Genome Alignment Software) that takes advantage of high-memory hardware (448 GB) and variant caller (Isaac Variant Caller) have been developed. We demonstrate that our combined pipeline (Isaac) is four to five times faster than BWA þ GATK on equivalent hardware, with comparable accuracy as measured by trio conflict rates and sensitivity. We further show that Isaac is effective in the detection of disease-causing variants and can easily/economically be run on commodity hardware. Availability: Isaac has an open source license and can be obtained at https://
INTRODUCTIONMotivated by a growing need for faster turnaround times for whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data analysis, we present here a novel alignment and variant calling pipeline that is able to rapidly align WGS data and deliver high-quality variant calls on a single server node. The aligner, Isaac Genome Alignment Software, is designed to align next-generation sequencing data with low-error rates (single or paired-ends). Speed improvements come from the fact that the Isaac aligner has been designed to take full advantage of all the computational power available on a single server node. As a result, the Isaac aligner scales well over a broad range of hardware architectures, and alignment performance improves with hardware capabilities (i.e. clock speed, number of cores, IO bandwidth and memory). The typical endto-end time to align a $3040 human dataset from BCL or FASTQ files to a sorted and duplicate-marked BAM file is $4 h on an Amazon High-Memory Quadruple Extra Large Instance and can be as fast as 2 h on an optimized high end server (see Supplementary Material for specs). Beyond speed and scalability, the Isaac aligner also delivers ease-of-use, flexibility and robustness. The creation of sorted, duplicate-marked BAM files from BCL or FASTQ files is done in a single operation, alleviating the need to rewrite large BAM files multiple times in a typical workflow. Additional command-line options are available to the expert user to finely control the algorithm's inputs, outputs and computational performance (Supplementary Section S1 describes the details of the Isaac aligner algorithm and its implementation). The Isaac Variant Caller calls SNPs and small indels using a Bayesian framework to compute probabilities over diploid genotype states. The Isaac Variant Caller uses an internal read realignment routine to improve variant call accuracy near indels and includes a site-specific error dependency term (Supplementary Section S2 provides a detailed explanation of the Isaac Variant Caller algorithm and implementation). The Isaac Variant Caller is designed to efficiently genotype and provide output for all variant and non-variant genomic loci as Genome VCF files (gVCF;, manuscript in preparation; https://sites.google.com/site/gvcftools/), a convention for efficiently representing whole-genome output in VCF format (http://www.1000genomes.org/node/101). To demonstrate the performance of the Isaac aligner and variant caller pipeline (Isaac), we compare the quality of the variant calls and the time-to-answer of this pipeline with the community standard combination of BurrowsWheeler Alignment (BWA) () and the Genome Analysis Tool Kit (GATK) (). We also demonstrate that Isaac can successfully detect a clinically deleterious variant in a neonatal sample ().