Integrative Short Reads NAvigator (ISRNA) is an online toolkit for analyzing high-throughput small RNA sequencing data. Besides the high-speed genome mapping function, ISRNA provides statistics for genomic location, length distribution and nucleotide composition bias analysis of sequence reads. Number of reads mapped to known microRNAs and other classes of short non-coding RNAs, coverage of short reads on genes, expression abundance of sequence reads as well as some other analysis functions are also supported. The versatile search functions enable users to select sequence reads according to their sub-sequences, expression abundance, genomic location, relationship to genes, etc. A specialized genome browser is integrated to visualize the genomic distribution of short reads. ISRNA also supports management and comparison among multiple datasets. Availability: ISRNA is implemented in Java/Cþþ/Perl/MySQL and can be freely accessed at http://omicslab.genetics.ac.cn/ISRNA/.
INTRODUCTIONThe wide application of high-throughput sequencing technology has given rise to significant needs for powerful bioinformatics tools to analyze the resulting data and retrieve useful information. Although there have been some web-based and standalone tools for high-throughput small RNA analysis available, many of them mainly focus on microRNA (miRNA) identification () or small RNA characterization (); few provide comprehensive feature analysis, mining as well as visualization and cross-sample comparison functions (see Supplementary Table S1 for detailed comparison). Here we introduce Integrative Short Reads NAvigator (ISRNA), an online toolkit for searching, analyzing, visualizing and comparing short sequence reads. ISRNA integrates several useful tools in a user-friendly way. Besides mapping short sequence reads to a given genome and allowing a genome browser to visualize the position and distribution of sequence reads, ISRNA also calculates nucleotide composition, identifies known miRNAs and their homologous sequences, predicts the secondary structure for the surrounding genomic region of a short sequence and reveals genomic small RNA clusters and genes producing small RNAs. It also provides versatile searching functions and allows cross-dataset comparisons. All these functions are easy to use with user-friendly outputs, making ISRNA suitable for researchers with limited bioinformatics skills.