Motivation: The accuracy of reference genomes is important for downstream analysis but a low error rate requires expensive manual interrogation of the sequence. Here, we describe a novel algorithm (Iterative Correction of Reference Nucleotides) that iteratively aligns deep coverage of short sequencing reads to correct errors in reference genome sequences and evaluate their accuracy. Results: Using Plasmodium falciparum (81% A + T content) as an extreme example, we show that the algorithm is highly accurate and corrects over 2000 errors in the reference sequence. We give examples of its application to numerous other eukaryotic and prokaryotic genomes and suggest additional applications. Availability: The software is available at http://icorn.sourceforge.net
INTRODUCTIONAlthough there are now over 5000 whole genome sequences in the public databases, their level of accuracy varies considerably. The aspiration set by the Human Genome Project was for a maximum of one error per 10 kb of finished sequence (International Human). However, the true error rate varies significantly from this figure depending on the nature of the sequence (base composition, repeats, etc.) both in human and in other organisms. Even to achieve this error rate, expensive manual finishing is required to ensure that each base is covered by at least 2 clones and has a cumulative Phred score of at least 40 (). The 'Gold Standard' for quality involves the manual inspection of each base by an experienced finisher. This is a major expense within a genome project. For example, nine chromosomes of Plasmodium falciparum were completed at the Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute (), by the equivalent of approximately seven finishers working for up to 5 years. Despite this and subsequent efforts since publication, as we show here, many errors are still present. Even in genomes described as completed or finished, the underlying quality at each base is unknown and the error rate can be variable genome-wide. Therefore, rapidly fixing errors, highlighting regions that are error-prone and quantifying accuracy genome-wide is a priority that will significantly benefit the end user. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. So far, few methods exist to correct genomic errors automatically. There are algorithms to improve base calling () or to detect frameshifts by protein homology or by sequence analysis. New assembly software like Mira (http://www.chevreux.org/projects_mira.html) has also been developed that allows hybrid assemblies with different sequencing technologies. This can both assemble mixed Sanger/454 data and improve the homopolymer length errors in 454 technologies using high Illumina read coverage. To date, however, no methods exist that can accurately detect and correct base errors and small indels in genome sequences. We have developed an algorithm that uses deep coverage of sequence reads produced using Illumina's Genome Analyser platform, mapped iteratively to a reference genome, in a way that allows confident sequence correction.
DISCUSSIONHere, we have shown that iterative mapping of short reads can correct errors remaining in a reference genome with great accuracy. Critical to the success of this approach is the use of two different mapping strategies during the iterations. High-quality discrepancies called using SSAHA2 are introduced into the genome and only confirmed if a separate mapping of perfectly aligning reads along their whole length using SNP-o-matic does not decrease coverage at the altered sites. Iterative mapping approaches have been used before to derive a consensus genome sequence from metagenomic sequencing data () but since this derives from aggregated sequences from an unknown number of starting Page: 1707 17041707