Motivation: Post-translational modification by the Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO) proteins, a process termed SUMOylation, is involved in many fundamental cellular processes. SUMO proteins are conjugated to a protein substrate, creating an interface for the recruitment of cofactors harboring SUMO-interacting motifs (SIMs). Mapping both SUMO-conjugation sites and SIMs is required to study the functional consequence of SUMOylation. To define the best candidate sites for experimental validation we designed JASSA, a Joint Analyzer of SUMOylation site and SIMs. Results: JASSA is a predictor that uses a scoring system based on a Position Frequency Matrix derived from the alignment of experimental SUMOylation sites or SIMs. Compared with existing web-tools, JASSA displays on par or better performances. Novel features were implemented towards a better evaluation of the prediction, including identification of database hits matching the query sequence and representation of candidate sites within the secondary structural elements and/or the 3D fold of the protein of interest, retrievable from deposited PDB files. Availability and Implementation: JASSA is freely accessible at http://www.jassa.fr/. Website is implemented in PHP and MySQL, with all major browsers supported. Contact:
IntroductionSUMOylation is a eukaryotic post-translational modification which consists in the reversible attachment of members of the Small Ubiquitin-like Modifier (SUMO) protein family on a protein substrate resulting in the dynamic regulation of its biochemical properties. Proteins involved in many fundamental cellular processes like DNA repair, transcription control, chromatin organization, macromolecular assembly and signal transduction are SUMOylated [for a review see (. Thus, it is not surprising that deregulation of SUMOylation is associated to various pathological conditions like neurological disorders, cancers and pathogen proliferation [for reviews (. SUMO proteins are conjugated to a lysine (K) residue of the substrate through the sequential action of SUMO-specific activating (E1), conjugating (E2) and ligating (E3) enzymes and de-conjugation relies on SUMO-specific proteases. Virtually all eukaryotes express SUMO proteins, mammals and plants harboring several paralogues,and the components of the conjugation pathway are highly conserved across eukaryote proteomes (;). Analysis of SUMO targets shows that the modified K is often embedded within the consensus sequence WKxE (where W is a hydrophobic residue and x any amino acid), which is a binding site for Ubc9, the single E2 conjugating enzyme (). Extended variants of this motif were described, including negatively charged amino acid-dependent SUMOylation motifs (NDSM) (), phosphorylation-dependent SUMOylation motifs (PDSM) () and phosphorylation SUMOylation motif (), where a cluster of negatively charged and/or phosphorylatable residues downstream of the core motif promotes SUMO conjugation by strengthening the interaction between the substrate and Ubc9 (). SUMOylation of the inverted consensus motif (xKW) was also reported (). However, not every sequence conforming to the consensus motifs is modified, likely because the environment of the target K must adopt a favorable conformation to be accessible to the SUMO machinery (). Notably, modification by SUMO occurs at nonconsensus sites. This is the case for $50% of the SUMOylated substrates identified by the Vertegaal's group (). SUMO creates an interface for the recruitment of protein cofactors that harbor short peptide sequences known as SUMOinteracting motifs (SIMs). Most SIMs feature a loose consensus sequence composed of 34 aliphatic residues often flanked by acidic and/or phosphorylatable amino acids (). The hydrophobic core adopts a b-strand conformation that can accommodate in a pocket formed by the a 1-helix and the b 2-strand of SUMO (). Adjacent negatively charged residues control the affinity, the polarity and the paraloguespecificity of the SIM/SUMO interaction (). Mapping SUMO-conjugation sites and SIMs is mandatory to fully characterize the biological consequences of SUMOylation. Large-scale mass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomic studies allowed the identification of hundreds of proteins harboring SUMOylation sites and/or SIMs (). However, the use of this approach is limited by the transient nature of the modification, the small fraction of a protein that is SUMOylated and the difficulty to identify branched peptides resulting for the tryptic digestion of SUMOylated proteins. When MS data are not available, computer-aided prediction of SUMOylation sites and SIMs by in silico analysis represents a promising strategy to reduce the number of potential targets for experimental verification. We developed JASSA (Joint analyzer of SUMOylation site and SIMs) to provide a comprehensive overview of potential SUMOylation sites and SIMs. The prediction relies on a scoring system based on a Position Frequency Matrix (PFM) derived from the alignment of experimentally validated sequences. When compared with existing bioinformatics tools, JASSA displays on par or better predictive performances. To increase the reliability of the prediction, JASSA offers additional features such as identification of database (DB) hits matching the query sequence, systematic pattern search against extended motifs, analysis of the physico-chemical properties of adjacent residues and, when a PDB file is available, the possibility to represent candidate sites within the secondary structural elements and the 3D fold of the query protein. We believe that JASSA will provide a valuable support for selecting the best candidate sites for experimental studies.