We present JAWAMix5, an out-of-core open-source toolkit for association mapping using high-throughput sequence data. Taking advantage of its HDF5-based implementation, JAWAMix5 stores genotype data on disk and accesses them as though stored in main memory. Therefore, it offers a scalable and fast analysis without concerns about memory usage, whatever the size of the dataset. We have implemented eight functions for association studies, including standard methods (linear models, linear mixed models, rare variants test, analysis in nested association mapping design and local variance component analysis), as well as a novel Bayesian local variance component analysis. Application to real data demonstrates that JAWAMix5 is reasonably fast compared with traditional solutions that load the complete dataset into memory, and that the memory usage is efficient regardless of the dataset size. Availability: The source code, a batteries-included executable and user manual can be freely downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONNext-generation sequencing (NGS) enables investigators to use whole-genome sequences for genotypephenotype association mapping, but it brings with it the challenge of developing scalable tools to handle very large datasets. To do association studies, it is usually preferable to put data into random access memory (RAM); however, the sequence data generated by NGS are usually too large to be loaded into RAM. Therefore, analysts may have to use ad hoc methods to manipulate file reading. As the magnitude of sequencing projects goes up, this problem will become more and more pronounced. To solve this problem of scalability, it would be ideal to have data stored on disk, but also provide a handy read/write protocol that users can use as if the data were stored in the main memory (an approach referred to as 'out-of-core' in computer science). This toolkit should offer transparency (i.e. hide the tedious implementation details) and high performance. Hierarchical Data Format (HDF5) (www.hdfgroup.org/HDF5) is a set of libraries designed to store and organize large datasets that was originally developed by the National Center for Supercomputing Applications. Because of its excellent performance and convenience, it has been widely used in many scientific computing communities, including storing NGS sequences (). We developed JAWAMix5, a toolkit that uses HDF5 for storing and analyzing whole-genome genotypes for association mapping with various statistical models. The linear mixed model has been considered an important framework in GWAS for controlling population structure () and estimating genetic architecture (), and it has recently been significantly improved (). We implemented most functions in JAWAMix5 based on the mixed model. In addition, we provide standard functions without the mixed model as an alternative for users (e.g. stepwise regression and nested association mapping). Given that current implementations of mixed model are based on C/C, R or Python, JAWAMix5 provides another alternative for researchers to use. Java programmers can contribute () based on the specifications described in our user manual.