Motivation: To increase detection power, gene level analysis methods are used to aggregate weak signals. To greatly increase computational efficiency, most methods use as input summary statistics from genome-wide association studies (GWAS). Subsequently, gene statistics are constructed using linkage disequilibrium (LD) patterns from a relevant reference panel. However, all methods, including our own Joint Effect on Phenotype of eQTL/functional single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) associated with a Gene (JEPEG), assume homogeneous panels, e.g. European. However, this renders these tools unsuitable for the analysis of large cosmopolitan cohorts. Results: We propose a JEPEG extension, JEPEGMIX, which similar to one of our software tools, Direct Imputation of summary STatistics of unmeasured SNPs from MIXed ethnicity cohorts, is capable of estimating accurate LD patterns for cosmopolitan cohorts. JEPEGMIX uses this accurate LD estimates to (i) impute the summary statistics at unmeasured functional variants and (ii) test for the joint effect of all measured and imputed functional variants which are associated with a gene. We illustrate the performance of our tool by analyzing the GWAS meta-analysis summary statistics from the multi-ethnic Psychiatric Genomics Consortium Schizophrenia stage 2 cohort. This practical application supports the immune system being one of the main drivers of the process leading to schizophrenia. Availability and implementation: Software, annotation database and examples are available at
IntroductionUnivariate analysis of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) has emerged as the main tool for identifying trait/disease-associated genetic variants (). However, most variants reported by complex trait GWAS are common single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with weak or moderate effect sizes, which account for only a small fraction of the overall phenotypic variation (). This is due to the fact that, due to their small effect sizes, most common causal variants are unlikely to be detected in GWAS (). A reasonable approach to increase the power to detect true association signals with small effect sizes is to aggregate them by jointly analyzing multiple SNPs. To leverage information from multiple SNPs, multivariate association tests () have been also proposed. However, these methods typically test all SNPs, regardless of their functionality. Given that functional SNPs are likely to jointly impact on gene expression, to increase detection power, our group proposed JEPEG (Joint Effect on Phenotype of eQTL/functional SNPs associated with V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.