The generation of large volumes of omics data to conduct exploratory studies has become feasible and is now extensively used to gain new insights in life sciences. The effective exploration of the generated data by experts is a crucial step for the successful extraction of knowledge from these datasets. This requires availability of intuitive and interactive visualization tools that can display complex data. Matrix heatmaps are graphical representations frequently used for the description of complex omics data. Here, we present jHeatmap, a web-based tool that allows interactive matrix heatmap visualization and exploration. It is an adaptable javascript library designed to be embedded by means of basic coding skills into web portals to visualize data matrices as interactive and customizable heatmaps.
INTRODUCTIONThe need for effective tools for data visualization is rising with the increasing data volumes generated by scientific studies. Effective data visualization lets the researcher understand his/her data at both broad and detailed levels and enables barrier-free exploration of the datasets. A widely used type of visualization to report biological results are matrix heatmaps, which represent a dataset with two dimensions, commonly genes and samples. The values in the matrix may represent any widely measurable property such as expression values. The static nature of such plots is a limiting factor to explore complex datasets. Therefore, we introduced the use of interactive heatmaps and developed Gitools, a desktop application for this purpose (Perez). With jHeatmap, we provide a javascript library that can be included in any web platform to interactively explore heatmaps over a web browser without any further software barriers. This could be compared with the creation of Cytoscape-Web (), which maintains basic features for network visualization of Cytoscape desktop application. The data are visualized in a heatmap matrix that can contain multiple values per cell and thus allows loading multidimensional datasets such as alteration data from oncogenomic study cohorts. Each cell is associated with two features, e.g. genes and samples, with additional information, e.g. clinical information for samples, and a set of values. Columns and rows can be moved freely, and can be filtered and sorted based on values in the cells or based on annotations. All of the properties associated with rows and columns can be color coded or printed as text.