The selection of models of nucleotide substitution is one of the major steps of modern phylogenetic analysis. Different tools exist to accomplish this task, among which jModelTest 2 (jMT2) is one of the most popular. Still, to deal with large DNA alignments with hundreds or thousands of loci, users of jMT2 need to have access to High Performance Computing clusters, including installation and configuration capabilities, conditions not always met. Here we present jmodel-test.org, a novel web server for the transparent execution of jMT2 across different platforms and for a wide range of users. Its main benefit is straightforward execution, avoiding any configuration/execu-tion issues, and reducing significantly in most cases the time required to complete the analysis. Availability and implementation: jmodeltest.org is accessible using modern browsers, such as Firefox, Chrome, Opera, Safari and IE from http://jmodeltest.org. User registration is not mandatory, but users wanting to have additional functionalities, like access to previous analyses , have the possibility of opening a user account.
INTRODUCTIONThe statistical selection of best-fit models of nucleotide substitution is relevant for the phylogenetic analysis of DNA sequence alignments (). With the advent of nextgeneration sequencing (NGS) technologies, many researches are moving from phylogenetics to phylogenomics, in which large sequence alignments typically include hundreds or thousands of loci. Phylogenetic resources, therefore, need to be adapted to a high-performance computing paradigm so as to allow demanding analyses. To keep up with the increasing availability of genome-wide data, jModelTest 2 (jMT2) () was recently developed to profit from technical optimizations and parallel computing. jMT2 uses PhyML () to obtain maximum likelihood estimates of model parameters, and implements different statistical criteria for model selection including hierarchical and dynamical likelihood ratio tests, Akaike's and Bayesian information criteria (AIC and BIC) and a performance-based decision theory method (). jMT2 can take advantage of high-performance computing (HPC) environments, such as supercomputers and clusters. However, execution in HPC environments is not trivial: (i) installing, configuring and optimizing parallel software are generally cumbersome for non-HPC experts, (ii) access to HPC resources generally implies long waiting times or at least significant variability in the response time and (iii) it is difficult to estimate in advance the computational resources needed. To overcome these limitations, we introduce jmodeltest.org, a web service for executing jMT2 transparently on HPC infrastructures. jmodeltest.org can distribute jMT2 jobs across multiple public or private clouds, such as Amazon Web Services (AWS) EC2, adopting optimal HPC configurations. jmodeltest.org considers the available resources at each site to minimize execution times and scales the resources up and down depending on the workload. Such an 'easy' access to HPC resources will allow users to focus more on their research rather than on secondary tasks like resource provision, installation, configuration, execution and optimization of parallel environments.