Motivation: Kablammo is a web-based application that produces interactive, vector-based visual-izations of sequence alignments generated by BLAST. These visualizations can illustrate many features , including shared protein domains, chromosome structural modifications and genome misassembly. Availability and implementation: Kablammo can be used at http://kablammo.wasmuthlab.org. For a local installation, the source code and instructions are available under the MIT license at http://
IntroductionThe Basic Local Alignment Search Tool (BLAST) rapidly finds similar subsequences shared between a query and database sequences (). Its uses include inferring homology from shared sequence similarity, identifying the species associated with an uncharacterized sequence, and locating domains shared between proteins. BLAST's ease-of-use and diverse applications have made it a ubiquitous tool in molecular biology, especially for researchers without extensive bioinformatics training. However, its output is predominantly text-based. In our experience running training workshops, non-bioinformaticians often have difficulty finding features of interest, restricting BLAST to serving as a mere tool for identifying genes or species. Various applications attempt to resolve this by providing graphical interpretations of the BLAST results (), but these suffer important shortcomings. The NCBI BLAST service (http://blast.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov) provides a simple visual summary of alignment results, but works only for BLAST searches performed through the web service. The BLAST Output Visualization tool (BOV) creates a static rather than interactive rendering of the BLAST alignments, renders only one query at a time, and works only with BLAST version 2.2.24 or earlier, which is almost four years out-of-date. We have tried other methods reviewed by, finding that no single tool satisfied our needs. To remedy these issues, we present Kablammo, an application that leverages modern web technologies to produce an expedient visual overview of BLAST results.