Motivation: The Brassicaceae family includes the most important plant model Arabidopsis thaliana and many cruciferous vegetable crops. A number of close relatives of Arabidopsis and economically important Brassica species are being sequenced with whole-genome shotgun sequencing technologies. However, de novo assembly of full chromosomes is difficult, since many non-model Brassicaceae species are lacking genetic and/or physical maps. As a unique feature for Brassicaceae, the genome of each member is composed of 24 conserved chromosomal blocks, and the arrangement of the 24 blocks can be obtained from karyotype analysis via comparative chromosome painting experiments. Taking this advantage, we developed a bioinformatic tool named KGBassembler to automatically finalize assembly of full chromosomes from contigs and/or scaffolds based on available karyotypes of Brassicaceae species.
INTRODUCTIONThe Brassicaceae family contains about 3700 species, including the most well-known model plant Arabidopsis thaliana (Arabidopsis), and many agronomically important vegetable crops (e.g. Brassica rapa, B. oleracea) and numerous species with promising use for biodiesel production (e.g. B. napus, B. juncea). Several projects have been launched to sequence the genomes of a selection of Brassicaceae species, for instance, the Brassicales Map Alignment Project (http://www.brassica.info). However, because of lacking genetic and/or physical maps for many of these non-model plants, the sequence reads from whole-genome shotgun sequencing can be only assembled to contigs or scaffolds. An alternative strategy to achieve the assembly of chromosomes from contigs or scaffolds is utilizing the genome synteny from the completed genomes of model organisms. This is especially feasible for Brassicaceae, because it was postulated that the genome of species in this family is composed of 24 conserved chromosomal blocks, whose arrangement can be obtained from comparative chromosome painting (CCP) analyses (e.g.). Numerous karyotypes in different lineages of Brassicaceae have been profiled with CCP experiments, such as A. thaliana (n  5), Eutrema salsugineum (n  7), A. lyrata (n  8), B rapa (n  10) and so on (). Thus, these existing and forthcoming karyotype maps of Brassicaceae can be used to finalize the assembly of chromosomes. The feasibility of karyotype-based assembly has been shown in the assembly of Thellungiella (Schrenkiella) parvula genome independent of genetic and/or physical maps (). Taking this advantage, we developed the KGBassembler, a tool to assemble full chromosomes from scaffolds if a karyotype is provided. The KGBassembler is featured with a user-friendly graphical user interface (GUI), allowing users to use automatic assembling of chromosomes based on CCP-based karyotypes and/or to manually edit the layouts of contigs according to in silico generated karyotypes.