Motivation: Next-generation sequencing has become an important tool in molecular biology. Various protocols to investigate genomic, transcriptomic and epigenomic features across virtually all species and tissues have been devised. For most of these experiments, one of the first crucial steps of bioinformatic analysis is the mapping of reads to reference genomes. Results: Here, we present thorough benchmarks of our read aligner segemehl in comparison with other state-of-the-art methods. Furthermore, we introduce the tool lack to rescue unmapped RNA-seq reads which works in conjunction with segemehl and many other frequently used split-read aligners. Availability: lack is distributed together with segemehl and freely available at www.bioinf.uni-leipzig.de/Software/segemehl/.
INTRODUCTIONThe problem of aligning (short) sequencing reads to (larger) reference genomes has received considerable attention in recent years, and many different alignment tools based on a variety of distinct algorithmic approaches have been published so far. A survey at the EBI currently counts more than 80 different mappers (). This competitive field has seen quite a bit of evolution and progress. Early mappers were restricted to aligning short reads with no or few mismatches and reads with insertions and deletions were excluded more often than not. Bowtie () and segemehl () were among the first next-generation sequencing (NGS) aligners that explicitly implemented strategies for aligning reads with indels. The rise of RNA-seq protocols has added yet another layer of complexity to the problem: splicing. When mapping cDNA reads that join two or more exons, the aligner is required to 'split' the read and align its parts to the appropriate exons in the reference genome. Alternatively, the mapper needs to be provided with junction or paired-end information to predict or construct mRNA references. Today, most of the tools allow only a single split, while reads that span multiple exonexon junctions may not be properly aligned. As read lengths are constantly increasing, algorithms that allow multiple splits are clearly favorable. segemehl facilitates multi-split alignments using a local transition algorithm that was shown to perform very well in simulated and read data benchmarks (). The alignment of reads of bisulfite-treated DNA, i.e. methylcytosine sequencing, also requires specialized algorithms and methods (). The split-read and bisulfite features of segemehl have recently been published along with extensive benchmarks (). The diversity of tools and the rapid development of algorithms and software requires frequent, transparent and reproducible benchmarks. Here, we present the results of performance tests for DNA-seq and RNA-seq read alignments and provide detailed information on them. We have therefore assembled an extensive electronic supplement (http://www.bioinf.uni-leipzig.de/publications/supplements/13-008) comprising all data, custom scripts and detailed descriptions on how to re-run the analyses. In reference to recent heated debates on the comparison of mappers, we would like to stress that benchmarks only measure specific aspects and may not be used to claim any universal superiority or inferiority of any tool. We would like to encourage all readers to reproduce this data and to come up with alternative benchmarks. In addition to the benchmarking, we propose a novel tool, lack, for remapping previously unmapped RNA-seq reads using supplied splice junctions. The workflow of common, split-read and bisulfite mapping using segemehl and remapping by lack is depicted in.
DISCUSSIONIn this article we show that segemehl is a versatile and accurate read aligner that performs equally well for reads from DNA-and RNA-seq experiments and is largely independent of read length and technology. Since the initial publication, segemehl has been continuously updated and extended. Here, we have focused updating segemehl's performance in aligning DNA-seq or unspliced RNA-seq reads. While the core algorithms remained unchanged, we have adjusted several parameterizations to optimize the tool. Our results indicate that segemehl is not only more sensitive in finding the optimal alignment with respect to the unit edit distance, but also very specific compared to the most commonly used alternative read mappers. These advantages are observable for both real and simulated reads. In addition, we have presented lack to rescue previously unmapped RNA-seq reads that have emerged from splicing events. It shows excellent performance for every dataset with all splitread aligner tested and hence represents a valuable extension to RNA-seq analysis pipelines.