Motivation: Ligand binding is a key aspect of the function of many proteins. Thus, binding ligand prediction provides important insight in understanding the biological function of proteins. Binding ligand prediction is also useful for drug design and examining potential drug side effects. Results: We present a computational method named Patch-Surfer2.0, which predicts binding ligands for a protein pocket. By representing and comparing pockets at the level of small local surface patches that characterize physicochemical properties of the local regions, the method can identify binding pockets of the same ligand even if they do not share globally similar shapes. Properties of local patches are represented by an efficient mathematical representation, 3D Zernike Descriptor. Patch-Surfer2.0 has significant technical improvements over our previous prototype, which includes a new feature that captures approximate patch position with a geodesic distance histogram. Moreover, we constructed a large comprehensive database of ligand binding pockets that will be searched against by a query. The benchmark shows better performance of Patch-Surfer2.0 over existing methods. Availability and implementation: http://kiharalab.org/patchsurfer2.0/
IntroductionSmall molecules, such as metabolites and drugs, have important interactions with protein receptors, regulating many different processes in biological systems. Therefore, predicting binding ligands can provide important information for elucidating protein functions. Predicting binding ligands for proteins can also provide useful information for computational drug discovery, drug side effects and protein design. By combining computational screening with experiments, proteinligand interaction networks can be revealed (). In principle, ligands for a protein can be predicted by identifying a global or local structure similar to known proteins. FINDSITE () and GalaxySite () use a modeled structure by threading to predict binding ligands for a target protein. Global structure-based methods capture distant evolutionary relationships that provide powerful information for function prediction; however, such methods have difficulty for cases where proteins of largely different global structures bind the same ligand molecules. Local structure-based methods aim to identify similarity between a target pocket and known binding sites. Local structure can be compared at different structure levels. Catalytic Site Atlas () and AFT () compare a few functional residues in binding sites, where similarity is quantified with the root-mean-square deviation (RMSD) of the residues. Pseudocenters of residues () as well as atom-level representation were also used (). However, cases have been reported where binding site residues for some ligand types are not always well conserved ().Alternatively, surface representations have been used for describing binding pockets. Surface representations do not explicitly specify residue/atom positions in pockets and thus are coarser representations. The advantage of a surface representation is that it can attenuate a certain level of differences in pocket shapes, which are commonly observed in pockets of the same ligand type. eF-Seek () constructs a triangle mesh to represent protein surface.used a histogram of distances between nodes in a triangle mesh that represents a protein surface. SMAP performs pocket alignment using Delaunay tessellation and amino acid residue comparison (). ILBind () combines FINDSITE and SMAP for inverse ligand binding protein prediction. Besides binding ligand prediction methods discussed earlier, there are methods that predict binding pocket location in proteins using various pocket descriptions. Those descriptions include grid representation (), atom triangles () and a-shape (). COACH () takes a consensus of multiple programs. Mathematical moment-based approaches have been identified to be suitable for molecular surface representation. Moment-based methods can naturally control the resolution of the surface description, and physicochemical properties on the surface can be represented in the same way as surface shape. Thornton and her colleagues used spherical harmonics for describing binding pockets (). In our earlier works, Pocket-Surfer, global pocket shape and the surface electrostatic potential are represented using 3D Zernike descriptors (3DZD;). Subsequently, we proposed Patch-Surfer, which represents a pocket as a set of small local surface patches, each of which is described by 3DZD (). The local patch representation of pockets enables the method to identify corresponding regions in pockets even if the global shapes of pockets are different. Although Patch-Surfer compared favorably against the existing methods in terms of prediction accuracy, it was tested on small datasets with a limited number of ligand types. In this work, we compiled a large dataset of over 6000 non-redundant pockets with 2707 different ligands with which our method was tested. Moreover, the algorithm was significantly improved in four more aspects: First, we introduced a new feature of a patch called the approximate patch position (APPS) that describes the relative position of the patch in a pocket. Second, we use geodesic distance rather than Euclidean distance for computing distance between patches in a pocket. Third, the procedure to identify corresponding patches in two pockets was revised so that the selected patch pairs are guaranteed to yield the minimum (i.e. best) score. Finally, we also consider similarity of ligands when scores for each ligand are computed. On the large dataset, we show that Patch-Surfer2.0 shows overall higher accuracy than the previous version as well as existing methods.