Motivation: The simulation of morphogenetic problems requires the simultaneous and coupled simulation of signalling and tissue dynamics. A cellular resolution of the tissue domain is important to adequately describe the impact of cell-based events, such as cell division, cell–cell interactions and spatially restricted signalling events. A tightly coupled cell-based mechano-regulatory simulation tool is therefore required. Results: We developed an open-source software framework for morphogenetic problems. The environment offers core functionalities for the tissue and signalling models. In addition, the software offers great flexibility to add custom extensions and biologically motivated processes. Cells are represented as highly resolved, massless elastic polygons; the viscous properties of the tissue are modelled by a Newtonian fluid. The Immersed Boundary method is used to model the interaction between the viscous and elastic properties of the cells, thus extending on the IBCell model. The fluid and signalling processes are solved using the Lattice Boltzmann method. As application examples we simulate signalling-dependent tissue dynamics. Availability and implementation: The documentation and source code are available on http://tana-kas.bitbucket.org/lbibcell/index.html
IntroductionDuring morphogenesis, tissue grows and self-organizes into complex functional units such as organs. The process is tightly controlled, both by signalling and by mechanical interactions. Long-range signalling interactions in the tissues can be mediated by diffusible substances, called morphogens, and by long-range cell processes (). The dynamics of the diffusible factors can typically be well described by systems of continuous reactionadvection-diffusion partial differential equations (PDEs). The appropriate tissue representation depends on the relevant time scale. For a homogeneous isotropic embryonic tissue, experiments show that the tissue is well approximated by a viscous fluid on long time scales (equilibration after 30 min to several hours) and by an elastic material on short time scales (seconds to minutes) (). However, biological control typically happens on a shorter time scale, and many cellular processes such as cell migration and adhesion, cell polarity, directed division, monolayer structures and differentiation cannot be cast into a continuous formulation in a straight-forward way. A number of cell-based simulation techniques at different scales and different level of detail have been developed to study these processes; here, we discuss main representatives for each category. The Cellular Potts model, introduced by, is solved on a lattice, with each lattice point holding a generalized spin value denoting cell identity. Similar to the Ising model, Hamiltonian energy functions are formulated and minimized using a Metropolis algorithm. It has been applied to a multitude of problems and is implemented in the software CompuCell3D ().However, the correspondence between the biological problem and the Hamiltonian, the temperature and the time step is not always straightforward. The subcellular element model divides cells into subcellular elements, which are represented by computational particles. The elements interact via interacting potentials which are subject to modelling. The motion of the elements is governed by overdamped Langevin dynamics, such that the method is mesh-free. The framework was first introduced by Newman (2005) and later applied by). This approach allows for detailed biophysical modelling, both in 2D and 3D. The spheroid model developed byassumes that cells in unstructured cell populations are similar to colloidal particles. The cells are modelled as point particles, hosting interaction potentials. Their motions consist of a random and a directed movement. Neighbouring cells form adhesive bonds, which are represented using models borrowed from contact mechanics, such as e.g. the JohnsonKendallRoberts model (). Many cellular processes such as cell shape change, division, death, lysis, cellcell interaction and migration have been successfully translated into the spheroid model (). Intra-and extracellular diffusion has not yet been introduced and implemented. The spheroid model extends efficiently to 3D, and it has been implemented in the open-source framework CellSys (). The vertex model uses polygons (or polyhedra in 3D) to represent cells in densely packed tissues, e.g. in Drosophila wing disc epithelia (). For each vertex, forces are computedeither via a potential or directly. The vertices are moved subsequently according to overdamped equations of motion or via a Monte Carlo algorithm. The model is implemented in the opensource software Chaste (). The viscoelastic cell model (also called IBCell models) presented inuses the immersed boundary (IB) method () to represent individually deformable cells as immersed elastic bodies. The cytoplasm and the extracellular matrix and fluid are represented by a viscous incompressible fluid. In this framework, a vast amount of biological processes such as cell growth, cell division, apoptosis and polarization has been realized. The model was applied to study tumour and epithelial dynamics. Due to the high level of detail, the viscoelastic cell model is computationally expensive and has not yet been implemented in 3D. The software framework VirtualLeaf with explicit cell resolution, available in 2D, has been introduced in. Although the cell representation is similar to vertex cell models, the dynamics is realized by minimizing a Hamiltonian using a Monte Carlo algorithm. The model assumes rigid cell walls, which is appropriate for plant morphogenesis. For many morphogenetic phenomena, which arise from a tight interaction between the biomolecular signalling and the tissue physics, an explicit computational representation of the cell shapes is required. Here, we present a flexible software framework based on the IBCell model, which, as a novelty, permits to tightly couple biomolecular signalling models to a cell-resolved, physical tissue model. The core components and the general approach of the model are described in the second section. In the third section, the software and the main functionalities are described in detail. Application examples are given in the fourth chapter to demonstrate the framework's capabilities.
DiscussionWe developed an extendible and open-source cell-based simulation environment, which is tailored to study morphogenetic problems. The novel framework permits the coupled simulation of a physically motivated viscoelastic cell model with regulatory signalling models. Processes such as viscous dissipation, elasticity, advection, diffusion, local reactions, local mass sources and sinks, cell division and cell differentiation are implemented. By applying our framework to Turing signalling systems, we show that the signalling systems may behave differently on dynamic tissues than on simple continuous tissue representations. We therefore advocate to test continuous morphogenetic signalling models on dynamically growing cellular domains. The presented framework permits to study a variety of mechanoregulatory mechanisms. By making the cell division orientation dependent on signalling cues, the effect on the macroscopic tissue geometry may be studied. Cell migration can be modelled by introducing gradient-dependent forces on specific cell types. Cell sorting may be achieved by specifying multiple cell types with differential cellcell junction strengths. The framework is specifically designed to study the mutual effects of signalling and biophysical cell properties. The viscoelastic cell model represents cell shapes at high resolution and is thus, unlike the vertex model, not restricted to densely packed tissues. Furthermore, hydrodynamic interaction, membrane tension and hydrostatic pressure are integral components of the model. The fact that a velocity field is available on the entire domain is a critical advantage to account for advection of the signalling components, thus allowing for a spatial description of intracellular concentrations. The model is, however, not easily extendable to the third dimension. Because a meshing of the surface will be required, the algorithmic and computational complexity are expected to be significant and subject to future work. The presented framework is, however, ideal to study intrinsically 2D morphogenetic problems, such as apical surface dynamics of epithelia as studied previously also byand Ishihara and Sugimura (2012) in 2D.