Motivation: Discovering and understanding patterns in networks of protein–protein interactions (PPIs) is a central problem in systems biology. Alignments between these networks aid functional understanding as they uncover important information, such as evolutionary conserved pathways, protein complexes and functional orthologs. A few methods have been proposed for global PPI network alignments, but because of NP-completeness of underlying sub-graph isomorphism problem, producing topologically and biologically accurate alignments remains a challenge. Results: We introduce a novel global network alignment tool, Lagrangian GRAphlet-based ALigner (L-GRAAL), which directly optimizes both the protein and the interaction functional conservations, using a novel alignment search heuristic based on integer programming and Lagrangian relaxation. We compare L-GRAAL with the state-of-the-art network aligners on the largest available PPI networks from BioGRID and observe that L-GRAAL uncovers the largest common sub-graphs between the networks, as measured by edge-correctness and symmetric sub-structures scores, which allow transferring more functional information across networks. We assess the biological quality of the protein mappings using the semantic similarity of their Gene Ontology annotations and observe that L-GRAAL best uncovers functionally conserved proteins. Furthermore, we introduce for the first time a measure of the semantic similarity of the mapped interactions and show that L-GRAAL also uncovers best functionally conserved interactions. In addition, we illustrate on the PPI networks of bakers yeast and human the ability of L-GRAAL to predict new PPIs. Finally, L-GRAALs results are the first to show that topological information is more important than sequence information for uncovering functionally conserved interactions.
IntroductionUnderstanding the patterns in molecular interactions is of foremost importance in systems biology, as it is instrumental to understanding the functioning of the cell (). Because molecular interactions are often modeled by networks, a large number of studies focused on understanding the topology of these networks (). In the case of proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks, where nodes represent proteins and edges connect proteins that interact, comparative studies based on network alignments were particularly successful. Given two networks, aligning them means finding a node-to-node mapping (also called an alignment) between the networks that optimizes two objectives: (i) maximizing the number of mapped proteins (nodes) that are evolutionarily or functionally related and (ii) maximizing the number of common interactions (edges) between the networks. Network alignment uncovers valuable information, such as evolutionarily conserved pathways and protein complexes () or functional orthologs (). Finding these allows transfer of information across species, such as performing Herpes viral experiments in yeast or fly and then applying the insights toward understanding the mechanisms of human diseases (). Network alignment problem is computationally intractable due to NP-completeness of the underlying sub-graph isomorphism problem (). Hence, several network alignment heuristics (i.e. approximate aligners) have been proposed. Earlier methods, called local network aligners, search for small but highly conserved sub-networks called motifs (). As motifs can be duplicated, local network aligners often produce one-to-many or many-to-many mappings, in which a node from a given network can be mapped to several nodes of the other network. Although these multiple mappings can indicate gene duplications, they are often biologically implausible (). Hence, global network aligners, which perform an overall comparison of the input networks and produce one-to-one mappings between the nodes of the two networks have been introduced. Several heuristics have been proposed for solving the global alignment problem. The first one is ISORANK (), which rephrases aligning networks as an eigenvalue problem, mimicking Google's Pagerank algorithm. HOPEMAP () iteratively constructs the alignment between two networks by searching for a common maximally connected component. PATH and GA algorithms () optimize the same objective function, which balances between mapping similar proteins and increasing the number of mapped interactions. The GRAAL family () is a set of network aligners, which are based on the idea that mapping together nodes that are involved in similar local wiring patterns (as measured by the statistics of small induced sub-graph called graphlets) will result in a large number of shared interactions. As newer GRAAL aligners use improved alignment heuristic strategies, using C-GRAAL or MI-GRAAL is recommended. Also, these two methods allow using additional node scores, such as sequence similarity. NATALIE () is a combinatorial optimization method based on Lagrangian relaxation, which searches for top scoring network alignments over the biologically plausible node mappings obtained by sequence alignment. GHOST () is a spectral approach, where nodes are mapped according to the similarity of their spectral signatures. NETAL () is a fast greedy heuristic that constructs an alignment by iteratively inserting the node mapping with the highest probability to induce common edges, where the probabilities are recomputed at each iteration. SPINAL () is a two-step approach, which first computes coarse-grained node similarity scores, and then based on these scores, iteratively grows a seed solution. PISWAP () optimizes global alignments using a derivative of the local 3-opt heuristic, which is originally used for solving the traveling salesman problem. MAGNA () uses a genetic algorithm to maximize the edge conservation between the aligned networks. HUBALIGN () uses a minimum-degree heuristic to align 'important' proteins first and then gradually extends the alignment to the whole networks. Although all the above methods align networks to derive additional biological knowledge (e.g. orthology group and functional annotations), DUALALIGNER () does the opposite and uses biological knowledge to produce network alignments. The number of known molecular interactions has increased tremendously during the last decade due to the technological advances in high-throughput interaction detection techniques such as yeast two-hybrid () and affinity purification coupled to mass spectrometry (). Because of the increasing amount of available interaction data, coupled with the computational hardness of the network alignment problem, producing topologically and biologically accurate alignments is still challenging. In this article, we introduce a novel global network alignment tool that we call Lagrangian GRAphlet-based ALigner (L-GRAAL). Unlike previous aligners, which either do not take into account the mapped interactions (e.g. the previous GRAAL aligners and ISORANK) or use naive interaction mapping scoring schemes (e.g. NATALIE), L-GRAAL optimizes a novel objective function that takes into account both sequence-based protein conservation and graphlet-based interaction conservation, by using a novel alignment search heuristic based on integer programming and Lagrangian relaxation. We compare L-GRAAL with the state-of-the-art network aligners on the largest available PPI networks from BioGRID and observe that L-GRAAL uncovers the largest overlaps between the networks, as measured with edge-correctness (EC) and symmetric sub-structure scores. These largest overlaps are key for transferring annotations between networks. Using semantic similarity, we observe that L-GRAAL's protein mappings and interaction mappings are in better agreement with Gene Ontology (GO) () than any other network aligners. By aligning the PPI networks of baker's yeast and human, we additionally show that the results of L-GRAAL can be used to predict new PPIs. Finally, using our novel semantic similarity measure of the interaction mappings and the ability of L-GRAAL to produce alignments by using both topological and sequence similarity, we observe for the first time that topological similarity plays a more important role than sequence similarity in uncovering functionally conserved interactions, a result that escaped all previous approaches.