Motivation: Shape-based alignment of small molecules is a widely used approach in computer-aided drug discovery. Most shape-based ligand structure alignment applications, both commercial and freely available ones, use the Tanimoto coefficient or similar functions for evaluating molecular similarity. Major drawbacks of using such functions are the size dependence of the score and the fact that the statistical significance of the molecular match using such metrics is not reported. Results: We describe a new open-source ligand structure alignment and virtual screening (VS) algorithm, LIGSIFT, that uses Gaussian molecular shape overlay for fast small molecule alignment and a size-independent scoring function for efficient VS based on the statistical significance of the score. LIGSIFT was tested against the compounds for 40 protein targets available in the Directory of Useful Decoys and the performance was evaluated using the area under the ROC curve (AUC), the Enrichment Factor (EF) and Hit Rate (HR). LIGSIFT-based VS shows an average AUC of 0.79, average EF values of 20.8 and a HR of 59% in the top 1% of the screened library. Availability and implementation: LIGSIFT software, including the source code, is freely available to academic users at http://cssb.biol ogy.gatech.edu/LIGSIFT.
INTRODUCTIONIdentification of new lead molecules is a major challenge in the drug discovery process, as the experimental screening of large chemical databases is very expensive and depends on how representative the library is. Virtual screening (VS) approaches are frequently used for lead identification, which can be then verified under laboratory settings. VS approaches can be broadly classified into protein-centric approaches (e.g. docking) and ligand centric approaches. Protein-centric approaches do not depend on known ligand information and are generally expected to perform better, as they enable one to explicitly evaluate proteinligand interactions. However, these approaches rely heavily on the quality of the receptor structure and suffer from inherent limitations of the applied protocol. Ligand centric VS methods, on the contrary, do not need receptor information and often use known ligands as a seed to identify potential binders based on their 2D or 3D similarity to the known active molecule (). 2D VS methods generally represent a molecule as a vector with entries indicating the presence or absence of molecular features. These methods are popular, as they provide a fast and easy way of fishing out similar active molecules. However, the scaffold hopping potential of such methods is controversial (), and both molecular size and complexity negatively affect the search performance of such methods (). In contrast, 3D VS methods are computationally taxing due to complexities associated with ligand flexibility and determination of the optimal 3D alignment. Nevertheless, with improvement in computational power, 3D VS methods have become popular, as they capture the physical and functional features required for the biological interaction and are generally capable of scaffold hopping (). The scaffold hopping potential of 3D methods not only help to reduce false negatives during VS experiments, but also provide important insights for bioisostere replacement (), potential off-target interactions and cross-reactivity of existing drugs. Three-dimensional methods for aligning small molecules consist of three basic components: (a) a descriptor to represent the molecule, (b) a scoring function to assess the alignment quality and (c) an optimization procedure to find the best possible alignment with respect to the chosen scoring function. Common choices of descriptors include molecular interaction field-based (), pharmacophore-based () and shape-based representations of small molecules. A number of algorithms for shape-based VS have emerged in the last few years; each seeks to maximize the shape overlap between the pair of molecules under consideration. Most use atom centered, smooth Gaussian functions to model molecular volume, as it helps to achieve rapid overlay and can also be performed relatively easily using simple mathematical operations. For example, Rapid Overlay of Chemical Structures (ROCS), a highly popular closed-source algorithm, uses a Gaussian description of the molecular shape and chemical nature of the ligand () for ligand screening. Similarly, Align-it TM , an opensource tool uses a Gaussian description of molecular pharmacophores, but follows a different optimization approach to find the best overlay (). These and other similar tools use the Tanimoto Coefficient (TC) or similar size-dependent functions for measuring molecular similarity (). Moreover, these scoring functions *To whom correspondence should be addressed. lack a statistical model that can indicate the significance of structural/chemical match between molecules (). In this study, we present a new open-source, ligand-based VS algorithm that provides a size-independent scoring function to measure shape and chemical similarity and also reports the P-value to assess the statistical significance of the match between a pair of molecules. Performance evaluation of LIGSIFT on the 40 targets in the Directory of Useful Decoys (DUD) set shows overall improved performance compared with other wellestablished shape-based VS methods such as ROCS and Align-it TM .