The ability of certain organisms to completely regenerate lost limbs is a fascinating process, far from solved. Despite the extraordinary published efforts during the past centuries of scientists performing amputations, transplantations and molecular experiments, no mechanistic model exists yet that can completely explain patterning during the limb regeneration process. The lack of a centralized repository to enable the efficient mining of this huge dataset is hindering the discovery of comprehensive models of limb regeneration. Here, we introduce Limbform (Limb formalization), a centralized database of published limb regeneration experiments. In contrast to natural language or text-based ontologies, Limbform is based on a functional ontology using mathematical graphs to represent unambiguously limb phenotypes and manipulation procedures. The centralized database currently contains4800 published limb regeneration experiments comprising many model organisms, including salamanders, frogs, insects , crustaceans and arachnids. The database represents an extraordinary resource for mining the existing knowledge of functional data in this field; furthermore, its mathematical nature based on a functional ontology will pave the way for artificial intelligence tools applied to the discovery of the sought-after comprehensive limb regeneration models. Availability and implementaion: The Limbform database is freely available at http://limbform.daniel
INTRODUCTIONMost phyla include species with the remarkable ability to regenerate lost body sections, the regeneration of limb appendages being one of the most complex and fascinating processes (). Hundreds of experiments based on physical manipulations and molecular disturbances have identified many key genetic elements necessary for limb regeneration; however, no model exists yet that can explain the sufficient mechanisms that enable salamanders and other organisms to carry out the perfect regeneration of amputated limbs (). Understanding the process of regeneration of complex 3D shape from cell growth is a problem of fundamental importance in biology, and this goal should not get lost in the search for the minute details of genetic and molecular interactions if we ever hope to find comprehensive testable models required to implement the sought-after promising biomedical applications (). The lack of formalization tools to describe functional experiments and a centralized repository to store and analyze the vast experimental literature of limb regeneration are hindering our ability to find a comprehensive model of limb regeneration. Papers are written in natural language, which is ambiguous and difficult to systematically mine and analyze, whereas proposed text-based phenotypic ontologies () are not ideal for describing qualitative (upper-arm versus forearm), quantitative (number of fingers), topological (ectopic hand in forearm) and geometrical (segment length) information key in regenerative experiments. In contrast, novel functional mathematical ontologies based on graphs have been recently proposed for the formalization of morphologies and manipulations for planarian worm () and limb () regenerative experiments. In contrast to natural language, a mathematical graph can unambiguously specify morphological data (). A graph can represent both complete jointless organisms such as planaria (where regions are represented by graph nodes connected by graph edges) and joint-based structures such as limbs (where segments connected by joints are represented by graph edges connected by graph nodes). Here, we present a database based on a functional ontology system that unambiguously centralize the knowledge of limb regeneration experiments in a diverse set of model organisms, enabling the unambiguous description, centralize storage and manual and automated mining of this vast dataset.