Motivation: The accurate measurement of the lipidome permits insights into physiological and pathological processes. Of the present high-throughput technologies, LC-MS especially bears potential of monitoring quantitative changes in hundreds of lipids simultaneously. In order to extract valuable information from huge amount of mass spectrometry data, the aid of automated, reliable, highly sensitive and specific analysis algorithms is indispensable. Results: We present here a novel approach for the quantitation of lipids in LC-MS data. The new algorithm obtains its analytical power by two major innovations: (i) a 3D algorithm that confines the peak borders in m/z and time direction and (ii) the use of the theoretical isotopic distribution of an analyte as selection/exclusion criterion. The algorithm is integrated in the Lipid Data Analyzer (LDA) application which additionally provides standardization, a statistics module for results analysis, a batch mode for unattended analysis of several runs and a 3D viewer for the manual verification. The statistics module offers sample grouping, tests between sample groups and export functionalities, where the results are visualized by heat maps and bar charts. The presented algorithm has been applied to data from a controlled experiment and to biological data, containing analytes distributed over an intensity range of 10 6. Our approach shows improved sensitivity and an extremely high positive predictive value compared with existing methods. Consequently, the novel algorithm, integrated in a user-friendly application, is a valuable improvement in the high-throughput analysis of the lipidome. Implementation and availability: The Java application is freely available for non-commercial users at
INTRODUCTIONAdvances in lipidomics technologies utilizing mass spectrometry have led to a rapid increase in the number, size and rate at which datasets are generated. LC-MS especially bears the potential for monitoring quantitative changes in hundreds of lipids simultaneously. In order to deal with the acquired data automated and reliable software tools are required. Currently available lipidomics MS-quantitation tools can be classified in two groups, each extracting 2D subsets of MS data: one group () requires m/z profiles or m/z spectra; and the other group () extracts chromatograms for quantitation. A representative of the first group is LIMSA which can analyse m/z spectra only (). It utilizes an additional program (SECD) to extract the m/z spectra. The user has to define manually a trapezoid in the m/z-time map of the LC-MS data containing the lipid series of interest (a collection of lipids having the same amount of C atoms). This extracted m/z spectra serve as input for the LIMSA algorithm. In contrast, mzMine2 (), a program from the second group, provides several algorithms to automatically extract chromatograms for processing. Both programs select the peaks for an analyte based on the exact m/z value. However, an LC-MS peak is a 3D object, whereupon each of its data points is characterized by retention time, m/z ratio and intensity. Consequently, all of the available tools lose information from a whole dimension (in the first group by the m/z profile extraction and the other group by the chromatogram extraction), and thus decrease the ability to clearly distinguish between closely overlapping peaks (). Furthermore, overlapping peaks occur frequently in lipidomic data due to the particular nature of lipids. The chemical structures of lipids can differ just by one double bond, resulting in a mass difference of 2 Da between the analytes. Thus, the base peak (+0 isotope) of the analyte has almost the same mass as the second isotopic peak (+2 isotope) of the analyte with one additional double bond. Furthermore, elution times are usually very close due to the physicochemical similarity of the analytes. In this article, we present a novel algorithm that addresses the difficulties specific to lipidomics MS-data quantitation by two novel approaches: (i) exact peak border confinement and (ii) accounting for the theoretical isotopic distribution for peak selection. The novel border confinement increases the ability to detect overlaps and reduces their effects. The theoretical isotopic distribution isShows the 3D view at the top of the picture and the 2D chromatogram view at the bottom. In the 3D view, the isotopic peaks (+0, +1 and +2) of TG56:6 and TG56:7, plus the +0 peak of TG56:5 are depicted, whereupon the peaks stained in red correspond to the quantified peaks of TG56:6. The 2D view shows the extracted chromatogram at the m/z value of TG56:6. In the chromatogram the overlapping +2 isotopic peak of TG56:7 is not distinguishable from the main peak of 56:6; resulting in one peak. (B) Shows the zoomed 3D view of the overlap of the +2 peak of TG56:7 with the +0 peak of TG56:6. In 3D the two peaks are clearly discernable. The red stained part of the overlapping peaks indicates the part that has been used for the quantitation of TG56:6. used as an exclusion and selection criterion and as such increases specificity. These two principles allow accurate and highly specific peak identification, which is required for the unattended highthroughput analysis of lipids. To assess the performance of the new algorithm, we (i) conducted a controlled experiment to test the accuracy of the quantitation and (ii) applied the algorithm to biological data to test its sensitivity and positive predictive value.
DISCUSSIONThe LDA proved to be a powerful and reliable tool for highthroughput analysis of the lipidome using LC-MS. In a controlled experiment, we showed that the results are more accurate than with other available tools (average deviation from the ideal ratio was 9.7% for LDA, 10.5% for mzMine2 and 36.3% for LIMSA). Moreover on biological data, the novel algorithm proved its real strength: the sensitivity increased from 86.1 to 93.3% and the positive predictive value from 89.4 to 99.1%