Genome-wide association study (GWAS) of a biomarker is complicated when the assay procedure of the biomarker is restricted by a Limit of Detection (LOD). Those observations falling outside the LOD cannot be simply discarded, but should be included into the analysis by applying an appropriate statistical method. However, the problem of LOD in GWAS analysis of such biomarkers is usually overlooked. lodGWAS is a flexible, easy-to-use R package that provides a simple and elegant way for GWAS analysis of such biomarkers while simultaneously accommodating the problem of LOD by applying a parametric survival analysis method. Availability and implementation: http://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/lodGWAS Contacts: a.vaez@umcg.nl or i.m.nolte@umcg.nl
IntroductionGenome-wide association study (GWAS) of a biomarker such as immunoproteins (e.g. C-reactive protein), cytokines (e.g. interleukins) and hormones (e.g. testosterone) is complicated if the detection range of the biomarker is restricted by the assay procedure. So far GWAS analyses of such biomarkers inadequately dealt with the problem of the limit of detection. As a consequence, the identified associations might be biased. The limit of detection (LOD) is the smallest or largest concentration of a biomarker that can be reliably measured by the analytical procedure. Those measurements falling outside the LOD, socalled non-detects (NDs), cannot be considered as missing values since they do provide information about the distribution of the biomarker. Simple exclusion of NDs from the statistical analysis will therefore yield incorrect estimates. A number of statistical approaches have been proposed to deal with the problem of LOD while still including those NDs in the statistical analysis, such as: analyzing detect/non-detect dichotomies, substituting NDs with a constant smaller than or equal to the lower LOD, or substituting NDs with a random value between zero and lower LOD (). However these methods insufficiently account for the available information provided by NDs, particularly when NDs comprise a large proportion of the data. Recently Dinse and colleagues proposed to apply survival analysis to overcome the problem of LOD (). They stated that NDs can be viewed as censored data, as they are known to fall within a certain interval. More details on this can be found in the Supplementary data. This approach could also be applied to GWAS data. However, currently available software packages for GWAS analysis are not flexible enough to properly account for NDs. We developed 'lodGWAS', a flexible, easy-to-use software package that is capable of performing GWAS analysis of biomarkers while accommodating the problem of LOD by applying survival analysis in which NDs are treated as censored data.
ConclusionIn this study we show the importance of applying an appropriate statistical method for GWAS analysis of biomarkers whose measurements are constrained by limits of detection. With lodGWAS we provide a flexible, easy-to-use R package for a simple and elegant way to perform GWAS analysis of such biomarkers while accommodating NDs.