Motivation: Depletion of loss-of-function (LoF) mutations may provide a rank of genic functional intolerance and consequently susceptibility to disease. Results: Here we have studied LoF mutations in 60 706 unrelated individuals and show that the most intolerant quartile of ranked genes is enriched in rare and early onset diseases and explains 87% of de novo haploinsufficient OMIM mutations, 17% more than any other gene scoring tool. We detected particular enrichment in expression of the depleted LoF genes in brain (odds ratio ¼ 1.5; P-value ¼ 4.2eÀ07). By searching for de novo haploinsufficient mutations putatively associated with neurodevelopmental disorders in four recent studies, we were able to explain 81% of them. Taken together, this study provides a novel gene intolerance ranking system, called LoFtool, which may help in ranking genes of interest based on their LoF intolerance and tissue expression.
IntroductionNext generation sequencing technology has generated a vast amount of genomic data, but for clinical applications, interpretability of the results remains a major challenge. Whole exome sequencing has recently started to detect variants related to rare Mendelian and complex diseases, usually in a trio setting where both the patient and the parents are exome sequenced in order to identify de novo disease-associated mutations (). Presently several tools exist to predict a single variant's pathogenicity, like PolyPhen () and SIFT (), but they do not extrapolate their predictions to the gene level. There are also tools that prioritize candidate disease-causing genes such as ENDEAVOUR () or Prioritizer (), but these need a priori genetic knowledge of the disease. Recently, a new set of tools that prioritize candidate disease-causing genes with no a priori disease knowledge has emerged. By using the whole exome sequences of 6503 individuals, from the NHLBI GO Exome Sequencing Project (ESP) (),devised a 'residual variance intolerance score' (RVIS) from common missense and loss-of-function (LoF) variants versus total number of protein coding variants regardless of their frequency in the ESP population. A complementary approach for gene-level prioritization of disease genes calibrates de novo mutation rates per gene based on exome-sequenced trios in order to prioritize real excess of de novo mutations (). EvoTol (), another gene score, measures the gene's intolerance to mutations using evolutionary conservation of protein sequences. Here we developed an alternative gene score method called LoFtool, based on the mutation patterns in the exomes of 60 706 unrelated individuals from the Exome Aggregation Consortium (ExAC) dataset (http://exac. broadinstitute.org/). Although LoF intolerance is not a synonym of general intolerance, LoF mutations have the greatest pathogenic potential and hence are a good proxy for general genic intolerance to functional V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com variation. LoFtool is based on the ratio of LoF to synonymous mutations for each gene, adjusting for the gene de novo mutation rate and evolutionary protein conservation (Section 2). We evaluate LoFtool against RVIS (), Z-score () and EvoTol (), and show that it clearly outperforms them in identifying de novo haploinsufficient disease-causing genes from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database (), and from studies of neurodevelopmental disorders ().
DiscussionWe have shown that LoFtool discriminates between genes that do and do not cause disease (mostly early onset), outperforming other state-of-the-art gene scoring methods. LoFtool predicts genomewide de novo haploinsufficient mutations accurately and could be of help in search for genetic causes of rare Mendelian diseases. Moreover, its brain expression enrichment coupled to a ROC AUC of 0.86 in detecting neurodevelopmental disorder genes makes LoFtool also an attractive method for investigating complex brain diseases with strong genetic effects. In addition, our LoFtool score has already been adopted by popular variant annotation tools like ANNOVAR, SnpEff, dbNSFP, UCSC Genome Browser Variant Integrator and Ensembl Variant Effect Predictor (), which highlights the wide applicability of our gene intolerance score. Future work could focus on functional protein domains, rather than the overall gene mutation burden, in order to more easily prioritize the avalanche of rare variants putativelyLoFtoolassociated with a phenotype of interest (). Taken together, this study provides a novel gene intolerance ranking system that ranks genes based on their loss-of-function intolerance and tissue expression specificity.