Motivation: The coiled coil is a ubiquitous-helical protein-structure domain that directs and facilitates protein–protein interactions in a wide variety of biological processes. At the protein-sequence level, the coiled coil is readily recognized via a conspicuous heptad repeat of hydrophobic and polar residues. However, structurally coiled coils are more complicated, existing in a wide range of oligomer states and topologies. As a consequence, predicting these various states from sequence remains an unmet challenge. Results: This work introduces LOGICOIL, the first algorithm to address the problem of predicting multiple coiled-coil oligomeric states from protein-sequence information alone. By covering 490% of the known coiled-coil structures, LOGICOIL is a net improvement compared with other existing methods, which achieve a predictive coverage of $31% of this population. This leap in predictive power offers better opportunities for genome-scale analysis, and analyses of coiled-coil containing protein assemblies. Availability: LOGICOIL is available via a web-interface at http:// coiledcoils.chm.bris.ac.uk/LOGICOIL. Source code, training sets and supporting information can be downloaded from the same site.
INTRODUCTIONCoiled coils are protein-structure domains that comprise two or more-helices that wrap around each other, typically in a left-handed fashion, and which interact through specific packing interactions known as knobs-into-hole packing (). Although accounting for $2.9% (range, 0.36.5%) of the protein-encoding regions of genes (), coiled coils are also actively involved in the mediation of proteinprotein interactions across a wide array of biological functions; from transcription, through membrane remodelling, to cell and tissue structure and stability (). Despite its functional diversity, the coiled coil is characterized by a straightforward sequence motif of hydrophobic (H) and polar (P) residues. The positions within this HPPHPPP motif, referred to as the heptad repeat, are typically labelled a through g, with hydrophobic residues generally occupying the a and d positions, and polar residues falling at the other positions. Given this common sequence pattern, the 3D structures adopted by naturally occurring coiled coils display a remarkable diversity (). Applying SOCKET, an algorithm that finds knobs-into-holes packing interactions within structurally resolved proteins (), to the Research Collaboratory for Structural Bioinformatics Protein Data Bank (RCSB PDB) () reveals an abundance of coiled-coil architectures and topologies (). Indeed, coiled-coil assemblies have been shown to contain different numbers of helices of parallel or anti-parallel orientation, that may be formed from the same (homo) or different (hetero) helical sequences (). Here, we focus on the prediction of coiled-coil oligomeric state. Six algorithms exist to tackle this problem: SCORER (), which has been recently redefined and retrained in SCORER 2.0 (), and PrOCoil () achieve high success rates when separating coiled-coil sequences, but these methods are strictly limited to the discrimination of parallel dimeric and parallel trimeric coiled-coil structures. Multicoil2 () and its predecessor MultiCoil () follow a different approach to predict both the location and oligomeric state of coiled coils in protein sequences. However, their oligomeric state functions remain limited to the discrimination of parallel dimers and trimers. Thus, these algorithms cover only a small subset of the known coiled-coil structural space, limiting their usefulness. For example, antiparallel dimers, so far excluded from all prediction analysis, account for well 450% of the total coiled-coil structure population and represent a wealth of untapped data (). Current de novo methods cover only $31% of the coiled-coil population. Thus, simple inclusion of antiparallel dimeric and tetrameric structures would increase coverage to 490%. Homology-based approaches, such as SPIRICOIL (), partially accomplish the task of multi-state coiled-coil oligomeric state prediction, but cannot be used to classify the oligomeric state of coiled-coil sequences ab initio that is, those without structurally defined precedents. As a consequence, we regard the development of an ab initio multi-state predictor to be the next logical step in coiled-coil structure analysis and prediction. To the best of our knowledge, no work has yet treated the ab initio problem of multi-state classification of coiled-coil oligomers. As previous attempts have focussed on two-state predictions and, therefore, have been tailored towards binary response problems, they could not be systematically extended for the purpose of multi-state classification. As *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com such, the problem required the development of statistical techniques and algorithm capable of discriminating between multiple coiled-coil oligomeric states.