Motivation: Ion mobility spectrometry (IMS) has gained significant traction over the past few years for rapid, high-resolution separations of analytes based upon gas-phase ion structure, with significant potential impacts in the field of proteomic analysis. IMS coupled with mass spectrometry (MS) affords multiple improvements over traditional proteomics techniques, such as in the elucidation of secondary structure information, identification of post-translational modifications, as well as higher identification rates with reduced experiment times. The high throughput nature of this technique benefits from accurate calculation of cross sections, mobilities and associated drift times of peptides, thereby enhancing downstream data analysis. Here, we present a model that uses physicochemical properties of peptides to accurately predict a peptides drift time directly from its amino acid sequence. This model is used in conjunction with two mathematical techniques, a partial least squares regression and a support vector regression setting. Results: When tested on an experimentally created high confidence database of 8675 peptide sequences with measured drift times, both techniques statistically significantly outperform the intrinsic size parameters-based calculations, the currently held practice in the field, on all charge states (+2, +3 and +4). Availability: The software executable, imPredict, is available for download from
INTRODUCTIONThe capability of ion mobility spectrometry coupled with mass spectrometry (IMS-MS) to characterize biological mixtures has been extensively reported (). IMS offers fast separation times () as well as additional information on ion structure that can assist e.g. identification of post-translational modifications () as well as gas-phase collision cross * To whom correspondence should be addressed. sections of peptides (). Determination of collision cross section can aid structural studies and provide clues to understanding protein function. Calculating the collision cross section also facilitates peptide identification and allows the reduction in false discovery rates (FDRs).investigated the use of intrinsic size parameters (ISPs) for prediction of peptide ion cross sections in IMS. While the results reported for this technique were promising, the application of such a technique to high throughput data analysis is challenging due to modeling the geometry of the ion which is required to solve a series of transport equations to determine the potential of interaction between the buffer gas atoms and the ion. One of the first efforts for computationally calculating collision cross sections and ion mobility drift times was based on determination of the ISPs of amino acid residues using calculations that were based on the stoichiometry of each residue (). The ISP technique is based on the assumption that all peptides are closely packed without major internal cavities and are near spherical in shape. As a result, the volume (and thus the cross section) of a peptide is directly proportional to the sum of the areas of the constituent atoms divided by the total mass. The use of the ISP technique facilitates computational calculation of collision cross sections and hence allows determination of ion mobilities and peptide drift times. The prediction of peptide drift times has practical application in peptide identification and may assist in the reduction of FDRs in high throughput IMS experiments. The ISP method was tested on 271 singly protonated peptides from the original 660 peptides published in. While the results of this calculation are accurate for this dataset, the technique has not been tested on datasets containing higher charge states peptides. A recent meeting abstract () uses an artificial neural network to predict peptide drift times directly without calculating cross sections and claims prediction performance of over 90% on charges +1 (212 peptides) and +2 (306 peptides) while reporting a 75% performance on charge +3 data (77 peptides). Prediction performance in a regression setting is calculated by selecting an error threshold and counting predictions within the error threshold as true predictions and those outside the threshold as false predictions. A more recent method proposed bydeveloped quantitative structureproperty relationships (QSPR) to predict the drift times for a set of 1481 peptides using information derived from molecular structures. Additionally, they
DiscussionGiven the increased application of IMS to biological separations and proteomics research, there is a need for a high throughput fast computational method to predict ion mobility drift times.