Motivation: The existing methods for genetic-interaction detection in genome-wide association studies are designed from different paradigms, and their performances vary considerably for different disease models. One important reason for this variability is that their construction is based on a single-correlation model between SNPs and disease. Due to potential model preference and disease complexity, a single-objective method will therefore not work well in general, resulting in low power and a high false-positive rate. Method: In this work, we present a multi-objective heuristic optimization methodology named MACOED for detecting genetic interactions. In MACOED, we combine both logistical regression and Bayesian network methods, which are from opposing schools of statistics. The combination of these two evaluation objectives proved to be complementary, resulting in higher power with a lower false-positive rate than observed for optimizing either objective independently. To solve the space and time complexity for high-dimension problems, a memory-based multi-objective ant colony optimization algorithm is designed in MACOED that is able to retain non-dominated solutions found in past iterations. Results: We compared MACOED with other recent algorithms using both simulated and real data-sets. The experimental results demonstrate that our method outperforms others in both detection power and computational feasibility for large datasets.
IntroductionWith the development of genome-wide high-density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotyping technology, genome-wide association studies (GWAS) that aim to explore associations between SNPs and disease in a population play an increasingly important role in identifying the causes of disease (). Although great success has been achieved in identifying single-locus SNPs that are responsible for disease such as Mendelian diseases (), searching for susceptible loci for complex diseases, such as diabetes, hypertension and some psychiatric disorders, has proven to be more problematic. One reason for this is that many diseases are influenced by multi-locus SNPs that interact with each other in a process known as epistasis and thereby complicating matters. Epistasis plays an essential role in human complex disease, and methods designed V C The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com for single-locus detection do not work for epistasis detection due to these interactions that cannot be modeled (). Recently, a number of multi-locus approaches have been proposed to detect epistasis. These approaches can generally be classified into three categories: (i) exhaustive search, (ii) stochastic search and (iii) machine-learning approaches (). Exhaustive search enumerates all possible single-locus and multilocus SNP combinations to identify the causative SNP or SNPs. A representative method of exhaustive search is the multifactordimensionality reduction algorithm, in which multi-locus genotypes are partitioned into two groups termed high-risk and low-risk, thereby reducing the original high-dimensional genotype-prediction problem to one dimension. Next, an exhaustive search is then conducted with these newly formed one-dimensional variables, and the model that predicts disease status the best by cross-validation and permutation testing will be selected ().proposed another exhaustive search method named Boolean operation-based screening and testing (BOOST), which screens data using an upper bound of the likelihood followed by an exhaustive search. Although exhaustive search is the most straightforward idea that has been helpful in many complex diseases, the recent high-dimensional datasets (containing up to one million SNPs) that lead to the so-called 'small sample size problem' [e.g. the small N (number of samples), large P (number of SNPs) problem] prohibit its practical application in the real-world GWAS field because implementation requires tremendous computing resources and takes an unusually long time. Stochastic methods detect epistasis via random sampling that can greatly speeds up the process. Bayesian epistasis association mapping (BEAM) is one example. This method detects suspected SNPs and their interactions via a Bayesian partitioning model and computes the posterior probabilities of the candidates belonging to true-associated SNPs and epistasis via Markov Chain Monte Carlo sampling. BEAM significantly outperformed existing methods as tested on an age-related macular degeneration GWAS dataset (). However, stochastic methods are criticized for using random elements in each iteration, which results in a dramatic loss of power as the search space expands exponentially (). With the development of machine-learning technologies, an increasing number of statistical learning methods have been used in the GWAS field, such as regression-based algorithms (), Bayesian networks (BNs) () and others. The regression-based method is regarded as the most natural first-line approach for modeling and testing genetic effects (Van Steen, 2012). North et al. applied the logistic regression approach to casecontrol association studies involving two causative loci ().tried a different solution which constructed a BN to model the association between SNPs and disease that was subsequently evaluated by a series of scoring criteria. However, these traditional statistical machine-learning methods still suffer from the 'small sample size problem' and generally perform poorly with realworld GWAS datasets. To solve this problem, other machine-learning-based methods introduced heuristic information to speed up the process, such as AntEpiSeeker (). Wang et al. developed the AntEpiSeeker method using heuristic search based on the ant colony optimization (ACO) algorithm and performed better than other methods on the rheumatoid arthritis dataset from the Wellcome Trust Case Control Consortium (). Machine-learning-based methods are generally acknowledged to have variable strengths and weakness due to their formation from different aspects.A number of studies have revealed that these approaches perform inconsistently with different disease models and that even the same approach will often vary when applied to different disease models. One important reason is that existing approaches were constructed based on a single correlation model or objective function for SNPs and disease. Considering the potential preference of the correlation model and the complexity of different disease models, a single-objective method will understandably not work well in general. In this study, we proposed a new multi-objective heuristic search approach based on the ACO algorithm called MACOED. We conducted experiments on a wide range of synthetic datasets and achieved good power and time performance. We also compared MACOED with the representative methods, including AntEpiSeeker, BEAM and BOOST and found that our method showed improved power in detecting correct epistatic interactions with different disease models.
DiscussionTo the best of our knowledge, we are the first to implement a multiobjective optimization framework based on swarm intelligence optimization in the GWAS field. The success of MACOED is primarily due to its complementary multi-objective and Pareto optimization, which increases sensitivity and minimizes false positives. On the other hand, our new memory-based strategy in the ACO algorithm also helps to increase the final power. Although the results demonstrate that our method performs well on both simulated datasets and a real GWAS dataset, some limitations remain. The performance of logistic regression, a parametric method, partly depends on the mathematical model adopted in the association study. Based on the study by North et al., different logistic models used in the first stage of MACOED may partly affect the results of non-dominated solutions (). Another criticism of logistic regression is that the number of parameters in models will increase exponentially when the number of lociModel 1 is a 2-locus multiplicative model, Model 2 is a 2-locus threshold model, and Model 3 is a 2-locus concrete model. Refer to supplementary information for more results of different parameter settings.