The prediction of change in stability upon point mutations in proteins has many applications in protein analysis and engineering. We recently adjoined a new structure-based method called MAESTRO, which is distributed as command line program. We now provide access to the most important features of MAESTRO by an easy to use web service. MAESTROweb allows the prediction of change in stability for user-defined mutations, provides a scan functionality for the most (de)stabilizing n-point mutations for a maximum of n ¼ 5, creates mutation sensitivity profiles and evaluates potential disulfide bonds. MAESTROweb operates on monomers, multimers and biological assemblies as defined by PDB. Availability and implementation: MAESTROweb is freely available for non-commercial use at https://
IntroductionPoint mutation can have a strong impact on protein stability. While in biomedical research functional consequences are of particular interest, in protein engineering often targeted stability changes are intended. Different computational approaches to predict the change in stability upon point mutations have been developed. Methods using the 3D structure of the wild type protein, e.g. I-Mutant2.0 (), PoPMuSiC () or DUET (), turned out to perform better than purely sequence-based approaches () in general. However, the new sequencebased method INPS () closes this performance gap for some datasets and is also able to complement and improve structure-based approaches. We recently introduced a novel structure-based method called MAESTRO which has a similar or better accuracy than the competitor methods (). MAESTRO offers additional benefits which are (i) report of a prediction confidence value, (ii) operation on multimeric proteins, (iii) a scan mode for the most (de)stabilizing n-point mutations and (iv) evaluation of potential disulfide bonds. Here, we present MAESTROweb, which provides an easy to use web interface to MAESTRO for the most frequent application scenarios.
ConclusionWe have introduced MAESTROweb, an easy to use web service for the prediction of changes in stability upon point mutations in proteins. It provides several common types of in silico mutation experiments. The applicability on multimeric structures and the improved accuracy on multi-point mutations make MAESTROweb outstanding in comparison to other web tools.