Motivation: Meta-analysis of large gene expression datasets obtained from public repositories requires consistently annotated data. Curation of such experiments, however, is an expert activity which involves repetitive manipulation of text. Existing tools for automated curation are few, which bottleneck the analysis pipeline. Results: We present MageComet, a web application for biologists and annotators that facilitates the re-annotation of gene expression experiments in MAGE-TAB format. It incorporates data mining, automatic annotation, use of ontologies and data validation to improve the consistency and quality of experimental meta-data from the ArrayExpress Repository. Availability and implementation: Source and tutorials for
INTRODUCTIONThe amount of experimental data in public repositories is accumulating at an ever increasing rate thanks to the advents of highthroughput technologies. Meta-analysis of these data are limited by the availability of harmonized, consistently annotated data in machine readable formats. In the study of gene expression, MAGE-TAB is a commonly used file format that provides flexibility and structure for describing experimental data (). Assays in the MAGETAB format can be explicitly annotated with characteristics and experimental variables, which in turn are referenced to ontologies to provide explicit meaning. Public repositories such as the ArrayExpress Archive () house over 23 000 experiments in the MAGE-TAB format, which is also used by the TCGA project (). The ability to perform meta-analyses requires considerable investment in human re-annotation, harmonization and mapping of data from different labs to single ontologies. Due to the spreadsheet nature of MAGE-TAB, it is a convenient bridge between readability and interoperability but meta-analysis is faster if formatting, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. validation, ontology enrichment and common editing tasks are addressed within the application. This addresses bottlenecks in the re-annotation process and allows users to extract implicit meta-data quickly from pre-existing MAGE-TAB documents and add to this in a convenient editing environment. We present MageComet, a web application for curators that provides semi-automatic tools for annotating existing MAGE-TAB documents. We have used it to curate hundreds of datasets imported into ArrayExpress from GEO.