A MapReduce-based implementation called MR-MSPolygraph for parallelizing peptide identification from mass spectrometry data is presented. The underlying serial method, MSPolygraph, uses a novel hybrid approach to match an experimental spectrum against a combination of a protein sequence database and a spectral library. Our MapReduce implementation can run on any Hadoop cluster environment. Experimental results demonstrate that, relative to the serial version, MR-MSPolygraph reduces the time to solution from weeks to hours, for processing tens of thousands of experimental spectra. Speedup and other related performance studies are also reported on a 400-core Hadoop cluster using spectral datasets from environmental microbial communities as inputs. Availability: The source code along with user documentation are available on http://compbio.eecs.
INTRODUCTIONIdentifying the sequence composition of peptides is of fundamental importance to systems biology research. High-throughput proteomic technologies using mass spectroscopy are capable of generating millions of peptide mass spectra in a matter of days. One of the most effective ways to annotate these spectra is to compare the experimental spectra against a database of known protein sequences. The main idea here is to generate candidate peptide sequences from the genome of the organism under study and then to use models of peptide fragmentation to generate model spectra that can be compared against each experimental spectrum. However, as samples become richer in diversity (e.g. from environmental microbial communities), the number of candidate comparisons could increase by orders of magnitude (Supplementary). An increase in the number of candidates also increases the probability of finding high-scoring, random matches. It is therefore essential to implement a peptide identification method that is both accurate and scalable to large sizes of spectral collections and sequence databases. The prediction accuracy of peptide identification can be improved * To whom correspondence should be addressed. if experimental spectra are also compared against spectral libraries, although this would only exacerbate the computational demands. Recently,developed a novel hybrid statistical method within the MSPolygraph framework, which combines the use of highly accurate spectral libraries, when available, along with on-the-fly generation of model spectra when spectral libraries are not available. This method demonstrated increases of 57147% in the number of confidently identified peptides at controlled false discovery rates. This effort to enrich quality of prediction, however, comes at an increased computational cost. While a parallel MPI version of the code exists, most users do not have access to large-scale parallel clusters. Whereas, open-source science cloud installations and commercial vendors such as Amazon provide access to MapReduce clusters on an on-demand basis. In this article, we present a MapReduce implementation of MSPolygraph called MR-MSPolygraph. MapReduce () is an emerging parallel paradigm for data intensive applications, and is becoming a de facto standard in cloud installations. One of the popular open-source implementations for MapReduce is the Hadoop framework. MR-MSPolygraph uses MapReduce to efficiently distribute the matching of a large spectral collection on a Hadoop cluster. Previously,ported peptide identifications tools that use the database search approach onto the Amazon EC2 cloud environment. Our work incorporates the statistics of the hybrid search method in MSPolygraph to any cluster running the open-source Hadoop environment.