Motivation: High-dimensional data are frequently generated in genome-wide association studies (GWAS) and other studies. It is important to identify features such as single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in GWAS that are associated with a disease. Random forests represent a very useful approach for this purpose, using a variable importance score. This importance score has several shortcomings. We propose an alternative importance measure to overcome those shortcomings. Results: We characterized the effect of multiple SNPs under various models using our proposed importance measure in random forests, which uses maximal conditional chi-square (MCC) as a measure of association between a SNP and the trait conditional on other SNPs. Based on this importance measure, we employed a permutation test to estimate empirical P-values of SNPs. Our method was compared to a univariate test and the permutation test using the Gini and permutation importance. In simulation, the proposed method performed consistently superior to the other methods in identifying of risk SNPs. In a GWAS of age-related macular degeneration, the proposed method confirmed two significant SNPs (at the genome-wide adjusted level of 0.05). Further analysis showed that these two SNPs conformed with a heterogeneity model. Compared with the existing importance measures, the MCC importance measure is more sensitive to complex effects of risk SNPs by utilizing conditional information on different SNPs. The permutation test with the MCC importance measure provides an efficient way to identify candidate SNPs in GWAS and facilitates the understanding of the etiology between genetic variants and complex diseases.
INTRODUCTIONSuccesses of genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have demonstrated that single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) can be used to identify genetic variants underlying complex diseases, such as age-related macular degeneration (AMD) and coronary artery disease (CAD) (). GWAS has emerged as the most effective study design for identifying candidate genes in the scenario of 'common * To whom correspondence should be addressed. disease, common variant'(CDCV). With the advance of genotyping technology, the number of available SNPs in one assay has soared from hundreds of thousand to more than 1 million in the past few years, leading to an outburst of high-dimensional data. On the contrary, statistical methods available for GWAS remain limited. Single marker univariate tests such as the chi-square test or likelihood ratio test are commonly used. While simple, the univariate tests have produced many successes in identifying genetic variants for complex diseases (), which some may regard as 'low hanging fruits'. In reality, biological systems are more complex than single variants acting independently, and most likely, multiple genes may work together in a complex system. For example, in the case of CDCV, multiple loci and environment factors may be involved, and the individual effects may not be large enough to be detectable with thousands of study subjects. Some approaches have been proposed for GWAS to consider the effects of multiple SNPs (). But, there are practical limitations in those approaches. For example, SNPs interactions can be examined only under very limited configurations. Moreover, genetic variants may manifest different effects such as multiplicative and heterogeneity effects (, b), further complicating the analysis. To meet the growing computational demand of the analytic methods, machine-learning approaches have attracted more attention in detecting significant SNPs in GWAS. For example, classification trees and forest-based methods () are powerful tools for identifying complex relationships between a trait and a large number of predictors, and these methods also have been found useful in the analysis of gene expression data (). A random forest consists of many classification trees, and at each node of the trees, a small subset of randomly selected predictors, instead all predictors, are considered to split on the node. Within a random forest, the effect of a predictor is measured by either the permutation importance or Gini importance (). The Gini importance of a specific predictor directly sums the improvement of weighted Gini index when this variable is used for splitting a node among all trees in the forest (). The permutation importance of a predictor calculates the increase of the out-of-bag errors as a result of permuting the values of the predictor (), because the permutation destroys any potential predictive power of the predictor on the trait. Previous studies () have demonstrated that the random forest-based approach is feasible and efficient for GWAS, although two major issues hamper further applications of random forests. Firstly, although large importance scores are often indicative of SNPs associated with the trait, it is usually not clear how large is large, and the importance score is not coupled with the rigorous statistical significance of the investigated SNPs. Secondly, both the permutation and Gini importance scores measure the 'average' effect of a predictor in a random forest, and can be easily altered by the presence of the other SNPs. To overcome the problems stated above, we introduce an alternative importance score using maximal conditional chi-square (MCC) statistic to assess the conditional significance of SNPs in GWAS. For example, with two SNPs (A and B), if SNP B confounds the effect of SNP A on the trait, failure to control the effects of SNP B may lead to inefficient tests for SNP A. Like the MantelHaenszel test, a test by stratifying by SNP B is an effective approach to adjusting for the confounding effect of SNP B. We make use of the hierarchical tree structure to assess the effect of SNP A through stratification of the SNPs that precede SNP A in splitting the nodes in a tree. A conditional chi-square statistic for SNP A can be calculated whenever it is used to split a node of any tree in a random forest. The maximal value among all these chisquares calculated for SNP A is obtained after the construction of the random forest. This maximum indicates the relationship between the trait and the SNP given its preceding SNPs in the random forest, and can serve as an importance measure. The reason we select the largest chi-square statistic, instead of the average as used in the Gini and permutation importance, is that disease-associated SNPs are usually very rare in the data, and therefore, most of the conditional chi-square statistics come from the SNPs that are not associated with the trait. Thus averaging all chi-square values limits the sensitivity of the permutation test. Based on the MCC importance score, we developed a permutation procedure to estimate the significance of each SNP. Simulated data sets based on various multiplicative and heterogeneity genetic models were generated to evaluate the performance of the proposed approach. We compared the results among Gini, permutation, and MCC importance scores. Finally, the proposed method was applied to a real data set for GWAS.
DISCUSSIONRandom forests, as a powerful machine learning method, has been successfully applied in many classification problems, especially with a large number of predictors. The permutation and Gini importance scores are commonly computed for random forests to evaluate the overall contribution of a predictor in classification. The reason for the reduced power they exhibited in identification of risk SNPs in GWAS is probably that the risk SNPs are extremely sparse in the data and they usually cooperate as a complex system associated with the phenotype; therefore averaging over all scores may significantly reduce its sensitivity in the permutation test. Moreover, there are other practical issues with the permutation importance. For example, highly correlated SNPs due to link age disequilibrium act as surrogates to each other, causing an underestimation of the permutation importance when they appear in one tree. During the calculation of permutation importance, the permutation of one SNP will break its intrinsic relationship with other SNPs which leads to inaccurate estimation of permutation importance. Some approaches () have been proposed to address these issues, but they are too computationally intensive for ultra high throughput data. Therefore, a powerful and yet simple statistic is very important to detect subtle effects between casual SNPs. In this article, we proposed and studied the maximal chi-square statistic as a new importance measurement in random forests and its application in the permutation test for GWAS. We first evaluated the performance of the MCC importance in detecting risk SNPs using empirical P-values under null hypothesis and discovered that there is no association between SNPs and a trait. We also compared this method with the permutation tests using different importance scores in random forests and single marker analysis. We further modified the genetic models in simulation by including LD, reflecting real data in GWAS. The results indicated that the permutation test using the MCC importance was consistently the best. Moreover, we showed that it is possible to make inference on risk SNPs from the preceding list of SNPs while deriving the MCC importance. Finally we applied this method to a GWAS data for AMD. Two AMD-related SNPs: rs10272438 and rs1329428 were successfully identified with the genome-wide significance level 0.05. Our analysis suggested that these two SNPs belong to a heterogeneity model involved in etiology.