Motivation: Y-chromosome short tandem repeats (Y-STRs) are widely used for population studies, forensic purposes and, potentially, the study of disease, therefore knowledge of their mutation rate is valuable. Here we show a novel method for estimation of site-specific Y-STR mutation rates from partial phylogenetic information, via the maximum likelihood framework. Results: Given Y-STR data classified into haplogroups, we describe the likelihood of observed data, and develop optimization strategies for deriving maximum likelihood estimates of mutation rates. We apply our method to Y-STR data from two recent papers. We show that our estimates are comparable, often more accurate than those obtained in familial studies, although our data sample is much smaller, and was not collected specifically for our study. Furthermore, we obtain mutation rate estimates for DYS388, DYS426, DYS457, three STRs for which there were no mutation rate measures until now.
INTRODUCTIONMicrosatellites or Short Tandem Repeats (STRs) are repetitive stretches of DNA made of short sequence motifs (26 bp), repeating a variable number of times. STRs are very common in eukaryotic genomes, and are highly mutable, with changes in repeat count occurring with much higher mutation rates compared to other polymorphisms [as high as 210 3 in Y-chromosome STRs (Y-STR) as estimated by, leading to allelic polymorphism. These properties have made them an efficient tool for identification in forensics and paternity tests () as well as for studying demographic history and population structure, especially Y-STRs (). This is because most of the Y-chromosome does not undergo recombination, hence population polymorphism originates only from mutations, and individuals can be placed on a common phylogenetic tree, whose branches are marked by mutations. Besides their use in forensics and demographic studies, some autosomal microsatellites are also known to be involved in disease: expansion of specific microsatellites beyond a certain threshold has been known to cause diseases such as Fragile X syndrome, myotonic dystrophy and Huntington's disease (). Microsatellites are also known to hypermutate in some cancers (). In order to understand microsatellites mutation mechanisms, reliable rate estimates for STRs, in general, and Y-STR, specifically, have long been considered of scientific interest. Different approaches have been utilized for the estimation of Y-STR mutation rates, some * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of which use direct counting such as counting mutation events in deep routed pedigrees with known history (), or in fatherson pairs (), and also in sperm (). Other methods try to estimate the mutation rates indirectly; for example,, use the diversity of Y-STRs in modern-day population samples with documented population founding or population splitting events in the last 1000 years (Gypsies and Pacific Islanders). They use T D , an estimator for a population divergence time based on inter-and intrapopulation variance of STR repeat number (), to estimate the average STR mutation rates. For the eight Y-STRs they consider they get an estimate of 6.910 4 5.910 4 mutations per generation. All of the different approaches observed significant variation in the mutation rates of different STRs. See for example the comparable mean and standard error for mutation rates as estimated by. However, there is a roughly 3-fold gap between the rates estimated from geneologies and those estimated from historical or phylogenetic data (). This has generated extensive attention in the literature, with some explanations offered by, but in our view it largely remains unresolved. In this article, we propose a new approach for estimating Y-STR mutation rates. As opposed to previous approaches, which require extensive collection of data specifically for this purpose (fatherson pairs, genealogies, populations with documented history, etc.), our approach takes advantage of data collected in population genetic studies. There is a long list of such studies which make use of Y-STR data (), and they often also sequence a collection of unique event polymorphism markers, usually single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), which place each sample in a well-defined region of the human Y-chromosome phylogenetic tree, referred to as a haplogroup (Hg). We show below how this partial knowledge of the phylogenetic relationship between samples affects the likelihood of the observed Y-STR lengths, and demonstrate how the resulting optimization problems can be solved to obtain maximum likelihood (ML) estimates of Y-STR mutation rates. In the simplest cases, the resulting ML estimation problem is generalized linear model (GLM), with a non-standard complementary loglog (CLL) link function. This has been previously demonstrated and applied on mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) data by. However, as we show, in Y-STR data we can extract more detailed information from the data. We formulate and solve the resulting ML maximization as general convex optimization problems. We apply our approach to a combined dataset of haplogroupassociated Y-STR data from two recent papers (), comprising in total 3780 samples in 66 haplogroups. We then compare our estimates to the onesPage: i441 i440i445
DISCUSSIONIn this study we show a new method for estimating Y-STR mutation rates. This method (MAL8) is based on ML estimation using partial phylogenetic information. Using data for 10 Y-STRs with previously estimated mutation rates, MAL8 obtains rates highly similar to the previously measured rates described in the YHRD (). This is noteworthy, as both the estimation method and the datasets used are very different. Classical mutation rate estimation is based on counting mutations in father son pairs (or other known geneologies). This requires both a specialized dataset, and, due to the small rate of mutations, thousands of samples (YHRD uses 10 00025 000 meioses for each STR). The MAL8 method used in this study was applied to a small, previously published dataset, consisting of only 4000 samples, which were collected for other uses and not customized for Y-STR mutation rate estimation in any way. Even on such a small dataset, the MAL8 method obtained tighter confidence intervals in most STRs, including DYS437 for which we had significantly fewer samples than the other Y-STRs (230 samples). This emphasizes an important aspect of our approach, whose performance largely depends on the level of detail in Hg classification, more than on the actual number of samples used. Thus, our approach is expected to do well in the presence of a detailed Hg phylogeny, even with relatively small sample sizes. Note that an incorrect classification into the Hgs might cause a contradiction to the assumption of independent occurrences of mutations, but this is not a real concern, since Hg classification is done with very high confidence according to SNPs (). Importantly, the rate estimates depend only on polymorphisms observed, which in turn depend on the total branch lengths of each Hg subtree, rather than on a specific internal structure. We obtained mutation rate estimates for three STRs for which, to the best of our knowledge, there is no measured mutation rate: DYS388, DYS426 and DYS457. The estimated mutation rate of DYS426 (0.0007) is significantly slower than the other estimates. Indeed, we observed in this study, as well as others in previous works (), that there is the large difference in mutation rates between different STRs. This has been suggested to originate from differences in STR repeat counts (a connection which we have verified above exists in our data), the length of the subunit itself, or its nucleotide composition. Obtaining better statistics on the mutation rates in different STRs may enable to shed more light on this problem. While currently 400 Y-STRs have been described (), only 20 Y-STRs have measured rates (). Since the dataset used for the MAL8 is publicly available and continues to grow, obtaining sufficient data for additional STRs may enable estimation of their mutation rates. In addition, a current limiting factor for more accurate estimation is the resolution of the haplogroup classification. Studies with detailed Hg classification based on unique event polymorphisms like SNPs would be most useful for generating accurate estimates of Y-STR rates. A fundamental flaw of all Y-STR mutation rate estimation approaches, including our own, is the limiting assumption they make about the nature of Y-STR mutation processes. The mutation count is assumed to be a symmetric random walk, so that the probability of change in the repeat count for each STR is fixed, independently of whether the change is an increase or decrease, and of the current repeat count. These models are unrealistic as they do not allow a stationary distribution of repeat counts (), thus, eventually leading to STR length which is infinite or zeroboth possibilities are obviously unreasonable. Interestingly, it has been demonstrated that use of such simplistic models is consistent with a decrease in 'observed' mutation rates as distance between samples increases (). We believe that this should be further investigated as a possible factor in the 3-fold gap between the genealogical and evolutionary rates (). Hence, we plan future extensions for our modeling approach to allow for asymmetric rates and length dependencies. Note that this is much more complex than our current approach, since knowledge of the total mutation count m ik no longer suffices to write the likelihood. At the very least, this approach requires prior knowledge about ancestral STR length in every Hg, or, possibly, a way to infer it.