We describe mbmdr, an R package for implementing the model-based multifactor dimensionality reduction (MB-MDR) method. MB-MDR has been proposed by Calle et al. as a dimension reduction method for exploring gene–gene interactions in case-control association studies. It is an extension of the popular multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method of Ritchie et al. allowing a more flexible definition of risk cells. In MB-MDR, risk categories are defined using a regression model which allows adjustment for covariates and main effects and, in addition to the classical low risk and high risk categories, MB-MDR considers a third category of indeterminate or not informative cells. An important improvement added to the current mbmdr algorithm with respect to the original MB-MDR formulation in Calle et al. and also to the classical MDR approach, is the extension of the methodology to different outcome types. While MB-MDR was initially proposed for binary traits in the context of case-control studies, the mbmdr package provides options to analyze both binary or quantitative traits for unrelated individuals. Availability: http://cran.r-project.org/
INTRODUCTIONModel-based multifactor dimensionality reduction (MB-MDR), has been proposed byas a dimension reduction method for exploring genegene interactions in casecontrol association studies. MB-MDR extends the multifactor dimensionality reduction (MDR) method ofin several ways. Like MDR, the MB-MDR method merges multilocus genotypes into a one-dimensional construct, but the way the genotype cells are merged differs. In MB-MDR, an additional 'noevidence category' allows a more accurate categorization into high level, low level and 'indeterminate' or 'non-informative' cells. Other extensions to improve the performance and applicability of MDR have been proposed, including the odds ratio-based MDR (OR-MDR) method () and the generalized MDR GMDR; (). Unlike these MDR extensions, MBMDR does not involve division of the data into training and * To whom correspondence should be addressed. learning sets and therefore does not select the best interaction model via prediction accuracy and cross-validation consistency measures. Instead, MB-MDR measures the association between multi-locus genotypes and the phenotype and provides a set of statistically significant interactions instead of a single best model. Significance is assessed through a permutation test. This strategy has proven to be more powerful than MDR in the presence of genetic heterogeneity (submitted for publication). An additional feature of MB-MDR is its flexibility for dealing with different kind of phenotypes by changing the link function of the regression analysis. MB-MDR was initially proposed for binary traits in the context of case-control studies (), but the mbmdr package presented here has been implemented to allow for quantitative traits. MB-MDR has been successfully applied to a set of 404 single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) in 110 inflammation-related genes as a preliminary phase to identify epistatic effects in the Spanish Bladder Cancer/EPICURO Study (). This is a case-control study conducted in 18 Spanish centers during 1998 2001 that included 1157 cases and 1157 controls. Unlike MDR, this approach allowed to adjust the analysis for the main bladder cancer risk factors (smoking status, age, gender and region). MBMDR identified one second-order interaction and five three-way interactions with P  10 5. While some interactions seem to be biologically sound, others were unexpected and need to be replicated in independent series before validating them in the lab. MB-MDR has also been applied to a study on eczema risk () where the phenotype was the allergenspecific IgE levels. This application is specially relevant since, involving a continuous response, the classical MDR approach could not be used. Furthermore, the flexible model-based approach allowed adjustment for well-known established risk factors. A significant epistatic effect of two variants in FCER1A on eczema risk was detected.