While many tools exist for performing enrichment analysis of transcriptomic and proteomic data in order to interpret them in biological terms, almost no equivalent tools exist for metabolomic data. We present Metabolite Biological Role (MBRole), a web server for carrying out over-representation analysis of biological and chemical annotations in arbitrary sets of metabolites (small chemical compounds) coming from metabolomic data of any organism or sample. Availability and Implementation: The web server is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONIn general,-omics data require a secondary analysis in order to be understood in biological terms. In the case of transcriptomics, for example, the primary processing of the raw experimental data provides large lists of hundreds or thousands of genes which are over-or under-expressed in a given condition. These lists are not easily interpretable and they should be further processed in order to get insight into the underlying cause for that change in expression. The most widely used methodology for performing such analysis is termed 'functional enrichment' (). This analysis looks for keywords or descriptors over-represented in the set of genes of interest (e.g. those over-expressed) with respect to a background reference set (e.g. the whole genome or the set of genes printed in the array). Since originally proposed, a hundred of variations and different implementations of enrichment analysis have been proposed (). While transcriptomic techniques provide information on the mRNA concentrations of the gene repertory of an organism, and proteomics on the respective protein concentrations, metabolomic techniques aim to massively measure the concentrations of the whole metabolite repertory of a given cell (). Hence, these methodologies complement each other in providing global pictures of the molecular components of living systems. Newer than transcriptomics and proteomics, metabolomic techniques are still facing many technical problems. Maybe due to this, the number of tools for performing secondary analysis (i.e. biological interpretation) of metabolomic data is still scarce, e.g. MetExplore (). As far as we know, only one public tool
CONCLUSIONIn this work we present MBRole, a tool to perform functional enrichment analysis on metabolic data from any organism or sample using sets of annotations of diverse nature. Only very recently the first tool for performing metabolomic enrichment analysis appeared: MSEA (), which is restricted to human metabolites. Although focused on qualitative annotations, MBRole is general and versatile enough to perform functional enrichment analysis in any metabolomic sample (including additional biological and chemical annotations for human metabolites), and hence complements existing software for the rising field of metabolomics.