MDWeb and MDMoby constitute a web-based platform to help access to molecular dynamics (MD) in the standard and high-throughput regime. The platform provides tools to prepare systems from PDB structures mimicking the procedures followed by human experts. It provides inputs and can send simulations for three of the most popular MD packages (Amber, NAMD and Gromacs). Tools for analysis of trajectories, either provided by the user or retrieved from our MoDEL database (http://mmb.pcb.ub.es/MoDEL) are also incorporated. The platform has two ways of access, a set of web-services based on the BioMoby framework (MDMoby), programmatically accessible and a web portal (MDWeb). Availability: http://mmb.irbbarcelona.org/MDWeb; additional information and methodology details can be found at the web site
INTRODUCTIONMolecular dynamics (MD) has experienced a long evolution since its origins (), being now a mature technique that allows to obtain accurate pictures of the dynamics of proteins and nucleic acids. Unfortunately, the practical use of MD is limited by three factors: (i) force-fields uncertainties; (ii) the need of large computational resources; and (iii) the high-level expertise needed to use efficiently the technique. Indeed, setting up a system for simulation requires a large series of operations, and a number of decisions that demand a significant degree of expertise and large amounts of human time, in most cases similar to that of computing the trajectory. The end result is that newcomers to the field face a stiff learning curve. These problems reach a maximum in highthroughput projects (; Van * To whom correspondence should be addressed. der), where thousands of trajectories need to be launched and supercomputer resources are required. We present here a tool designed to help nave users to completely prepare systems for simulation, and that allows expert users to use MD in the high-throughput regime. The tool is presented in two different versions: a web-services-oriented software platform (MDMoby), and a web portal MDWeb. The technology has been adapted to be accessed as web-services following BioMoby (www.biomoby.org;). MDMoby can be run with usual web-services clients and also programmatically through suitable APIs (http://inb.bsc.es). In turn, the web portal MDWeb provides a friendly environment to setup new systems, run test simulations and perform analysis within a guided interface. Setup files can be prepared, at present time, for Amber (), NAMD () and Gromacs (), and analyses can be carried out from trajectories written in the most usual formats. Additionally, the platform is interfaced to our flexibility analysis software FlexServ, so providing coarsegrained simulation, and advanced analysis tools (), and also with our MoDEL database ().