Motivation: Protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks are a valuable resource for the interpretation of genomics data. However, such networks have interaction enrichment biases for proteins that are often studied. These biases skew quantitative results from comparing PPI networks with genomics data. Here, we introduce an approach named physical interaction enrichment (PIE) to eliminate these biases. Methodology: PIE employs a normalization that ensures equal node degree (edge) distribution of a test set and of the random networks it is compared with. It quantifies whether a set of proteins have more interactions between themselves than proteins in random networks, and can therewith be regarded as physically cohesive. Results: Among other datasets, we applied PIE to genetic morbid disease (GMD) genes and to genes whose expression is induced upon infection with human-metapneumovirus (HMPV). Both sets contain proteins that are often studied and that have relatively many interactions in the PPI network. Although interactions between proteins of both sets are found to be overrepresented in PPI networks, the GMD proteins are not more likely to interact with each other than random proteins when this overrepresentation is taken into account. In contrast the HMPV-induced genes, representing a biologically more coherent set, encode proteins that do tend to interact with each other and can be used to predict new HMPV-induced genes. By handling biases in PPI networks, PIE can be a valuable tool to quantify the degree to which a set of genes are involved in the same biological process. Contact
INTRODUCTIONPhysical interactions between proteins explain how proteins function together in protein complexes or functional modules (). Discovery of all proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) has therefore been a priority in systems biology and there have been several efforts to elucidate PPIs both in low-and in high-throughput platforms (), as well as * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by evolutionary inference (). The resulting PPI networks are invaluable for the interpretation of other genomics data. In a number of studies, specific emphasis has been placed on quantifying aspects of network topology to identify proteins that are specifically relevant to a biological process or for evolution. For instance Wachi and coworkers identified a high network centrality for genes that are upregulated during lung cancer as a distinguishing topological feature to enable placement of cancer genes into the global and systematic context of the cell (). In a similar study, essential genes in yeast have been found to be well connected and globally centered in the PPI network (). Notwithstanding the success of such approaches, there are some experimental biases in the determination of PPIs. For instance, the Yeast-2-Hybrid (Y2H) approach is known to detect interactions among proteins that may not be likely because the proteins naturally do not occur in the same subcellular compartment (von). Tandem Affinity Purification followed by mass spectrometry is known to favor highly abundant proteins (). In addition, evolutionary inference of PPIs as 'interologs' has placed highly conserved proteins as hubs in general PPI networks (). Even manual curation of PPIs in scientific literature has caveats. One main caveat being that the discovery of such interactions is driven by existing knowledge and hypotheses (). The latter has led to an overrepresentation of interactions between proteins encoded by disease genes in the Human Protein Reference Database (HPRD) (). Several measures have been developed to improve the reliability of PPI networks (), like the integration of general PPI networks with networks based on other data (). Although such comparative genomic approaches increase the reliability of the PPI network, they do not specifically remove systematic biases, like the overrepresentation of well-studied proteins, from general PPI networks. This is of pertinent concern because function information derived from such networks would be skewed towards well-studied genes that are often evolutionarily conserved nodes, immune-related nodes or disease-associated nodes in PPI networks. Moreover, such biases can cloud quantitative assessments of whether a set of proteins of interest tend to interact with each other, and are therewith 'physically cohesive'. For example, when genes that are upregulated under a specific condition encode proteins that physically interact with each other, this can be because they truly interact more with
DISCUSSIONIn order to explore PPIs in a quantitative manner, we have developed a method called PIE, to circumvent interaction enrichment biases in context-specific networks derived from general PPI networks. PIE employs a randomization procedure that appropriately considers the global degrees (in a general PPI network) of the extant nodes in a context-specific test network, prior to assigning physical cohesiveness to the test network. We have focused on the context of disease and immunity because many proteins have been studied in this area. We observe that there are significantly (P  0.01) more interactions for proteins of morbid disease genes and HMPV-induced genes than random expectation in general PPI networks. This observed enrichment for PPI of morbid disease genes and HMPV-induced genes is in agreement with other Page: 2742 27372743