Mutually exclusive splicing is a strictly regulated pattern of alternative splicing. A specific group of mutually exclusive splicing events has been shown to be regulated by the formation of specific RNA secondary structures. This type of regulation has been shown to exist only in arthropods. The present study involved a detailed sequence analysis of human gene structures that undergo mutually exclusive splicing, which showed that this type of regulation may also occur in dynamin 1 in mammals. A phylogenetic analysis revealed that the dynamin 1 orthologs in invertebrates did not share the same sequence features, which suggests that the regulatory mechanism has independently evolved in the mammalian lineage. Therefore, the emergence of this elaborate mechanism for mutually exclusive splicing may be attributable to mechanistic convergence.
INTRODUCTIONThe alternative splicing of pre-mRNA is regulated in a spatiotemporal manner and is essential for generating proteomic diversity. Mutually exclusive splicing is an alternative splicing pattern where only a single exon is precisely selected from a cluster of candidate exons. Several different mechanisms have been proposed for mutually exclusive splicing (). For example, an elegant model that involves specific RNA secondary structures in introns was first proposed for the exon 6 cluster of Dscam in Drosophila species (). In this model, the formation of RNA secondary structures between a docking site and selector sequences in premRNA allows a single exon to be selected, although other cases that can be explained using this model were not observed for several years. A recent study byexpanded the applicability of this model to other genes in insects, such as 14-3-3 and myosin heavy chain. In Dscam, it appeared that clusters of mutually exclusive exons other than exon 6 could also be explained using the docking site-selector sequence interaction model. They not only predicted the intronic elements responsible for mutually exclusive splicing but also experimentally demonstrated that the elements were directly involved with the precise selection of the exon (). At present, this mechanism is only known to exist in arthropods (), and it is uncertain whether it applies to genes in other clades, including mammals. In this report, a genome-wide analysis of cases of mutually exclusive splicing was performed by scanning the structures of human transcripts to gain mechanistic insights into the regulation of mutually exclusive splicing. The RNA base-pairing potential for pre-mRNA sequences that underwent mutually exclusive splicing was calculated, and a characteristic sequence pattern that fitted well with the docking site-selector sequence pairing model was observed in the sequence of dynamin 1 (dnm1). The applicability of this model was supported by evidence, such as the conservation of sequence patterns in other mammalian species. The discovery that the pre-mRNA sequence of dnm1 in humans has sequence features similar to that of the alternative splicing patterns observed in insects greatly expands the applicability of the docking site-selector sequence pairing model to bilaterian animals.