Motivation: The data gathered by the Pan-Cancer initiative has created an unprecedented opportunity for illuminating common features across different cancer types. However, separating tissue-specific features from across cancer signatures has proven to be challenging. One of the often-observed properties of the mutational landscape of cancer is the mutual exclusivity of cancer driving mutations. Even though studies based on individual cancer types suggested that mutually exclusive pairs often share the same functional pathway, the relationship between across cancer mutual exclusivity and functional connectivity has not been previously investigated. Results: We introduce a classification of mutual exclusivity into three basic classes: within tissue type exclusivity, across tissue type exclusivity and between tissue type exclusivity. We then combined across-cancer mutual exclusivity with interactions data to uncover pan-cancer dysregulated pathways. Our new method, Mutual Exclusivity Module Cover (MEMCover) not only identified previously known Pan-Cancer dysregulated subnetworks but also novel subnetworks whose across cancer role has not been appreciated well before. In addition, we demonstrate the existence of mutual exclusivity hubs, putatively corresponding to cancer drivers with strong growth advantages. Finally, we show that while mutually exclusive pairs within or across cancer types are predominantly functionally interacting, the pairs in between cancer mutual exclusivity class are more often disconnected in functional networks.
IntroductionThe Pan-Cancer initiative surveyed genetic and epigenetic aberrations in cancer samples from thousands of cancer patients over 12 cancer types (). This data opened the door to a systematic examination of the similarities and differences among multiple cancer types. However, integrative analysis for subtype classifications from five 'omics' platforms revealed that 'cell-oforigin' features dominate the molecular taxonomy of diverse tumor types rather than discovering common features across tissue types. Although such an outcome may be partly due to the tissue specificity of some cancer driver genes and pathways, it can also be attributed to the lack of power to untangle mixed signals of cell-type-specific and cancer-specific features (). Despite these strong tissue-specific signals, it has also become evident that many mutated genes, and even whole dysregulated subnetworks, are shared by multiple cancer types (). Pathway-centric methods have emerged as a key approach to empower studies of complex diseases with heterogeneous signals by focusing on the genetic activities on the level of biological pathways (subnetworks) rather than individual genes. Several computational methods have been developed to utilize genotypic data for the identification of mutated subnetworks (, b) and stratification of cancer subtypes (). One of the often-observed properties of the mutational landscape of cancer is the mutual exclusivity of cancer driving mutations (). Mutually exclusive mutations observed among genes in the same functional pathway prompted the development of computational methods that utilize mutual exclusivity in the context of identifying pathways dysregulated in cancer as well as for the pathway independent identification of mutually exclusive cancer drivers (). However, the sets of mutually exclusive drivers previously obtained in Pan-Cancer analysis () predominantly contain tissue type-specific genes and do not necessarily share common pathways, indicating that the previous definition of mutual exclusivity is not sufficient in Pan-Cancer analysis and it is necessary to recognize different mutual exclusivity classes. To this end, we started by classifying mutual exclusivity patterns into three basic classes: within tissue type exclusivity (mutual exclusivity observed only in one cancer type), across tissue type exclusivity (mutual exclusivity common to several tissue types), and between tissue type exclusivity (mutual exclusivity between putative tissue-specific drivers). We developed statistical tests that allow us to identify the membership of gene sets to these mutual exclusivity classes. We then aimed to use the principle of mutual exclusivity for identification of subnetworks dysregulated across multiple cancer types. To identify Pan-Cancer dysregulated modules, we utilized the across cancer mutual exclusivity measure jointly with the interaction data from a network. Interestingly, we found that functionally interacting gene pairs are more likely to be involved in across tissue type mutual exclusivity while between type exclusivity is more often observed in gene pairs that are not functionally related. Adapting the Module Cover approach (), we uncovered subnetworks that are dysregualted in multiple cancer types. Module Cover is an extension of the classical Multi-Set Cover approach, utilized before to find disease marker genes for highly heterogeneous genomic data, to a network setting. This is an optimization technique that is particularly suitable in the context of heterogonous data. The approach essentially aims to identify a set of dysregulated subnetworks so that a desired subnetwork score is optimized, while at the same time, ensuring that altered genes from different cancer samples are present in the union of the selected subnetworks. Our proposed algorithm, Mutual Exclusivity Module Cover (MEMCover), uses the module cover strategy to combine mutual exclusivity feature with functional interactions and genomic aberration data from individual Pan-Cancer cases to uncover Pan-Cancer dysregulated subnetworks. Unlike previous approaches for finding a set of genetic aberrations exclusive between all pairs, MEMCover does not necessarily seek to identify subnetworks with complete exclusivity among the genes, (, b) but utilizes pairwise mutual exclusivity to complement interaction data for a better identification of subnetworks dysregulated in Pan-Cancer samples. When applied to Pan-Cancer data, MEMCover identified a large number of subnetworks dysregulated across many cancer types. We found that many of the identified subnetworks are linked to cancerrelated pathways, overlapping with all but one subnetwork with at least 10% coverage recently identified by HotNet2 in Pan-Caner analyses () despite the fact that MEMCover is based on completely different principle from HotNet2. We also identified subnetworks whose role across cancer types has not been appreciated previously. Finally, our analysis also suggests the existence of mutual exclusivity hubsgenes whose genetic aberrations are mutually exclusive with aberrations in a large number of other genes, both connected and not connected in the network, indicating that these mutual exclusivity hubs may correspond to cancer driver genes that have particularly strong growth advantages.