Motivation: Liquid chromatography–mass spectrometry (LC/MS) is a key technique in metabolomics. Since the efficient assignment of MS signals to true biological metabolites becomes feasible in combination with in vivo stable isotopic labelling, our aim was to provide a new software tool for this purpose. Results: An algorithm and a program (MetExtract) have been developed to search for metabolites in in vivo labelled biological samples. The algorithm makes use of the chromatographic characteristics of the LC/MS data and detects MS peaks fulfilling the criteria of stable isotopic labelling. As a result of all calculations, the algorithm specifies a list of m/z values, the corresponding number of atoms of the labelling element (e.g. carbon) together with retention time and extracted adduct-, fragment-and polymer ions. Its function was evaluated using native 12 C-and uniformly 13 C-labelled standard substances.
INTRODUCTIONThe extraction of high-resolution LC/MS signals of true metabolites contained in complex biological samples is still a major challenge in non-targeted metabolomics. This limitation can largely be attributed to the non-specific nature of the electrospray ionisation (ESI) process in LC/MS, leading to full scan spectra, which tend to contain up to  90% background signals compared with signals measured for metabolites (). In vivo stable isotopic labelling offers a powerful tool to circumvent these limitations. Uniformly 13 C-labelled metabolites show identical chromatographic behaviour as their non-labelled isotopologues but can be easily differentiated by MS. Recently, () for example, successfully used 13 C-labelled Arabidopsis thaliana plants in combination with * To whom correspondence should be addressed. database searching for the elimination of background signals and annotation of metabolites. Despite the high potential of this approach in metabolomics research, no algorithms have been published for the automated evaluation of LC/MS data originating from in vivo labelled biological samples. To the best of our knowledge, a single commercial software programme exists to date, which has been designed to assign differentially expressed metabolites in differently treated biological samples (e.g. control versus treatment) by calculating and graphically illustrating the intensity ratios of the principal ions from isotopologue signal pairs (; http://nextgenmetabolomics.com/). Complementary to this, the presented MetExtract algorithm makes use of biological cultures obtained under identical growth conditions with the only difference being the isotopic composition of the nutrition source. MetExtract mainly aims at the global detection and combination of metabolitederived corresponding LC/MS signals originating from natural and stable isotopically labelled analogues and their assignment to true biological metabolites.Page: 737 736738