The Illumina 450k array is a frequently used platform for large-scale genome-wide DNA methylation studies, i.e. epigenome-wide association studies. Currently, quality control of 450k data can be performed with Illuminas GenomeStudio and is part of a limited number 450k analysis pipelines. However, GenomeStudio cannot handle large-scale studies, and existing pipelines provide limited options for quality control and neither support interactive exploration by the user. To aid the detection of bad-quality samples in large-scale genome-wide DNA methylation studies as flexible and transparent as possible, we have developed MethylAid; a visual and interactive Web application using RStudios shiny package. Bad-quality samples are detected using sample-dependent and sample-independent quality control probes present on the array and user-adjustable thresholds. In-depth exploration of bad-quality samples can be performed using several interactive diagnostic plots. Furthermore, plots can be annotated with user-provided metadata, for example, to identify outlying batches. Our new tool makes quality assessment of 450k array data interactive, flexible and efficient and is, therefore, expected to be useful for both data analysts and core facilities. Availability and implementation: MethylAid is implemented as an R/Bioconductor package (www.bioconductor.org/packages/3.0/bioc /html/MethylAid.html). A demo application is available from shiny. bioexp.nl/MethylAid. Contact: m.van_iterson@lumc.nl
INTRODUCTIONBecause the introduction of the Illumina 450k Human Methylation BeadChip (), it has become the standard for large-scale genome-wide DNA methylation studies, i.e. epigenome-wide association studies (EWAS;). The array measures 482,421 CpG dinucleotides, covering 99% of genes (RefSeq;) and a broad range of genomic annotations. The principle of the array is that the methylation level of individual CpG dinucleotides is inferred using quantitative 'genotyping' of bisulfite-converted genomic DNA, a chemical reaction that converts unmethylated Cs into Ts, whereas methylated Cs are protected. To monitor the quality of Illumina 450k data, the array contains 10 different types of quality control probes to evaluate the performance of both samples and specific steps in the process. The most frequently used type of quality control probe is the negative control that represents the background signal level. These are used to determine whether a signal significantly exceeds the background signal (represented as a so-called detection P 0.01 or 0.05). However, current tools do not allow researchers to use the valuable information provided by the other control probes. The Illumina software GenomeStudio visualizes all quality control probes but is limited to small studies (typically 5100), while tools developed to handle large studies primarily focus on data processing and analysis and mostly limited their use of the control probe information to the calculation of the detection P-values. Moreover, neither have the possibility for interactive exploration by the user. MethylAid was developed to address these limitations.
CONCLUSIONMethylAid provides complete insight in the quality of each sample in a large-scale EWAS and gives the user full control on the selection of bad-quality samples that should be excluded from downstream analyses. Quality assessment of 450k array data is made interactive, flexible and efficient. Therefore, MethylAid is expected to be useful for both data analysts and core facilities.