Motivation: Due to the high complexity of metabolome, the comprehensive 2D gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GCÂGC-TOF MS) is considered as a powerful analytical platform for metabolomics study. However, the applications of GCÂGC-TOF MS in metabolomics are not popular owing to the lack of bioinfor-matics system for data analysis. Results: We developed a computational platform entitled metabolo-mics profiling pipeline (MetPP) for analysis of metabolomics data acquired on a GCÂGC-TOF MS system. MetPP can process peak filtering and merging, retention index matching, peak list alignment, normalization, statistical significance tests and pattern recognition, using the peak lists deconvoluted from the instrument data as its input. The performance of MetPP software was tested with two sets of experimental data acquired in a spike-in experiment and a bio-marker discovery experiment, respectively. MetPP not only correctly aligned the spiked-in metabolite standards from the experimental data, but also correctly recognized their concentration difference between sample groups. For analysis of the biomarker discovery data, 15 metabolites were recognized with significant concentration difference between the sample groups and these results agree with the literature results of histological analysis, demonstrating the effectiveness of applying MetPP software for disease biomarker discovery. Availability: The source code of MetPP is available at http://
INTRODUCTIONComprehensive 2D gas chromatography time-of-flight mass spectrometry (GCGC-TOF MS) uses two GC columns connected via a thermal modulator. Compared with the first column, the second column is usually a short column with a different stationary phase and is operated at a higher temperature. The metabolites co-eluted from the first column are further separated in the second column and are directed to a time-of-flight mass spectrometer for detection. Consequently, the GCGC-TOF MS system brings more accurate and rich information about compound retention times and mass spectrum than a 1D GC-MS system, representing a powerful technique for analysis of metabolites in complex biological systems. The GCGC-TOF MS system generates a huge amount of high-dimensional data in metabolomics study that require efficient and accurate data analysis algorithms to uncover the biological information. Many data analysis algorithms have been developed to process the GCGC-TOF MS data for peak picking (), chromatogram alignment () and peak list alignment (). Guineu () is the only reported tool that uses the peak lists as its input and performs retention time correction, peak list alignment, normalization and statistical significance tests. A comprehensive review of the developed methods is given by. Compared with liquid chromatography mass spectrometry (LC-MS), the applications of GCGC-TOF MS to metabolomics were not fully explored during the past decade. One significant bottleneck limiting the usage of GCGC-TOF MS in metabolomics is the lack of accurate and comprehensive data analysis tools. We herein report a computational platform for analysis of metabolomics data generated from the GCGC-TOF MS instrument in a form of metabolomics profiling pipeline (MetPP). MetPP uses the peak lists deconvoluted from the instrument data as its input and then renders peak filtering and merging, retention index matching, peak list alignment, normalization, statistical significance tests and pattern recognition. To test its performance, MetPP was used to analyze the GCGC-TOF MS data of 30 metabolite extracts of mouse livers with spiked-in metabolite standards at different concentrations, and two groups of liver metabolite samples from mice fed different diets. MetPP was developed using MATLAB (The Mathworks, Natick, MA, USA), and its source code is available at http://metaopen.sourceforge.net. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONMetPP uses the peak lists generated by peak deconvolution software, such as commercial software ChromaTOF, as its input. It is well known that the ChromaTOF software has some shortcomings, including multiple peak table entries for the same compound, limited accuracy in calculation of peak areas, etc. To minimize these shortcomings of ChromaTOF software, MetPP provides options for users to filter data from the peak lists generated by ChromaTOF using the peak quality information (profile purity, purity, concerns) provided by ChromaTOF. The multiple peak entries of the same compound are recognized based on user defined 2D retention time variation windows. These peak entries are then merged and represented by one representative peak entry. To handle peaks detected in blank sample(s), MetPP has three options for the user to select from: no action, deducting the peak area of blank sample(s) from the biological samples and removing the metabolites. The user can also remove metabolites using a user-provided exclusion list. In this study, the default values for peak quality-based filtering and merging multiple peak entries were used. The analysis of spike-in data demonstrates that the data preprocessing methods implemented in MetPP is able to remove some of the shortcomings of ChromaTOF software without affecting identification and quantification of the spiked-in standards. To reduce the rate of false-positive identification, the current version of MetPP provides an option for users to match the firstdimension retention index of each compound with the database values. A large value of the mean absolute deviation between the database value and experimental retention index of the removed metabolites (308 AE 257 i.u. for the spike-in data, 318 AE 267 i.u. for the biomarker discovery data) and a small value of the corresponding values of the preserved metabolites (28 AE 12 i.u. for the spike-in data, 21 AE 16 i.u. for the biomarker discovery data) demonstrates the mass spectral matching-based metabolite identification can introduced a high rate of false identification, and the retention index filtering methods in MetPP can detect and remove some of these false-identified metabolites. MetPP performs peak list alignment using a mixture score function to simultaneously evaluate the deviation of the 2D retention time and mass spectral similarity. Compared with the progressive retention time map searching method implemented in the distance and spectrum correlation optimization (DISCO) algorithm (), the mixture score approach is able to align chromatographic peaks that may have a large variation in either retention time or mass spectral similarity, as long as the overall quality of two peak are similar. Supplementarydepicts the alignment results of the spike-in experimental data by DISCO and MetPP. All 28 spiked-in metabolites were fully aligned in all 30 samples by MetPP. However, 23 metabolite standards were fully aligned by DISCO, while the rest of the spiked-in metabolites were aligned in a portion of the 30 samples. In terms of metabolite quantification, the data analysis algorithms implemented in MetPP are able to correctly identify and quantify all spiked-in metabolite standards. Analysis of biological samples using MetPP revealed that 15 metabolites have significant abundance changes between two sample groups. The accuracy of clustering samples using all metabolite data in each sample is 0.82, while the clustering accuracy is improved to 0.91 when the abundance of the 15 metabolites in each sample are used for clustering. The improvement in sample clustering accuracy demonstrates that MetPP correctly recognized the metabolites with significant abundance difference between sample groups LFD and HFD. The abundance changes of the free fatty acids agree with the literature results of hepatic lipid level test, a different analytical method. These analysis results further demonstrate that the MetPP software can be used to recognize the metabolites with significant abundance changes between sample groups. The performance of MetPP in analysis the spike-in data was also compared with the existing Guineu software () in terms of accuracy of alignment and relative quantification. Supplementaryshows that only 9 of the 28 spiked-in metabolites were fully aligned by Guineu, while all the 28 spiked-in metabolites were fully aligned by MetPP. For relative quantification, MetPP also significantly outperforms Guineu in all three statistical measures of TPR, PPV and their harmonic mean F1 for analysis of all pairwise comparison between the five sample groups (Supplementary). Analysis of both the spike-in data and biomarker discovery data demonstrates that the methods implemented in MetPP for peak filtering and merging are effective in minimizing the shortcomings of ChromaTOF. However, compound 24 (nonanoic acid) instill has a large variation in peak area after the peak filtering and merging. For the future development, accurate peak deconvolution algorithms are needed to improve the quality of peak lists. A large variation in peak area introduced during peak deconvolution can significantly affect the downstream statistical analysis. It is also important to develop algorithms for analysis of time course data and construction of metabolite correlation networks.