MetPA (Metabolomics Pathway Analysis) is a user-friendly, web-based tool dedicated to the analysis and visualization of metabolomic data within the biological context of metabolic pathways. MetPA combines several advanced pathway enrichment analysis procedures along with the analysis of pathway topological characteristics to help identify the most relevant metabolic pathways involved in a given metabolomic study. The results are presented in a Google-map style network visualization system that supports intuitive and interactive data exploration through point-and-click, dragging and lossless zooming. Additional features include a comprehensive compound library for metabolite name conversion, automatic generation of analysis report, as well as the implementation of various univariate statistical procedures that can be accessed when users click on any metabolite node on a pathway map. MetPA currently enables analysis and visualization of 874 metabolic pathways, covering 11 common model organisms. Availability: Freely available at http://
INTRODUCTIONOver the past decade, pathway analysis has emerged as an invaluable aid to understanding the data generated from various 'omics' technologies. As a result, a number of robust software tools have been developed to support pathway analysis for genomics and proteomics studies. These tools combine powerful statistical analysis with visualization capacities to help researchers identify significant pathways involved in the conditions under study. The first pathway analysis tools were typically designed to take a list of differentially expressed genes (or gene products) and compare the number of differentially expressed genes detected in each pathway of interest with the number of genes expected to be found in the given pathway just by chancea procedure known as over representation analysis (). Second-generation pathway analysis tools typically use normalized gene expression data to calculate the expression of biological pathways in association with phenotypesa procedure generally known as gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) (). More recent tools consider both the significance of gene expression changes * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and their topological characteristics in order to better evaluate their impact on the pathways of interest (). To date, essentially all pathway analysis tools have been designed and developed for the analysis of genomic or proteomic data, but not metabolomic data. Here, we wish to introduce MetPA (Metabolomics Pathway Analysis), a dedicated pathway analysis and visualization tool to facilitate the use of these relatively new and powerful methods in metabolomic studies.