MGEScan-long terminal repeat (LTR) and MGEScan-non-LTR are successfully used programs for identifying LTRs and non-LTR retrotransposons in eukaryotic genome sequences. However, these programs are not supported by easy-to-use interfaces nor well suited for data visu-alization in general data formats. Here, we present MGEScan, a user-friendly system that combines these two programs with a Galaxy workflow system accelerated with MPI and Python threading on compute clusters. MGEScan and Galaxy empower researchers to identify transposable elements in a graphical user interface with ready-to-use workflows. MGEScan also visualizes the custom annotation tracks for mobile genetic elements in public genome browsers. A maximum speed-up of 3.26Â is attained for execution time using concurrent processing and MPI on four virtual cores. MGEScan provides four operational modes: as a command line tool, as a Galaxy Toolshed, on a Galaxy-based web server, and on a virtual cluster on the Amazon cloud. Availability and implementation: MGEScan tutorials and source code are available at
IntroductionTransposable elements (TEs) move within or between most eukaryotic genomes and constitute a significant portion of these genomes. It is known that nearly half of the human genome is derived from TEs (). The transposition of TEs generates new mutations that can have different effect, ranging from changes in genes expression to genomic instabilities. Therefore, the identification and analysis of TEs is important for understanding genome evolution. TEs can be classified into retrotransposons and DNA transposons according to their mechanism of transposition (). Whereas DNA transposons cut and insert themselves into new genomic sites, retrotransposons are copied and inserted at new genomic locations using RNA intermediates. Retrotransposons can be classified into two subgroups according to the existence of long terminal repeats (LTRs) at their 5 0 and 3 0 ends. In addition, both LTR retrotransposons and non-LTR retrotransposons can be further classified into various orders, super-families, and families based on their structure, encoded genes, and phylogeny (). We previously developed two separate computational methods for the genome-wide identification of LTR and non-LTR retrotransposons, called MGEScan-LTR and MGEScan-non-LTR, respectively. MGEScan-LTR identifies all types of LTR retrotransposons, i.e. young intact, old intact and solo LTR retrotransposons, using approximate string matching, protein domain analysis, and profile Hidden Markov Models (). MGEScannonLTR identifies non-LTR retrotransposons based on Gaussian Bayes classifiers and generalized hidden Markov models consisting of 12 super states that correspond to different clades or closely related clades (). MGEScan-LTR and MGEScan-non-LTR have been successfully used for identifying retrotransposons (). However, these programs were not designed to support either a web graphical user interface or parallel execution on clusters. Their computational time for eukaryotic genome analysis ranges from a few hours to several days. In addition, because they were developed as commandline tools that produce output files regardless of post-processing, it is not easy to visualize the results or perform further analysis. In this article, we introduce MGEScan, a Galaxy-based system for identifying retrotransposons in genomes. MGEScan provides an integrated interface to run both computational LTR and non-LTR retrotransposon identification programs using the Galaxy workflow. This design facilitates input data preparation and the further analysis of results. Execution time for retrotransposon identification in genomes is reduced by 68% when MGEScan runs with concurrent and MPI executions. Moreover, because we provide MGEScan in various forms, users can use MGEScan in their preferred way.