Motivation: Specific information on newly discovered proteins is often difficult to find in literature. Particularly if only sequences and no common names of proteins or genes are available, preceding sequence similarity searches can be crucial for the process of information collection. In drug research, it is important to know whether a small molecule targets only one specific protein or whether similar or homologous proteins are also influenced that may account for possible side effects. Results: prolific (protein-literature investigation for interacting compounds) provides a one-step solution to investigate available information on given protein names, sequences, similar proteins or sequences on the gene level. Co-occurrences of UniProtKB/Swiss-Prot proteins and PubChem compounds in all PubMed abstracts are retrievable. Concise heat-maps and tables display frequencies of co-occurrences. They provide links to processed literature with highlighted found protein and compound synonyms. Evaluation with manually curated drug–protein relationships showed that up to 69% could be discovered by automatic text-processing. Examples are presented to demonstrate the capabilities of prolific. Availability: The web-application is available at http://prolific .pharmaceutical-bioinformatics.de and a web service at http://www .pharmaceutical-bioinformatics.de/prolific/soap/
INTRODUCTIONCollecting information on proteins in the large and fast growing body of available biomedical information can be an elaborate task, particularly if proteins are only rarely investigated, newly predicted or sequenced, or if no common names are available for proteins and genes. Researchers may want to search for potential lead structures for given targets, determine the function of the protein, or analyse side effects of drugs with regard to protein similarity. To gather needed information for proteins as possible targets for chemical compounds, there are a variety of databases available providing manually curated information (). However, a need for information beyond the scope of the existing databases often requires researchers to find information in biomedical texts by searching PubMed (http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed) with MeSH terms. Although the texts are rather unstructured, PubMed is widely accepted as the most comprehensive and up-to-date source for biomedical information (). While subsequent analysis of information found in texts seems inevitable, text-or datamining tools greatly enhance the process of information collection (). A variety of tools can be found via the Critical Assessment of Information Extraction systems in Biology initiative (). Several tools focus on the recognition of proteins and genes in texts () or extraction of information of relationships between biological entities (). Others focus on a convenient provision of mined data of several types like proteins, drugs and diseases via web service () or the co-occurrence of biological entities like EXCERPT (), CoPub () and CIL (). Finding co-occurences of biological entities is a well-accepted method for finding associations of any type that may be hidden in context or implicit () and supports on-going research in Natural Language Processing. CIL was recently published, enabling users to search for compound structures, similar structures and names in all PubMed abstracts. Proteins referred to in those texts are related to the compounds. The relationships and their frequency are displayed as results. prolific (protein-literature investigation for interacting compounds) closes the gap between protein information in literature and sequence information on proteins with a one-step solution. Thus, it complements CIL. It enables researchers to collect a variety of information on proteins without identifiers or synonyms. Similar sequences are searched and all compounds mentioned in the same context are identified. It provides all information including abstracts with highlighted found entities in a pre-calculated, swiftly accessible database visualizing data in a 'heat-map' with colours representing displayed values. Thus, prolific has a protein-centric point of view, in contrast to CIL with its compound-centric view, allowing to obtain new information on proteins, compounds and their relationships. However, this requires specialized data structures allowing for high speed data retrieval for the large amount of data. The interconnection of both applications results in an additional benefit, enabling users to switch between protein and compound literature research using result compoundsPage: 710 709714