Current challenges in microRNA (miRNA) research are to improve the identification of in vivo mRNA targets and clarify the complex interplay existing between a specific miRNA and multiple biological networks. MiRonTop is an online java web tool that integrates DNA microarrays or high-throughput sequencing data to identify the potential implication of miRNAs on a specific biological system. It allows a rapid characterization of the most pertinent mRNA targets according to several existing miRNA target prediction approaches. It also provides useful representations of the enrichment scores according to the position of the target site along the 3-UTR, where the contribution of the sites located in the vicinity of the stop codon and of the polyA tail can be clearly highlighted. It provides different graphs of miRNA enrichment associated with up-or down-regulated transcripts and different summary tables about selections of mRNA targets and their functional annotations by Gene Ontology.
INTRODUCTIONMiRNAs appear capable to block translation and also stimulate mRNA degradation, with translational repression often preceding mRNA degradation. Several mechanisms of miRNA action, including block of cap binding or elongation, increased ribosome drop-off rate or increased de-adenylation, have already been proposed (). It remains, however, that target recognition follows a complex set of rules dominated by the existence of a perfect match between 6 and 8 nt located in the 5 region of the miRNA (called the 'seed') and the target mRNA (). The ability of miRNAs to interact with many targets and the possibility for some of them to share a same target increase tremendously the complexity of many biological networks. In that context, an experimental validation of in silico predictions appears quite necessary. Many available target prediction softwares combine a search for a perfect seed match between miRNA and 3-untranslated region (3-UTR) and a conservation of the interaction across species. In fact, comparison of results * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. obtained with several of these computational tools show significant divergences. MiRonTop aims at detecting influence of miRNAs on gene expression profiles by analyzing potential overrepresentation of specific miRNAs targets across an experimental gene set. Other tools have been recently described to explore miRNA influence on datasets (). MiRonTop provides several novel and complementary information including (i) the possibility to screen and compare miRNA signatures using different target prediction tools; (ii) options to calculate enrichment scores according to the spatial distribution of predicted targets sites along the transcript, since true sites may be preferentially located in close vicinity of stop codons and polyadenylation sites (); and (iii) access to Gene Ontology functional annotations of the different gene lists. Overall, these different modes of representation increase the sensitivity of the research in order to define a set of either mRNA or miRNAs associated with the selected experiment.
CONCLUSIONMiRonTop is an online application allowing the detection of miRNAs that significantly affect gene expression at a large scale. The flexibility of the interface allows a fine-tuning of the 'Down' and 'Up' gene sets according to three parameters that correspond to the level of expression, the extent of differential expression and a significance index. Such a selection allows experimenters to easily explore a large-scale experiment and get a summary report of the different predictions made by several miRNA target identification softwares. Recent investigations on other datasets have indicated that miRonTop is not only useful in experiments of miRNA overexpression/knock-down but can also detect more subtle miRNA activities in a physiological context. In the future, MiRonTop will be easily updated in order to integrate any additional predictions made publicly available, such as experimentally validated pairs of miRNA and mRNA that could now be provided by recent experimental approaches ().