Identifying, amongst millions of publications available in MEDLINE, those that are relevant to specific microRNAs (miRNAs) of interest based on keyword search faces major obstacles. References to miRNA names in the literature often deviate from standard nomenclature for various reasons, since even the official nomenclature evolves. For instance, a single miRNA name may identify two completely different molecules or two different names may refer to the same molecule. mirPub is a database with a powerful and intuitive interface, which facilitates searching for miRNA literature, addressing the aforementioned issues. To provide effective search services, mirPub applies text mining techniques on MEDLINE, integrates data from several curated databases and exploits data from its user community following a crowdsourcing approach. Other key features include an interactive visualization service that illustrates intuitively the evolution of miRNA data, tag clouds summarizing the relevance of publications to particular diseases, cell types or tissues and access to TarBase 6.0 data to oversee genes related to miRNA publications. Availability and Implementation: mirPub is freely available at
IntroductionMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are small, single-stranded endogenous RNAs, which suppress the expression of protein coding genes. They are important regulators of many crucial cellular processes and they are implicated in a multitude of diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, multiple sclerosis, Alzheimer, cancer, etc. (). The number of miRNA-related publications is growing constantly every year, reaching more than 12,700 papers until 2013. Keyword search to retrieve publications relevant to particular miRNAs faces three obstacles: (i) publications may refer to the same miRNA using different names, (ii) publications may refer to miRNAs with old, obsolete names and (iii) results retrieved as relevant should be carefully examined, since, e.g. sequence changes might have happened in referenced miRNAs, after the publication date. mirPub is a database with a powerful and intuitive interface that addresses the aforementioned issues. During miRNA literature search, mirPub takes into account both inconsistencies in naming miRNAs and the history of miRNA data as being recorded in all available miRBase (