Motivation: Identification of microRNA regulatory modules (MiRMs) will aid deciphering aberrant transcriptional regulatory network in cancer but is computationally challenging. Existing methods are sto-chastic or require a fixed number of regulatory modules. Results: We propose Mirsynergy, an efficient deterministic overlapping clustering algorithm adapted from a recently developed framework. Mirsynergy operates in two stages: it first forms MiRMs based on co-occurring microRNA (miRNA) targets and then expands each MiRM by greedily including (excluding) mRNAs into (from) the MiRM to maximize the synergy score, which is a function of miRNA–mRNA and gene–gene interactions. Using expression data for ovarian, breast and thyroid cancer from The Cancer Genome Atlas, we compared Mirsynergy with internal controls and existing methods. Mirsynergy-MiRMs exhibit significantly higher functional enrichment and more coherent miRNA–mRNA expression anti-correlation. Based on Kaplan–Meier survival analysis, we proposed several prognostically promising MiRMs and envisioned their utility in cancer research. Availability and implementation: Mirsynergy is implemented/ available as an R/Bioconductor package at www.cs.utoronto.ca/ $yueli/Mirsynergy.html Contact:
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are $22 nt small non-coding RNA that base pair with mRNAs primarily at the 3 0 untranslated region (UTR) to cause mRNA degradation or translational repression (). Aberrant miRNA expression is implicated in tumourigenesis (). Based on miRBase (release 20) (), the human genome encodes 1872 (2578) precursor (mature) miRNAs, which potentially target majority of the human genes (). Although targets of individual miRNAs are significantly enriched for certain biological processes (), it is also likely that multiple miRNAs are coordinated together to synergistically regulate one or more pathways (). Despite their limited number, miRNAs may be in charge of more evolutionarily robust and potent regulatory effects through coordinated collective actions. The hypothesis of miRNA synergism is also parsimonious or biologically plausible because the number of possible combinations of the 2578 human miRNAs is extremely large to potentially react to virtually countless environmental changes. Intuitively, if a group of (miRNA) workers perform similar tasks together, then removing a single worker will not be as detrimental as assigning each worker a unique task (). Several related methods have been developed to study miRNA synergism. Some early methods were based on pairwise overlaps () or score-specific correlation () between predicted target sites of any given two (co-expressed) miRNAs. For instance,devised an overlapping scoring scheme to account for differential 3 0 UTR lengths of the miRNA targets, which may otherwise bias the results if standard hypergeometric test was used. Methods beyond pairwise overlaps have also been described. These methods consider not only the sequence-based miRNA-target site information but also the respective miRNAmRNA expression correlation (MiMEC) across various conditions to detect miRNA regulatory modules (MiRMs). Briefly,developed a probabilistic search procedure to separately sample from the mRNA and miRNA pools candidate module members with probabilities proportional to their overall frequency of being chosen as the 'fittest', which is determined by their target sites and MiMEC relative to the counterparts. The algorithm finds only a single best MiRM, which varies depending on the initial mRNA and miRNA set.used a maximal bi-clique enumeration (MBE) technique to discover complete bipartite subgraphs, where every miRNA is connected with every mRNA. The approach operates on unweighted edges only, which requires discretizing MiMEC. Moreover, maximal bi-clique does not necessarily imply functional MiRMs and vice versa. Le anddeveloped GroupMiR to form MiRMs by assigning each miRNA or mRNA (m/miRNA) one or more memberships *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONRecent works on miRNA dysregulation prove useful in cancer research (). To identify condition-specific networks, however, most existing methods exploited only the curated pathways or GO terms. Methods for de novo network reconstruction in some recent literatures operate only on interactions involving differentially expressed genes (DEG) or differentially expressed miRNA () because the corresponding solutions quickly become intractable with increasing number of m/miRNAs. However, the DEG/M-driven approaches cannot capture subnetworks with accumulative changes of m/miRNA that have been filtered out either by individual hypothesis testings or by multiple testing corrections. In this article, we introduce Mirsynergy as a reasonable alternative approach. Notably, standard clustering methods such as k-means or hierarchical clustering are not suitable for constructing MiRMs, as these methods assign each data point to a unique B Awere plotted as a CDF for internal nodes/Mirsynergy (solid) and boundary nodes/SNMNMF outputs (dash). We observe a significantly more negative MiMEC distribution for the internal nodes or Mirsynergy-MiRMs, as their curves are clearly located on the left of the curves from the counterparts. P-values were computed by one-sided KS test cluster. A recently developed greedy-based clustering method ClusterONE is more realistic because it allows overlap between clusters (). However, ClusterONE was developed with physical PPI in mind. Mirsynergy extends from ClusterONE to detecting MiRMs. The novelty of our approach resides in a two-stage clustering strategy with each stage maximizing a synergy score as a function of either the miRNAmiRNA synergistic co-regulation or miRNAmRNA/gene gene interactions. Several methods have incorporated GGI as PPI/TFBS in predicting MiRMs (), which proved to be a more accurate approach than using miRNA-mRNA alone. Comparing with recent methods such as SNMNMF () and PIMiM (Le and), however, an advantage of our deterministic formalism is the automatic determination of module number (given the predefined thresholds to merge and filter low quality clusters) and efficient computation with theoretical bound reduced from O(K(T + N + M) 2 ) per iteration to only O(M(N + M)) for N (M) mRNAs (miRNAs) across T samples. Because N is usually much larger than M and T, our algorithm runs orders of faster. Based on our tests on a linux server, Mirsynergy took about 2 h including the run time for LASSO to compute OV (N = 12 456; M = 559; T = 385), BRCA or THCA (N = 13 306; M = 710; T = 331 or 543, respectively), whereas SNMNMF took more than a day for each dataset. More importantly, Mirsynergy-MiRMs are significantly more functionally enriched, coherently expressed and thus more likely to be biologically functional. The success of our model is likely attributable to its ability to explicitly leverage two types of information at each clustering stage: (i) the miRNAmiRNA synergism based on the correlation of the inferred miRNA target score profiles from MMIW matrix; (ii) the combinatorial miRNA regulatory effects on existing genetic network, implicated in the combined MMIW and GGIW matrices. We also explored other model formulations such as clustering m/miRNAs in a single clustering stage or using different MMIW matrices other than the one produced from LASSO, which tends to produce MiRMs each containing only one or a few miRNAs or several large low-quality MiRMs, which were then filtered out by the density threshold in either clustering stage. Notably, an MiRM containing only a single miRNA can be directly derived from the MMIW without any clustering approach. Moreover, Mirsynergy considers only neighbour nodes with non-zero edges. Thus, our model works the best on a sparse MMIW matrix such as the outputs from LASSO, which is the best performing expression-based methods based on our comparison with other alternatives. Nonetheless, the performance of Mirsynergy is sensitive to the quality of MMIW and GGIW. In this regard, other MMIW or GGIW matrices (generated from improved methods) can be easily incorporated into Mirsynergy as the function parameters by the users of the Bioconductor package (please refer to the package vignette for more details). In conclusion, with large amount of m/miRNA expression data becoming available, we believe that Mirsynergy will serve as a powerful tool for analysing condition-specific miRNA regulatory networks.