Deep sequencing of small RNAs has become a routine process in recent years, but no dedicated viewer is as yet available to explore the sequence features simultaneously along with secondary structure and gene expression of microRNA (miRNA). We present a highly interactive application that visualizes the sequence alignment, secondary structure and normalized read counts in synchronous multi-panel windows. This helps users to easily examine the relationships between the structure of precursor and the sequences and abundance of final products and thereby will facilitate the studies on miRNA bio-genesis and regulation. The project manager handles multiple samples of multiple groups. The read alignment is imported in BAM file format.
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNA sequencing (miR-seq) is a powerful method to study virtually all aspects of miRNA biology, including biogenesis, molecular function and expression of miRNAs. With the advances in deep sequencing technologies, more laboratories are adopting miRNA sequencing instead of microarrays or quantitative PCR for such analyses (). Typical procedure of analyzing miR-seq data consists of preprocessing, mapping, quantification and identification of novel and/or differentially expressed miRNAs, as implemented in recent integrative platforms of MAGI () and CAP-miRSeq (). Even though the sequence variations such as uridylation, iso-miRs and RNA editing are known to be important in biogenesis and function of miRNAs (), we still lack a dedicated alignment viewer to examine the details of sequence features interactively and simultaneously with other features such as secondary structure and read abundance. To our knowledge, miRspring () is the only software to support analysis of sequence variations, but its visualization lacks interactive features. Here, we present miRseqViewer, a Java-based standalone platform for visualizing miR-seq data. The read alignment is concurrently displayed with the secondary structure as well as the read count table that indicates miRNA expression in multiple samples of multiple groups. Diverse features are implemented to enhance user convenience. the analysis. In addition, it is important to use the identical reference genome for read alignment and for visualization. We recommend using the genome assemblies as specified in the miRBase in the alignment process. For novel miRNAs not included in the miRBase database, users should identify novel miRNAs in advance by running a program such as miRDeep2 (), and prepare a BED file containing the genomic information on miRNAs of interest.