Motivation: Exome capture kits have capture efficiencies that range from 40 to 60%. A significant amount of off-target reads are from the mitochondrial genome. These unintentionally sequenced mitochon-drial reads provide unique opportunities to study the mitochondria genome. Results: MitoSeek is an open-source software tool that can reliably and easily extract mitochondrial genome information from exome and whole genome sequencing data. MitoSeek evaluates mitochondrial genome alignment quality, estimates relative mitochondrial copy numbers and detects heteroplasmy, somatic mutation and structural variants of the mitochondrial genome. MitoSeek can be set up to run in parallel or serial on large exome sequencing datasets.
INTRODUCTIONNext-generation sequencing (NGS) has enabled high-throughput production of sequencing data at a low cost. Projects such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) and the 1000 Genomes Project have generated huge amounts of sequencing data. NGS data are rich and informative and contain many off-target reads that are often ignored but which may be biologically relevant. Sequencing data outside capture regions can produce reliable variation data (). Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) sequences are recoverable in exome sequencing data (), even when the mtDNA is not included in the target region. Picardi and Pesole (2012) also provided scripts for assembling mitochondrial genome exome sequencing data. Based on those findings, we designed and implemented a tool, MitoSeek, for high-throughput secondary mitochondrial data mining from exome sequencing data or whole genome sequencing data. MitoSeek extracts mitochondrial information from exome sequencing data and performs analyses on four major mitochondrial factors: heteroplasmy, somatic mutations, relative copy number variation and large structural changes.
DISCUSSIONOwing to the limitation of exome sequencing data, MitoSeek is not capable of calculating absolute copy number of mtDNA, only relative mtDNA copy number. Also, owing to noise in the sequencing data, MitoSeek is more suited to detecting large copy number variation rather than small copy number variation. MitoSeek is designed to work with paired-end sequencing data rather than single-end sequencing data given the large abundance of paired-end sequencing data. MitoSeek is designed with accessibility in mind. It considers many unique parameters that have not been implemented by other genome analysis tools. It is the only sequencing analysis tool that reports allele counts separately by forward and reverse strands, critical information for assessing strand bias (). MitoSeek creates opportunities for high-throughput mitochondrial sequencing data mining from existing large exome sequencing databases.