MATLAB is popular in biological research for creating and simulating models that use ordinary differential equations (ODEs). However, sharing or using these models outside of MATLAB is often problematic. A community standard such as Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) can serve as a neutral exchange format, but translating models from MATLAB to SBML can be challenging— especially for legacy models not written with translation in mind. We developed MOCCASIN (Model ODE Converter for Creating Automated SBML INteroperability) to help. MOCCASIN can convert ODE-based MATLAB models of biochemical reaction networks into the SBML format. Availability and implementation: MOCCASIN is available under the terms of the LGPL 2.1 license
IntroductionMATLAB is a general-purpose numerical computing environment whose powerful features have attracted many researchers. It has been the substrate for countless models as well as software tools written in its object-oriented programming language. Despite its popularity, there are reasons why MATLAB programs are not themselves a desirable format for exchanging, publishing or archiving computational models in biology. These include the lack of biological semantics in MATLAB programs, which makes clear interpretation of programs as models of biological processes more difficult; the fact that MATLAB is proprietary and expensive, which makes it unsuitable as a universal format for open scientific exchange; and the fact that model details are often intertwined with program implementation details, which makes it difficult to determine which parts constitute the essence of a model. Systems Biology Markup Language (SBML) is an open format for representing models in systems biology (). Designed to resolve incompatibilities between systems that use different formats to describe models, SBML is neutral with respect to modeling framework and computational platform. This helps make models portable across tools, and ensures that models as research products can persist regardless of changes to any particular software tool or operating system. Unfortunately, translating models from MATLAB to SBML is not straightforward. Some MATLAB toolboxes () offer SBML capabilities; however, they have limited utility for translating legacy models, lack support for the latest SBML releases, and must be used from the start of a modeling project to have an effect.