RNA loop regions are essential structural elements of RNA molecules influencing both their structural and functional properties. We developed RLooM, a web application for homology-based modeling of RNA loops utilizing template structures extracted from the PDB. RLooM allows the insertion and replacement of loop structures of a desired sequence into an existing RNA structure. Furthermore, a comprehensive database of loops in RNA structures can be accessed through the web interface. Availability and Implementation: The application was implemented in Python, MySQL and Apache. A web interface to the database and loop modeling application is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONLoop structures (i.e. regions without secondary structure) are not only essential structural elements accounting for the flexibility and structural diversity of RNA molecules. They are also important functional elements. For example, they frequently represent the site at which ligands are bound to the RNA molecule. The lack of canonical base pair formation in these regions makes them accessible for intra-(e.g. tertiary structure contact formation) and intermolecular contacts (e.g. binding of small molecules or other biomolecules). The disparity between the number of available RNA sequences on the one side and experimentally verified 3D structures on the other calls for an application of computational structure modeling to bridge this gap. Recently, we reported results from a comprehensive survey of RNA loop structures and established the basis for the application of homology modeling to RNA loops(). Sequence-similar loops were found to fold into very similar structures. As a critical sequence identity threshold beyond which this relationship no longer holds, 25% sequence identity was determined. Here, we present a web-based application for RNA loop structure modeling utilizing available structures extracted from the Protein Data Bank (PDB;). In contrast to the existing RNA 3D structure modeling applications [MC-Sym/MC-Fold (), NAST/C2S () and FARNA (Das * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and)] and RNA 3D structure databases [RNAjunction (), FRABASE () and SCOR (, our approach is specifically tailored to the application to RNA loop structures.
CONCLUSIONWe reported RLooM, a structure modeling web server for RNA loop modeling based on sequence homology and geometric constraints dictated by the site of insertion via anchor nucleotides. The server uses loop templates extracted from experimentally verified structures in the PDB. A performed benchmark () showed that homology modeling approach as implemented in RLooM yielded more accurate structural predictions than an ab initio-based modeling server [the iFoldRNA webserver (for target sequences with available sequencesimilar template structures. For nine selected examples covering various loop sizes and types, our homology-based approach yielded significantly better results as judged by RMSD than obtained by using iFoldRNA [cf.Supplementary]. Evidently, for target loop sequences with no suitable structural example in the database, no prediction can be made. However, with the structural database steadily growing, this modeling gap is expected to shrink substantially over the coming years. RLooM was designed to harness the wealth of structural information already available for applications in RNA modeling. RLooM is expected to find many applications in RNA engineering and design.