A model class of finite mixtures of linear additive models is presented. The component-specific parameters in the regression models are estimated using regularized likelihood methods. The advantages of the regularization are that (i) the pre-specified maximum degrees of freedom for the splines is less crucial than for unregularized estimation and that (ii) for each component individually a suitable degree of freedom is selected in an automatic way. The performance is evaluated in a simulation study with artificial data as well as on a yeast cell cycle dataset of gene expression levels over time. Availability: The latest release version of the R package flexmix is available from CRAN (http://cran.r-project.org/).
INTRODUCTIONTime-course microarray experiments make it possible to look at the gene expression of thousands of genes at several time points simultaneously. Clustering of gene expression patterns is, in general, used to identify common temporal or spatial expression patterns. Cluster results contribute to the regulatory network of gene expression, i.e. suggest functional pathways and interaction between genes. In the literature, numerous methods for clustering time-course gene expression data have been proposed. Besides traditional methods like hierarchical clustering or the classical k-means algorithm, modelbased clustering is frequently used. Model-based clustering has the advantage to provide a framework to determine the number of clusters and the role of each variable in the clustering process (e.g.). Suitable models for time-course gene expression data need to be able to (i) distinguish between groups with different expression patterns and to (ii) determine smooth curves for the development over time. Finite mixtures of regression models, e.g. of linear models (LMs) or of linear mixed models, with splines as covariates were proposed for this purpose (). The use of splines to determine the covariate matrices has the advantage that the functional relationship * To whom correspondence should be addressed. between the dependent and independent variables does not need to be specified a priori and arbitrary smooth functions can be fit. The disadvantage is that the flexibility of the covariate space needs to be fixed before model estimation, i.e. needs to be assumed to be known. If the covariate space is determined in a data-driven way, different mixture models where the flexibility of the spline functions is varied need to be compared using model selection techniques. Even when imposing the restriction that the same degree of flexibility applies to all components, a considerable number of different models needs to be estimated and compared. Whilediscuss model selection with respect to the number of components and recommend the Bayesian information criterion (BIC) for this purpose, they do not address the issue of selecting appropriate degrees of freedom for the splines. In their applications, only models with an a priori fixed number of degrees of freedom are fitted and compared. Linear additive models (LAMs) model the dependent variable as a sum of smooth functions of the covariates (). These smooth functions can either be nonparametric local smoothers or also spline functions. In the case of spline functions, in general, penalized regression splines are used and the degree of flexibility for the smooth functions is determined by choosing an appropriate smoothing parameter. The smoothing parameter can either be selected using generalized cross-validation (GCV) or (restricted) maximum likelihood [(RE)ML] (). In the latter case, the smoothing parameter is determined using the maximal marginal (restricted) likelihood integrated over the penalized coefficients, which after re-parameterization are assumed to follow a normal distribution with mean zero and variance indirectly proportional to the smoothing parameter. LAMs with regularized estimation therefore allow to estimate the degree of flexibility in a data-driven way. This ensures that a suitable and parsimonious model is selected. The exact maximum flexibility (i.e. the degrees of freedom of the splines) allowed is less important and the different models arising from changing this hyperparameter can be compared on a coarser grid reducing the number of models evaluated in the model selection step. In Section 2, the model is specified and methods for estimation and inference in a ML framework are discussed. Section 3 evaluates the performance of the mixtures of LAMs with regularized estimation using artificial data, which resembles time-course gene expression patterns. The number of noise genes as well as the variation within components are varied to assess the influence of these data characteristics on the performance. An application to the yeast cellPage: 223 222228