Intrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) play central roles in many biological processes. Consequently, an accurate description of the disordered state is an important step towards a comprehensive understanding of a number of important biological functions. In this work we describe a new web server, Mollack, for the automated construction of unfolded ensembles that uses both experimental and molecular simulation data to construct models for the unfolded state. An important aspect of the method is that it calculates a quantitative estimate of the uncertainty in the constructed ensemble, thereby providing an objective measure of the quality of the final model. Overall, Mollack facilitates structure-function studies of disordered proteins. Availability and Implementation: http://cmstultz
IntroductionIntrinsically disordered proteins (IDPs) constitute a class of biopolymers that sample a diverse set of conformations during their biological lifetime. Constructing a structural model for an IDP requires that one specify a representative set of structures that capture, at a low resolution, the dominant thermally accessible states of the protein. IDP Ensemble construction, albeit challenging, is an essential step towards a comprehensive understanding of the function of these biopolymers (). When experimental data on the IDP of interest are available, the ensemble construction problem can be posed as a straightforward optimization problem; i.e. building an ensemble is equivalent to generating a set of structures that yield calculated ensemble averages that agree with experiment. Indeed, a number of ensemble construction algorithms have been developed that use this guiding principle to optimize the choice of structures (), and an online database exists for cataloging and storing these data (). Despite these advances it is important to recognize that the ensemble construction problem itself is inherently degenerate because the number of degrees of freedom in the protein is generally much larger than the number of experimental constraints (). A consequence of this is that there may be several different ensembles that have calculated ensemble averages that agree with experiment. Therefore agreement with experiment is insufficient by itself to ensure that the resulting ensemble is correct. In a previous work, we described an ensemble construction algorithm, based on a Bayesian formalism, that generates an ensemblethat agrees with a pre-specified set of experimental data (). A key aspect of the method is that it also calculates an 'uncertainty parameter', 0 r 1, which quantifies the uncertainty in the underlying ensemble. When r  0, it is likely that the model is correct, and when r  1 one has little certainty that the constructed ensemble is correct. Nevertheless, when r 6  0 one can generate confidence intervals for ensemble average quantities that provide a rigorous framework for hypothesis testing. Mollack is an online implementation of this Bayesian formalism for constructing ensembles for IDPs.