Motivation: Post-translational modifications (PTMs) are important steps in the maturation of proteins. Several models exist to predict specific PTMs, from manually detected patterns to machine learning methods. On one hand, the manual detection of patterns does not provide the most efficient classifiers and requires an important work-load, and on the other hand, models built by machine learning methods are hard to interpret and do not increase biological knowledge. Therefore, we developed a novel method based on patterns discovery and decision trees to predict PTMs. The proposed algorithm builds a decision tree, by coupling the C4.5 algorithm with genetic algorithms, producing high-performance white box classifiers. Our method was tested on the initiator methionine cleavage (IMC) and N-terminal acetylation (N-Ac), two of the most common PTMs. Results: The resulting classifiers perform well when compared with existing models. On a set of eukaryotic proteins, they display a cross-validated Matthews correlation coefficient of 0.83 (IMC) and 0.65 (N-Ac). When used to predict potential substrates of N-terminal acetyltransferaseB and N-terminal acetyltransferaseC, our classifiers display better performance than the state of the art. Moreover, we present an analysis of the model predicting IMC for Homo sapiens proteins and demonstrate that we are able to extract experimentally known facts without prior knowledge. Those results validate the fact that our method produces white box models. Availability and implementation: Predictors for IMC and N-Ac and all datasets are freely available at
INTRODUCTIONPost-translational modifications (PTMs) are modifications occurring during protein maturation or biosynthesis. These modifications can consist of attachments of functional groups (e.g. methylation), changes of the chemical nature (e.g. deamidation), cleavage of one or more residues (e.g. initiator methionine cleavage) or structural changes (e.g. disulfide bonds). The PTMs broaden the diversity of functional groups of the 20 standard amino acids, thus producing diverse forms of proteins that cannot be derived only from its genes (). Because the mature form of a protein cannot be inferred only by genes, the knowledge of a protein's PTMs helps to understand the roles, the possible interactions or the activity of a protein. Numerous predictors for PTMs have been developed, based on different machine learning models. For example, artificial neural networks have been widely used to predict various PTMs, like phosphorylation (), N-terminal myristoylation () and C-mannosylation (). More recently, Random Forest method has been succesfully used to predict PTM sites, for ubiquitination (),-carboxylation () and glycosylation sites (). Although some of these predictors provide good prediction capabilities for the problem they tackle, they often are black boxes. Their mathematical complexity makes them hard to interpret in terms of biological meaning (). Unfortunately, this restricts the application of these models for biological problems, which, in our opinion, require a model providing explanations for the prediction. The purpose of this article is to introduce a new method to automatically build a PTM predictor, using only the information contained in the proteins primary structure and which can be interpreted by biologists. We focused on two PTMs: first the N-terminal acetylation (N-Ac), a PTM involving the transfer of an acetyl group to the N-terminal residue-amino group. It is one of the most common covalent irreversible modifications and occurs in $50% of yeast proteins and $80% of human proteins (). In eukaryotes, N-Ac is catalyzed by N-terminal acetyltransferases (Nats) (). Six Nats have been identified (NatANatF), each acetylating specific N-terminal substrates (). Because N-Ac can occur on proteins having their initiator methionine cleaved or not (), it is also required to know if the initiator methionine cleavage (IMC) occurs to produce an accurate predictor for N-Ac. Hence, the second PTM studied is the IMC, which is catalyzed by methionine aminopeptidases (MetAPs;). As pointed by, it is unlikely to discover a unique pattern describing the requirement of all enzymes because there is no biological sense to build an acetylation predictor based on an 'average' motif, as no enzyme recognizes this 'average' motif. Our main idea is to combine several discriminant motifs optimized with genetic algorithms (GA). These motifs are combined using a binary decision tree (DT). Our choice is mainly motivated by the need for white box models, that is, to say classifiers that are interpretable by biologists to help identifying the required biological features. The method described in this article is tested by evaluating its capacity to predict the IMC and the N-Ac of eukaryotic proteins. The choice of predicting those PTMs has been made because several methods to predict N-Ac have been published, which allow us to test the efficiency of our method by comparison. The published methods range from black box machine learning methods (ML), e.g. support vector machines () and artificial neural networks (), to manual pattern detection ('by eye'). For example,, Cai and Lu (2008) and more recentlypredicted PTMs using manually extracted rules based only on the information provided by the first two or three amino acids in the sequence, which may be insufficient to predict correctly the PTMs.
DISCUSSIONWe presented a new method to predict PTMs called motifs tree. The method was tested for the IMC and N-Ac by building a classifier for proteins in different taxa. The resulting models are accurate on our datasets and perform as well as the previously published state-of-the-art results, namely TermiNator3. Moreover, our results are cross-validated, showing that our model can build classifiers with good generalization capabilities. We did not compare our model with NetAcet because it has been trained only on a small dataset restricted to NatA substrates from S.cerevisiae. Also, we have shown that our N-Ac classifier can take into account subtle information allowing it to improve the classification of potential NatB and NatC substrates, which is a feature that is lacking in TermiNator3 and NetAcet. As with all machine learning approaches, the quality of the predictor depends on the quality of the dataset. In biology, negative sets are difficult to build because they rely on the non-observation of a phenomenon, which is not directly annotated in databases. To confirm that our predictor was not biased because of noise in the dataset, we have used a hold-out test set. This set is only composed of experimentally confirmed non-acetylated eukaryotic proteins (). All proteins in the hold-out test set were not seen during training. The Eukaryota motifs tree produce a specificity of 0.85 on this hold-out test set, which is above the cross-validated specificity (0.09). This good result illustrates that our algorithm induces correct rules to predict non-acetlyation, probably because our methodology can cope with noise in the dataset, or because our dataset is clean enough to produce accurate predictors. We add that the ability to learn with noise is a desirable feature for a ML method. For more details, see Supplementary Information A ('3.3 Validation for N-terminal acetylation classifiers'). Also, our method produces a white box model that shows how features are used to classify sequences. In a preliminary analysis, we have illustrated that our model can provide helpful information about the composition of sequences that promote or inhibit a PTM. This is also a valuable advantage versus the predictors presented inand Liu and Lin (2004), which is hard or impossible to interpret. We are convinced that a model used for classification in biology should be readable by experts. Models used in machine learning are able to capture characteristics that are hard to see in the data. Those characteristics or features may be exploited to understand the studied biological process. The purpose of this first analysis was only to validate the white box quality of our model, by retrieving experimentally known biological facts from our motifs trees. However, in the future we may be able to use the motifs tree as a tool to propose new biological hypothesis that could be tested experimentally.