We present a new, first-of-its-kind, fully automated computational tool MOTIF-EM for identifying regions or domains or motifs in cryoEM maps of large macromolecular assemblies (such as chaperonins, viruses, etc.) that remain conformationally conserved. As a by-product, regions in structures that are not conserved are revealed: this can indicate local molecular flexibility related to biological activity. MOTIF-EM takes cryoEM volumetric maps as inputs. The technique used by MOTIF-EM to detect conserved sub-structures is inspired by a recent breakthrough in 2D object recognition. The technique works by constructing rotationally invariant, low-dimensional representations of local regions in the input cryoEM maps. Correspondences are established between the reduced representations (by comparing them using a simple metric) across the input maps. The correspondences are clustered using hash tables and graph theory is used to retrieve conserved structural domains or motifs. MOTIF-EM has been used to extract conserved domains occurring in large macromolecular assembly maps, including as those of viruses P22 and epsilon 15, Ribosome 70S, GroEL, that remain structurally conserved in different functional states. Our method can also been used to build atomic models for some maps. We also used MOTIF-EM to identify the conserved folds shared among dsDNA bacteriophages HK97, Epsilon 15, and ô29, though they have low-sequence similarity.
INTRODUCTIONThe key processes in a cell, the fundamental building block of life, are carried out or at-least influenced by large macromolecular assemblies (LMAs) such as ribosomes and chaperonins. Understanding their structures and interactions is needed for understanding their mechanisms and hence essential for a complete understanding of life processes at the molecular level. A major development over the last 15 years has been the success of cryoEM in the very challenging task of determining and understanding the structures of LMAs (often in the molecular mass range 1100 million Da). CryoEM has emerged as a method distinctly more suited for determining and understanding structures of LMAs in under near-native conditions and inferring conformation flexibility (by capturing 'snapshots' of dynamic processes) associated with their working * To whom correspondence should be addressed. mechanisms (). With recent automation advances, CryoEM structures of large assemblies can be obtained at subnanometer resolution within few days of work (). Structural comparison is a critical step in structural biology research using cryoEM. For instance, in order to derive the functional mechanism of a newly determined structure, it is often compared with structures (for instance, same molecule in different functional states) already determined and studied by X-ray crystallography or cryoEM. In this article we present a new fully automated first-of-its-kind computational tool MOTIF-EM, which is meant to solve an important structural comparison problem P. P is defined as follows: compare a non-atomic resolution structure (i.e. a cryoEM map from EMDB) with another structure (either another cryoEM map or a map blurred from a crystal structure) and identify conserved structural domains or motifs or sub-map (if there is any) between the pair of input structures. The by-product of solving P is revelation of the regions in the input pair which are not-conserved between them. These non-conserved regions can point to local molecular flexibility related to biological activity, if the input pair are same molecule in two different functional states. For instance, two cryoEM maps of ribosome 70S are shown inand b Solving P with these two maps as input means detecting the location and shape (or domain boundary) of the two domains: 50S and 30S (shown as yellow and blue regions, respectively, inand d) that are known to be structurally conserved between the two maps. The by-product of solving P for this pair of 70S, is the revelation of the regions which are notconserved or flexible between the input structure pair, i.e. the red regions, as detected by MOTIF-EM, inand d. This region has been implicated with EF-G binding and and tRNA locomotion (). Prior to MOTIF-EM, there was no direct and fully automated way of solving P, without substantial prior knowledge (unavailable at times)such as, the occurrence of the common conserved subregion in the two input maps as a high-resolution structural homolog in some domain databank (such as SCOP). See Section 2 for more details. Structural comparison tools like MOTIF-EM are useful as conserved motifs or domains can point to conserved active sites, indicating function sharing, evolutionary relationships or drug binding targets for therapies. The remaining non-conserved regions in the input structure pair, revealed as by-product, can point to local molecular flexibility related to biological activity. MOTIFEM is expected to work with cryoEM maps upto the resolution when structural domains and assembly components in the maps remain detectable, which is typically believed to be 15  or betterPage: i302 i301i309
CONCLUSIONWe have described a new, first-of-its kind, computational tool MOTIF-EM that can identify structural motifs or domains that are conserved between a pair of cryoEM maps. As a by-product, regions that are not conserved are also revealed. Such a tool is useful as conserved structural entities can point to conserved active sitesindicating common function, evolutionary links and drug binding targets for therapies. The non-conserved regions, revealed as by-product, can point to local molecular flexibility related to biological activity. Apart from breaking an input map pair into conserved and non-conserved regions, MOTIF-EM can (i) dock existing atomic-resolution domains into cryo-EM maps, (ii) propose atomic resolution models for some cryoEM maps, and (iii) compare maps with conserved structures but little sequence similarity. The distinct advantage of using MOTIF-EM is that it enables the users to directly and automatically compare and analyze two cryoEM structures. Otherwise, the conventional way has been indirect comparison, via docked structural homologs or backbone traced models (both not always available), which can introduce errors from imperfect docking and modeling into the structural analysis. Overall, this required significant manual intervention. In the future we would like to do structure comparisons using MOTIF-EM on a much larger scale. Such as, comparing a given cryoEM map with all the available structures in various databanks (such as, EBI cryoEM and PDB databanks) and detecting previously unknown links between the cryoEM map and all other known structures.