Aptamers are synthetic antibodies that can bind to target molecules with high affinity and specificity. Aptamers are chemically synthesized and their discovery can be performed completely in vitro, rather than relying on in vivo biological processes, making them well-suited for high-throughput discovery. However, a large fraction of the most enriched aptamers in Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential enrichment (SELEX) rounds display poor binding activity. Here, we present MPBind, a Meta-motif-based statistical framework and pipeline to Predict the Binding potential of SELEX-derived apta-mers. Using human embryonic stem cell SELEX-Seq data, MPBind achieved high prediction accuracy for binding potential. Further analysis showed that MPBind is robust to both polymerase chain reaction amplification bias and incomplete sequencing of aptamer pools. These two biases usually confound aptamer analysis. Availability and implementation: MPBind software and documents are available at http://www.morgridge.net/MPBind.html. The human embryonic stem cells whole-cell SELEX-Seq data are available at
INTRODUCTIONAptamers are short, single-stranted DNA or RNA, which have the ability to specifically bind to a variety of targets including proteins () and the surface of cells (). Aptamers have gained significant interest as a promising alternative to antibodies because they are chemically synthesized, thermostable and can be readily produced using standard laboratory techniques. Importantly, aptamers can be distributed as sequence information rather than as a physical entity. The generation of high-affinity aptamers typically starts with a random oligonucleotide pool. These oligonucleotides are then subjected to multiple rounds of in vitro target-based selection with polymerase chain reaction (PCR) amplification. This procedure is termed SELEX (Systematic Evolution of Ligands by EXponential enrichment). Several studies observed that the number of unique sequences decreases after target selection, suggesting that the decrease of sequence complexity is caused by the increase of sequence enrichment (). Also, 'trueselected' sequences were more likely to appear in multiple rounds if compared with non-selected sequences (). Thus, enrichment ratio-related methods are the most common approach to initially identify high-affinity aptamers. However, those methods suffer from a relatively high false-positive rate, where sequences are enriched but do not exhibit binding (). This is likely because of PCR amplification bias. To design aptamers that can bind to human embryonic stem cells (hESCs), we generated five rounds of hESC whole-cell SELEX sequencing data. We found that the validation rate is low (550%) if we used the enrichment ratio-based method (data not shown). Prior work showed that PCR bias is a substantial confounding factor in aptamer analysis (). Therefore, there is a pressing need to have a computational approach that can accurately predict the binding potential of SELEX-derived aptamers without relying on aptamer read counts. To this end, we developed MPBind, a novel statistical framework and pipeline to predict the binding potential of SELEXderived aptamers. Our approach is based on the assumption that the binding potential of an aptamer can be broken down to the combination of binding of all n-mers (e.g. 6-mer) within a sequence. MPBind assesses all possible n-mers for metrics such as the relative frequency change and the relative abundance in the final round. Based on those observations, each n-mer is assigned a combined score. The binding potential of an aptamer is further inferred from the combination of all n-mers within the sequence. This approach integrates multiple moderately informative sources of data to generate high-confidence predictions, which is particularly important for Cell-SELEX where non-specific binding is prevalent.