I present MR_predictor, a simulation engine designed to guide the development and interpretation of statistical tests of caus-ality between phenotypes using genetic instruments. MR_predictor provides a framework to model either individual traits or complex scenarios where multiple phenotypes are correlated or dependent on each other. Crucially, MR_predictor can incorporate the effects of multiple biallelic loci (linked or unlinked) contributing genotypic variability to one or more simulated phenotypes. The software has a range of options for sample generation, and output files generated by MR_predictor port into commonly used analysis tools (e.g. PLINK, R), facilitating analyses germane for Mendelian Randomization studies. Benchmarks for speed and power calculations for summary statistic-based Mendelian Randomization analyses are presented and compared with analytical expectation. Availability and implementation: The simulation engine is implemented in PERL, and the associated scripts can be downloaded from github.com, and online documentation, tutorial and example datasets are available at
INTRODUCTIONThe discovery of genetic polymorphisms contributing to a wide range of human phenotypes has made causal inference between traits or disease endpoints feasible, by using these polymorphisms as instrumental variables (). The approach, dubbed Mendelian Randomization, can be conceptualized as a natural version of a randomized control trial, as alleles that elevate or lower a biomarker of interest assort randomly at meiosis. One popular application finds a researcher having selected multiple, unlinked polymorphic sites reproducibly associated to a biomarker of interest, which are then assayed for relationship to a disease endpoint (). Causal inference can be assessed using either individual genotypes or the equivalent estimated effects summarized from large-scale association studies; both approaches to inference are statistically valid if assumptions are satisfied (). As additional phenotypes and genetic associations continue to be cataloged, Monte Carlo approaches that efficiently model complex phenotypic and genotypic relationships will be useful for continued analytical and methodological progress () and addressing more complex models (). Unfortunately, existing software is optimized for genomics/genetic architecture applications, which is careful to incorporate linkage between sites as well as other population genetic features at computational expense, and does not easily handle complex relationships between multiple traits and genetic variants, simultaneously (G ). Thus, I report a Monte Carlo approach designed to generate samples of unrelated individuals presenting multiple phenotypes that also segregate genetic polymorphisms that contribute to them.