Motivation: Feature selection is one of the main challenges in analyzing high-throughput genomic data. Minimum redundancy maximum relevance (mRMR) is a particularly fast feature selection method for finding a set of both relevant and complementary features. Here we describe the mRMRe R package, in which the mRMR technique is extended by using an ensemble approach to better explore the feature space and build more robust predictors. To deal with the computational complexity of the ensemble approach, the main functions of the package are implemented and parallelized in C using the openMP Application Programming Interface. Results: Our ensemble mRMR implementations outperform the classical mRMR approach in terms of prediction accuracy. They identify genes more relevant to the biological context and may lead to richer biological interpretations. The parallelized functions included in the package show significant gains in terms of run-time speed when compared with previously released packages.
INTRODUCTIONIn genomic data analysis, phenotype-associated feature selection is of utmost importance in understanding the biological processes underlying the relevant phenotype and in building accurate predictive models. This is not a trivial task for high-throughput genomic data (microarray, next-generation sequencing, etc.), as they are high dimensional, noisy and have complex intercorrelational structures. Because feature selection is an nondeterministic polynomial time (NP)-hard problem, one must resort to the use of heuristics, which find suitable and sub-optimal sets of relevant features in high-dimensional datasets. Among these heuristics, the minimum redundancy maximum relevance (mRMR) feature selection technique is particularly appealing because of the relatively low computational complexity of its algorithm for finding a set of relevant and complementary features (), from which accurate predictive models are developed. The challenge lies in that mRMR, like all feature selection algorithms in a low sample-to-dimensionality ratio setting, produces highly variable results, and small changes in sample data often lead to dramatically different sets of selected features. In the past decade, a new trend has emerged whereby highly accurate 'ensemble' classifiers are produced by combining less accurate ones, on the grounds that model variance is reduced without affecting bias (). However, the computational cost of an ensemble variant of the mRMR method is high, as multiple mRMR feature selections must be done. This was the primary motivator for the development of a new R package, mRMRe, which implements an ensemble variant of mRMR, in which multiple feature sets, rather than a single list of features, is built. Also included in the package is a function for computing a mutual information matrix (MIM) based on the appropriate estimators for each variable type (i.e. continuous, discrete and survival data). Both these package features have been adapted to fully use multicore platforms.
CONCLUSIONThe R package mRMRe provides functions to efficiently perform ensemble mRMR feature selection by taking full advantage of parallel computing. Ensemble mRMR can be beneficial from both a predictive (lower bias and lower variance) and biological (more thorough feature space exploration) point of view, which makes it particularly attractive for high-throughput genomic data analysis.