Motivation: The increasing availability of mitochondria-targeted and off-target sequencing data in whole-exome and whole-genome sequencing studies (WXS and WGS) has risen the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure heteroplasmy and to easily recognize the most functionally important mitochondrial variants among a huge number of candidates. To this purpose, we developed MToolBox, a highly automated pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mito-chondrial DNA from high-throughput sequencing data. Results: MToolBox implements an effective computational strategy for mitochondrial genomes assembling and haplogroup assignment also including a prioritization analysis of detected variants. MToolBox provides a Variant Call Format file featuring, for the first time, allele-specific heteroplasmy and annotation files with prioritized variants. MToolBox was tested on simulated samples and applied on 1000 Genomes WXS datasets. Availability and implementation: MToolBox package is available at https://sourceforge.net/projects/mtoolbox/.
INTRODUCTIONEmerging discoveries in human mitochondrial genetics, driven by the advent of next-generation sequencing, have revealed that individuals exhibit a complex mixture of mitochondrial genotypes () and carry low-level heteroplasmic variants (). On the other hand, the deeper the sequencing coverage, the higher the number of mitochondrial DNA(mtDNA) variants and the variety of heteroplasmic ranges found per individual (). In this frame, the deep sequencing of mtDNA raises the demand of effective pipelines to accurately measure heteroplasmy and to easily recognize the most functionally important variants among a huge number of candidates. To this purpose, we developed MToolBox, a highly automated bioinformatics pipeline to reconstruct and analyze human mtDNA from high-throughput sequencing (HTS) data. The MToolBox workflow includes a computational strategy to assemble mitochondrial genomes from whole-exome sequencing (WXS) and/or whole-genome sequencing (WGS) data (), which was further updated to detect insertions and deletions (ins/dels) and to assess the heteroplasmic fraction (HF) of each variant allele with the related confidence interval (CI), reported as sample-specific meta-information in an enhanced version of the Variant Call Format (VCF) file (version 4.0). The MToolBox pipeline analyzes the reconstructed genomes for haplogroup assignment () and variant prioritization.