Motivation: With recent advances in sequencing, structural and functional studies of RNA lag behind the discovery of sequences. Computational analysis of RNA is increasingly important to reveal structure–function relationships with low cost and speed. The purpose of this study is to use multiple homologous sequences to infer a conserved RNA structure. Results: A new algorithm, called Multilign, is presented to find the lowest free energy RNA secondary structure common to multiple sequences. Multilign is based on Dynalign, which is a program that simultaneously aligns and folds two sequences to find the lowest free energy conserved structure. For Multilign, Dynalign is used to progressively construct a conserved structure from multiple pairwise calculations, with one sequence used in all pairwise calculations. A base pair is predicted only if it is contained in the set of low free energy structures predicted by all Dynalign calculations. In this way, Multilign improves prediction accuracy by keeping the genuine base pairs and excluding competing false base pairs. Multilign has computational complexity that scales linearly in the number of sequences. Multilign was tested on extensive datasets of sequences with known structure and its prediction accuracy is among the best of available algorithms. Multilign can run on long sequences (1500 nt) and an arbitrarily large number of sequences. Availability: The algorithm is implemented in ANSI C++ and can be downloaded as part of the RNAstructure package at:
INTRODUCTIONRNA sequences have been discovered to play remarkably diverse roles, such as catalysis (), gene expression regulation () and sequence recognition (). Recent studies show that there are a large number of RNA transcripts that do not encode proteins (). The functional and structural roles of these RNAs are of great * To whom correspondence should be addressed. interest. With current techniques, however, it is slow and expensive to experimentally determine structures for the majority of those RNA. Thus, structural and functional analysis of RNA molecules has lagged behind the rate of sequencing, leaving a large gap needing to be filled. Structure prediction is an attractive tool for studying all the currently available sequences. RNA secondary structure, defined as the sum of canonical base pairs (A-U, G-U and G-C) is commonly predicted and these predictions have been used to design structures (), discover functional RNA sequences in genomes (), study folding (), design siRNA sequences () and facilitate comparative sequence analysis (). The prediction of lowest free energy structures with a dynamic programming algorithm is a popular approach for making such predictions (). In this approach, a nearest neighbor energy model with a set of thermodynamic parameters derived from optical melting experiments on small RNA models () is used to evaluate possible structures and the dynamic programming algorithm guarantees that the most stable structure will be found. Only 73% or fewer known base pairs are predicted by free energy minimization for sequences shorter than 700 nt (). The prediction is worse for longer sequences, with 2060% average accuracies for small and large subunit rRNA (). When multiple homologous sequences are available, evolutionary conservation can be used to improve RNA secondary structure prediction accuracy. RNA sequences often change during evolution, but RNA structures are generally conserved in order to preserve function. The set of structures that multiple different sequences can adopt is smaller than the number of structures each can adopt independently, so determining the conserved structure is more accurate. A number of computational approaches have been applied to this problem, as previously reviewed (). Some of the algorithms require a fixed initial alignment as input (). The drawback to this is that the initial alignment, based on nucleotide matching, may not reflect the correct alignment because of compensating changes in the sequence. This imperfect alignment can seriously restrict prediction accuracy.introduced a dynamic programming algorithm to find optimal consensus structures and sequence alignment simultaneously without being constrained to aPage: 627 626632. Multilign algorithm flowchart, illustrating progressive calculations of S sequences. The index sequence is used with each other sequence as input to Dynalign. The cycle is repeated for multiple iterations, using the same index sequence for all iterations. A structure is predicted for each sequence with the final iteration. The computational complexity for this algorithm is O(N 4 ) in memory and O(ISN 6 ) in time for I iterations of calculation for average sequence length of N.
DISCUSSIONMultilign combines free energy minimization and comparative sequence analysis to predict RNA secondary structures of multiple sequences with higher or comparable accuracy to Dynalign. It has among the best accuracy as compared with other algorithms that predict conserved structures for multiple sequences.