Computational solvent fragment mapping is typically performed on a single structure of a protein to identify and characterize binding sites. However, the simultaneous analysis of several mutant structures or frames of a molecular dynamics simulation may provide more realistic detail about the behavior of the sites. Here we present a plug-in for Visual Molecular Dynamics that streamlines the comparison of the binding configurations of several FTMAP-generated structures. Availability: FTProd is a freely available and open-source plug-in that can be downloaded at
INTRODUCTIONThe identification and characterization of ligand-binding sites in proteins is of utmost importance for research into drug discovery and biomolecular function. The experimental determination of regions on the surface of the protein with high recurrence of bound probes correlates well with the locations of drug-binding sites (). Interested readers are referred to the following reviews:and Vajda and Guarnieri (2006). One popular method for experimental determination of such druggable 'hot spots' involves the process of multiple solvent crystal structures (MSCS) (). During MSCS, the protein is solvated within various probe compounds. The structure determined using X-ray crystallography indicates probe-binding locations. X-ray crystallization of multiple structures is expensive, and computational fragment mapping can emulate this process to identify binding sites (). Various computational methods for binding site identification are compared in Morrow and Zhang, 2012. The FTMAP algorithm () seeks to mimic the MSCS method and has been shown to predict the analogous binding of probe molecules with a high degree of success. To gain a comprehensive understanding about a protein's ligand-binding characteristics, structural knowledge alone is often insufficient. A single structure ignores protein dynamics, which may alter probe-binding location, number and capacity (). Here we present FTProd, a program capable of clustering hot spots spanning multiple structures, and which allows for the ease of identification and characterization of those hot spots with a graphical user interface. FTProd is a plug-in for Visual Molecular Dynamics (VMD;), a molecular visualization program free for academic use.
DISCUSSIONThe determination of potentially druggable sites on the surface of a protein represents an area of intense interest to drug discovery and other applications. FTProd provides the capability to compare the characteristics of pockets between crystal structures of structurally similar proteins. The burden is placed on the user to determine whether two structures ought to be compared. RMSD-based clustering of molecular dynamics (MD) trajectories could be one of many methods that may be used to identify input for FTProd, along with binding site similarity, analogous structures, similar substrates or any other structural similarity metric. FTProd's utility is completely extensible toward the analysis of the frames of a simulation trajectory, as may be generated by an MD simulation. To our knowledge, FTProd is the only existing tool that integrates protein structural dynamics data for the purpose of binding site characterization. The inclusion of cross-structural or dynamic information in the analysis of these 'hot spots' is likely to increase the predictive accuracy and scope of these computational methods by providing a more realistic picture of ligand binding. Given the high success of the FTMAP algorithm, we expect that FTProd will greatly aid researchers in the analysis of protein pockets by streamlining interstructural CS comparison. FTProd is presented as a plug-in for the molecular viewer program VMD, and is freely available under the GNU Public License. Download instructions and a tutorial can be found at http://amarolab.ucsd.edu/ftprod.