Motivation: The identification of gene regulatory modules is an important yet challenging problem in computational biology. While many computational methods have been proposed to identify regulatory modules, their initial success is largely compromised by a high rate of false positives, especially when applied to human cancer studies. New strategies are needed for reliable regulatory module identification. Results: We present a new approach, namely multilevel support vector regression (ml-SVR), to systematically identify condition-specific regulatory modules. The approach is built upon a multilevel analysis strategy designed for suppressing false positive predictions. With this strategy, a regulatory module becomes ever more significant as more relevant gene sets are formed at finer levels. At each level, a two-stage support vector regression (SVR) method is utilized to help reduce false positive predictions by integrating binding motif information and gene expression data; a significant analysis procedure is followed to assess the significance of each regulatory module. To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed strategy, we first compared the ml-SVR approach with other existing methods on simulation data and yeast cell cycle data. The resulting performance shows that the ml-SVR approach outperforms other methods in the identification of both regulators and their target genes. We then applied our method to breast cancer cell line data to identify condition-specific regulatory modules associated with estrogen treatment. Experimental results show that our method can identify biologically meaningful regulatory modules related to estrogen signaling and action in breast cancer. Availability and implementation: The ml-SVR MATLAB package can be downloaded at
INTRODUCTIONIdentifying regulatory modules is one of the key steps to understanding the molecular mechanisms of biological processes, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. especially important for defining the deregulated pathways in cancer. At the transcriptional level, a regulatory module is defined as a set of genes controlled by one or several transcription factors (TFs) in a condition-specific manner (). TFs can either activate or inhibit gene expression, usually by binding to short, highly conserved, DNA sequences in the promoter (or upstream) region, i.e. transcription factor binding site (TFBS) or binding motif. In higher eukaryotes, TFBSs are often organized in clusters called cis-regulatory modules (CRMs). Many computational methods have been developed to facilitate the identification of CRMs from either gene expression data or DNA sequence data. Expression-based methods () take advantage of gene expression data but lack of sequence binding constraints. Sequence-based module discovery algorithms, such as CisModule (), CREME () and ModuleSearch (), analyze the promoter regions of a set of coregulated genes to identify overrepresented motif combinations. A major limitation of sequence-based methods is that they do not consider the condition-specific nature of regulatory modules, i.e. they ignore the relationship between binding affinities and gene expression levels. A living cell is a dynamic system in which gene activities and interactions exhibit temporal patterns and spatial compartmentalization (). Recently, several studies have shown that binding of TFs not only depends on their affinity for the binding sites but binding also occurs in a conditionspecific manner in response to various environmental changes (). Thus, a TF may play different regulatory roles to its downstream target genes or may even have different downstream targets under different conditions (). Motivated by this understanding, many computational algorithms were proposed to discover condition-specific regulatory modules by integrating condition-specific gene expression profiles and motif information. Regression models are widely used to combine these two types of information (). For example, a least square regression (LS regression) method described by () identifies significant regulators by combining mRNA expression level and ChIP-on-chip binding data to minimize a fitting error. GRAM () is another regression method based on an iterative search to identify significant regulators andPage: 1417 14161422
DISCUSSIONIdentification of transcription regulatory modules has become increasingly important to understand the molecular mechanisms associated with cancer. Previous methods () focused on how to model the relationship of TF binding and gene expression levels, assuming either active TFs or target genes are known. However, it is a challenging problem in many cancer studies due to significant noise in data sources: inaccurate motif binding information, noisy gene expression data and incomplete knowledge of the biological problem under study. The ml-SVR method is intended to address these problems and simultaneously identify significant TFs and their target genes through a multilevel strategy. SVR is utilized because its performance for combining binding motif information and gene expression data is robust in the presence of noise; note that it can also be extended to model the non-linear relationship between binding information and expression data through kernel functions. Clustering is used to group genes in multiple levels, in a coarse-tofine way, to avoid hard split of the genes, which may be undesirable considering the noises. There are several issues for further investigation. The method described here assumes that coexpressed genes should be coregulated to some degree; hence, genes are clustered based on their expression profiles alone. Recently,proposed to cluster genes based on their gene expression data and binding motif information together, which may provide more accurate gene clusters for analysis. Another important issue that needs to be addressed is how to determine an appropriate motif set for SVR fitting. In our experiment, we only focused on each individual TF and their modules. However, finding the cooperative TFs is also important for many biological studies. Due to the large number of motifs under study (typically in a range of 50 to 500), it is not feasible to consider all possible motif combinations when the order of the motif set increases. In our recent work (), we developed a stepwise forward greedy search strategy, using a modified loss function to find the cooperative motifs in a given gene set. Finally, the parameters in the algorithm need to be further optimized in the future work.
CONCLUSIONWe have proposed a multilevel two-step SVR method to identify significant condition-specific regulatory networks. Binding motif information and gene expression data are integrated by SVR followed by significance analysis to find the active motif sets.