Motivation: Identifying protein subchloroplast localization in chloroplast organelle is very helpful for understanding the function of chloroplast proteins. There have existed a few computational prediction methods for protein subchloroplast localization. However, these existing works have ignored proteins with multiple subchloroplast locations when constructing prediction models, so that they can predict only one of all subchloroplast locations of this kind of multilabel proteins. Results: To address this problem, through utilizing label-specific features and label correlations simultaneously, a novel multilabel classifier was developed for predicting protein subchloroplast location(s) with both single and multiple location sites. As an initial study, the overall accuracy of our proposed algorithm reaches 55.52%, which is quite high to be able to become a promising tool for further studies. Availability and implementation: An online web server for our proposed algorithm named MultiP-SChlo was developed, which are freely accessible at
IntroductionChloroplasts are organelles in most green plant cells, and also exists in some eukaryotic organisms, such as seaweed. Chloroplast's main function is to conduct photosynthesis, where they capture and store the energy from the sunlight, transform it to chemical energy, and finally release oxygen from water. In addition to the important photosynthesis, they are also responsible for carrying out a lot of other functions, including fatty acid synthesis and the immune response in plants. Chloroplast proteins play different roles in the biological processes mentioned above. Knowing the functions of these proteins is of significant value. Due to the very close relationship between the functions and localizations of chloroplast proteins, identifying the subchloroplast localizations of these proteins in chloroplast organelle is very helpful for understanding the function of chloroplast proteins. With in-depth study of cell organelles, the researchers have found a number of substructures in cell organelles, such as nuclear chromatin, heterochromatin, nuclear envelope, nucleolus in the nucleus, inner membrane, outer membrane in the mitochondria, stroma, thylakoid in the chloroplast and so on. In order to more deeply understand the function of these proteins, it is necessary to identify the subchloroplast localizations of these proteins in the organelle level. As can be seen from the recently released UniProtKB/ Swiss-Prot database (release 2013_05), there are a total ofchloroplast proteins, where 7367 chloroplast proteins have subchloroplast localization annotations, accounting for about 7367= 14408  51% of all chloroplast proteins. However, of the 7367 chloroplast proteins with subchloroplast localization annotations, 6955 are annotated with experimental confidence and 412 annotated with uncertain terms such as 'by similarity', 'probable' and 'potential'. Therefore, there are only 6955 chloroplast proteins with determined subchloroplast localization annotations, which are about 6955=14408  48% of all chloroplast proteins. In other words, subchloroplast localizations of more than half of the chloroplast proteins need to be further identified either by computational methods or biological experiments. Since the organelle is a more microscopic structure unit relative to the cell, it is more difficult and time-consuming to determine protein sub-subcellular localizations by biological experiments. With explosively increasing of protein sequences in the post-genomic era, the gap between the sequence number and function annotations of chloroplast proteins will become more and more wide. To fill the gap, it is very necessary to develop new computational prediction methods for predicting protein subchloroplast localizations. In recent years, there have existed a few computational prediction methods for protein sub-subcellular localizations, such as, subnuclear localization prediction (), submitochondria localization prediction () and subchloroplast localization prediction () concerned in this article. In the field of subchloroplast localization prediction, the first pioneering work is completed by. They constructed the first public benchmark dataset in the field, and developed a new predictor based on pseudoamino acid composition (PseAAC) and the evidence-theoretic K-nearest neighbor (ET-KNN) classifier. Since then, other researchers have also proposed a few prediction methods for protein subchloroplast localization. However, these existing works have the following drawbacks: (i) only considering the small number of subchloroplast locations, reducing practicality of prediction methods, (ii) the homologous bias of the benchmark dataset adopted is too large to accurately evaluate the performance of prediction methods, for instance, the dataset constructed by Du et al. has as high as 60% protein sequence similarity, (iii) more importantly, ignoring proteins with multiple subchloroplast locations when constructing prediction models, so that these existing works will not be able to completely predict all the subchloroplast locations of these multilabel proteins. It has been observed that more and more proteins have multiple subcellular or sub-subcellular locations. Actually, multilabel proteins should not be ignored because they may have some special biological functions worthy of our in-depth notices. Recently, some multilabel predictors have been developed for predicting subcellular localization of proteins with both single and multiple sites, such as, iLoc-Plant (), iLoc-Animal (), PlantmPLoc () and MLPred-Euk (). A review article () has concluded recent advances in predicting multilabel attributes in molecular biosystems. However, none of the existing multilabel predictors was specially developed for chloroplast proteins. In this article, we aim to develop a novel computational method that can predict single and multiple subchloroplast locations for chloroplast proteins simultaneously by overcoming the above three problems. Firstly, we constructed a new benchmark dataset that contains chloroplast proteins with both single and multiple subchloroplast locations. To enlarge the prediction scope, the number of subchloroplast locations concerned is increased from 4 to 5. To avoid redundancy and homology bias, protein sequence similarity in the new-constructed dataset is controlled under 40%. Secondly, through selecting features that are most related to each subchloroplast location, respectively, and taking into account correlations between different subchloroplast locations simultaneously, we proposed a novel multilabel algorithm that can accurately predict multilabel protein subchloroplast localizations. Finally, we developed an online web server for our proposed algorithm called MultiP-SChlo freely accessible at http://biomed. zzuli.edu.cn/bioinfo/multip-schlo/.
ConclusionIn this article, we further study sub-structures of the chloroplast organelle, and try to identify subchloroplast locations of proteins with both single and multiple sites. All the existing predictors have the following drawbacks: (i) only considering the small number of subchloroplast locations, (ii) homologous bias of the benchmark dataset adopted is too large, (iii) more importantly, ignoring proteins with multiple subchloroplast locations when constructing prediction models. In view of this, we propose a novel multilabel prediction algorithm for identifying multilabel protein subchloroplast locations. The main contributions of this article is as follows:1. A new benchmark dataset is constructed that contains chloroplast proteins with both single and multiple subchloroplast locations. It not only covers much more subchloroplast locations but also has much less homology bias. 2. A novel multilabel algorithm is proposed through combining label-specific features with label correlations, which can predict multilabel protein subchloroplast locations accurately.3. An online web server for our proposed algorithm is established called MultiP-SChlo freely accessible at http://biomed.zzuli.edu. cn/bioinfo/multip-schlo/.