Motivation: Recently, a range of new statistics have become available for the alignment-free comparison of two sequences based on k-tuple word content. Here, we extend these statistics to the simultaneous comparison of more than two sequences. Our suite of statistics contains , first, C Ã l and C S l , extensions of statistics for pairwise comparison of the joint k-tuple content of all the sequences, and second, C Ã 2 , C S 2 and C geo 2 , averages of sums of pairwise comparison statistics. The two tasks we consider are, first, to identify sequences that are similar to a set of target sequences, and, second, to measure the similarity within a set of sequences. Results: Our investigation uses both simulated data as well as cis-regulatory module data where the task is to identify cis-regulatory modules with similar transcription factor binding sites. We find that although for real data, all of our statistics show a similar performance, on simulated data the Shepp-type statistics are in some instances outperformed by star-type statistics. The multiple alignment-free statistics are more sensitive to contamination in the data than the pairwise average statistics. Availability: Our implementation of the five statistics is available as R package named multiAlignFree at be
INTRODUCTIONA cis-regulatory module (CRM) is a stretch of DNA in charge of regulating expression of some nearby genes (). CRMs typically consist of a few hundred base pairs, and they contain multiple transcription factor binding sites (TFBS). As CRMs with similar TFBSs may show similar regulatory patterns, a pertinent question is how to classify CRM sequences and how to measure the similarity within a set of CRM sequences. Usually, the similarity between two CRM sequences is assessed by either global () or local alignment (). A main issue with applying alignment-based methods for this problem is that TFBSs are normally much shorter than the CRM, and hence the alignment score of two CRMs may be dominated by the content of their background sequences. Therefore, a high alignment score between two CRMs may arise without them containing similar TFBSs regulatory patterns. Moreover, especially in distantly related species, the CRM sequences may simply not be alignable (). Finally, alignment-based methods are time-consuming. Hence, CRMs provide a challenging test case for sequence comparison; see also Hardison and Taylor (2012). In contrast, alignment-free methods, first proposed by, have been developed at a fast pace during the past two decades. Here, we focus on alignment-free sequence comparison based on the joint k-tuple content of sequences. For two sequences A  A 1 A 2. .. A n1 and B  B 1 B 2. .. B n2 of letters from a finite alphabet A of size d, and for a k-tuple word w 2 A k , let X 1 w denote the frequency of w in sequence A, and similarly X 2 w denote its frequency in sequence B. We centralize the word counts based on a probabilistic model. Let P i w denote the probability of occurrence of the word w  w 1 , w 2 ,. .. , w k in the i th sequence, i  1, 2. For example, when the letters in the underlying sequence are assumed to be drawn independently at random from the identical distribution (the i.i.d. model), then P i w  Q k j1 p i wj , where p i wj is the probability of letter w j in the ith sequence; in practice, p i wj is estimated by the frequency of letter w j in the ith sequence. For a word w, the centralized count variablesand their approximate standardization,measure the deviation of the word frequencies in the sequence from the word occurrence expectation in the so-called background sequences. The statistics D  2 and D S 2 for alignment-free comparison of two sequences are now defined byBoth C  2 and C S 2 range from 1 to 1, with a value close to 1 when the sequences are closely related. For sequences that do not have the same length, the total number of k-tuple words could have a large influence on the value of D-type statistics, and hence for such sequences, we use the C-type statistics to measure the similarity. As CRM sequences vary by a few hundred base pairs in length, we only use the C-type statistics in our applications. Variants of our D-type statistics have been considered in the literature; a main issue with them is that they may be dominated by single-sequence noise. In, it has been shown that the straightforward non-centred statistic D 2 A, B  P w2A k X 1 w X 2 w may be dominated either by noise in the single sequences or by difference in sequence backgrounds. Thus, it has weak power in detecting relationship between two sequences; see also;, a standardized statistics D2z  D2ED2 sdD2 was proposed, where ED 2  and sdD 2  are the mean and standard deviation of D 2 under a given model of the sequence. It was shown that D2z outperforms D 2. Yet, the noise in the single sequence may still dominate the statistics D2z when the background sequence is not uniform (). Standardizing the count vectors themselves, as in D  2 and D S 2 , resolves this issue. In the work of Goke, the background sequence model is generalized from i.i.d to a first-order Markov chain model, showing that a first-order Markov chain model improves the ability of detecting similarity between regulatory sequences compared with the i.i.d model. Higher order Markov chain models could be considered, but owing to the limited length of CRM sequences, estimating the higher order Markov chain model parameters leads to an overfitting problem and results in poor performance (). Gokealso showed that including the reverse complement of a word could increase the prediction accuracy. Although the statistics C  2 and C S 2 perform well for pairwise alignment-free sequence comparison, in applications, the similarity within a set of more than two sequences may be of interest. There are two main types of problems to tackle. The first problem is an identification problem. Suppose that we have already classified '  1 sequences according to whether they are CRMs of a particular type, and we are presented with a new sequence. How should we classify this sequence? The second problem is how to assess the similarity within a set of sequences. Both problems are motivated by the task of predicting sets of related CRMs, given a set of co-regulated genes. In, the overall similarity within a set of CRM sequences is addressed as follows. A set of CRMs, known to regulate expression in the same tissue and/or development stage, is taken as the so-called positive set. A set of equally many randomly chosen sequences, with lengths matching the CRMs, is taken as the so-called negative set. The positive set is randomly partitioned into two disjoint subsets of equal size, and each subset of sequences is concatenated to produce one long sequence. The similarity between these sequences can then be assessed using an alignment-free statistic for pairwise sequence comparison;recommend D2z. As this method requires many repeats of the random partitioning, it is time-intensive, and hence alternative methods are of interest. Here, we extend the renormalized pairwise alignment-free sequence comparison statistics C  2 and C S 2 to two families of multiple statistics, denoted by C  l and C S l. We also introduce three families of average pairwise statistics for the identification problem, called C  2 , C S 2 and C geo 2 , and their versions for measuring similarity within a set of sequences, called C  2 , C S 2 and C geo 2. We evaluate these families of statistics by testing them on the identification problem described earlier in the text, both through a simulation study and through analysing real data, by using each of our statistics as a score; the higher the score, the more similar the sequences should be. In the simulation study, we follow the common motif model inandbut under a first-order Markov chain model for the background sequence. Then, we apply our statistics to the data fromof tissue-specific enhancer CRMs identified in vivo in mouse embryos. We also evaluate these families for the task of assessing the similarity within sets of sequences, again using both the simulated sequences as mentioned previously and the CRM data from. Our evaluation is based on 90% confidence intervals (CI) for the area under the receiver operational characteristic (ROC) curve (AUC), which is implemented by the R package ROCR in. In Hardison and Taylor (2012), it is emphasized that it is often the number of false positives that make CRM prediction not very successful. Hence, we also assess the performance of our statistics through 90% CIs for the false-positive rate at 20% sensitivity. We say that a statistic outperforms the other if the 90% CIs of the former statistic is smaller than the lower bound of the 90% CI of the latter statistic. We find that although for real data all of our statistics show a similar performance, on simulated data, the Shepp-type statistics are in some instances outperformed by star-type statistics. The multiple alignment-free statistics are more sensitive to contamination in the data than the pairwise average statistics. The article is organized as follows. In Section 2, we introduce two families of multiple alignment-free statistics, called C  l and C S l , for l42. Moreover, three families of average pairwise alignment-free statistics, called C  2 , C S 2 and C geo 2 , are introduced with the identification problem in mind, as well as their generalizations C  2 , C S 2 and C geo 2 for measuring similarity within a set of sequences. Section 3 contains the evaluation and comparison of these statistics for the CRM identification problem. Section 4 addresses the problem of measuring the similarity within a set of sequences. In Section 5, we assess the effect of contamination in the data. We summarize our results in Section 6.
DISCUSSION(b). The 90% CI of AUC score (the bar) and average AUC scores (the position of the number) of the five statistics for the CRM identification on 0, 10, 20 and 30% contaminated S 0 sequences, under a first-order Markov chain, N  1000, k  5, jS 0 j  10, jS CRM j  100, jS bkg j  100; 1  is the motif density, and 0% refers to the results in, for comparison with the case of no contamination of S 0. The parameter values are (a)  0:95 and (b)  0:993: