Motivation: Reconstruction of gene regulatory networks (GRNs) is of utmost interest to biologists and is vital for understanding the complex regulatory mechanisms within the cell. Despite various methods developed for reconstruction of GRNs from gene expression profiles, they are notorious for high false positive rate owing to the noise inherited in the data, especially for the dataset with a large number of genes but a small number of samples. Results: In this work, we present a novel method, namely NARROMI, to improve the accuracy of GRN inference by combining ordinary differential equation-based recursive optimization (RO) and information theory-based mutual information (MI). In the proposed algorithm, the noisy regulations with low pairwise correlations are first removed by using MI, and the redundant regulations from indirect regulators are further excluded by RO to improve the accuracy of inferred GRNs. In particular, the RO step can help to determine regulatory directions without prior knowledge of regulators. The results on benchmark datasets from Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods challenge and experimentally determined GRN of Escherichia coli show that NARROMI significantly outperforms other popular methods in terms of false positive rates and accuracy. Availability: All the source data and code are available at: http://csb.
INTRODUCTIONA major issue in systems biology is to construct and understand the gene regulatory networks (GRNs), which explicitly characterize regulatory processes in the cell (). The development of high throughput technologies has produced tremendous amounts of gene expression data, which provide insights into the underlying regulatory mechanism of cellular machines (). The reconstruction or 'reverse engineering' of GRNs, which aims to dissect the underlying network of gene-gene interactions from the measurement of gene expression, is still a challenging task (). For this reason, the Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM) project was established to encourage researchers to develop new efficient computation methods to infer robust GRNs (). Recently, various approaches have been developed to infer GRNs from gene expression data with the motivation of improving the accuracy and scalability of network inference (). In general, these GRN inference methods fall into two categories, namely model-based approaches and machine learning-based approaches (). For the model-based methods, chemical reaction of transcription and translation, as well as other cellular processes are described as linear or non-linear differential equations, in which the parameters represent the regulation strengths of the regulators. Representative algorithms in this category include multiple linear regression (), singular value decomposition method (di), network component analysis () and linear programming (LP) (). For the machine learning-based approaches, the network is inferred through measuring the dependences or causalities between transcriptional factors (TFs) and target genes (). Popular methods in this category include partial correlation coefficient (), Bayesian network analysis (), mutual information (MI) () and conditional mutual information (CMI) (). As one of the most popular methods, MI has been widely used to construct GRNs because it provides a natural generalization of correlation owing to its capability of characterizing non-linear dependency (). Furthermore, MI is able to deal with thousands of variables (genes) in the presence of a limited number of samples (). Despite these advantages, MI fails to distinguish indirect regulators from direct ones, i.e. it tends to overestimate the number of regulators targeting the gene. In a GRN, the indirect regulations are the main source of false positives. Although some methods have been developed recently to remove these redundant indirect regulations, such as CMI () and CMI-based path consistensy algorithm (PCA-CMI) (), the high computational complexity makes them infeasible while calculating the high order MIs. Another limitation of MI is that it only describes the correlation between two genes but is unable to determine the regulatory directions. Different from the methods based on information theory, the model-based methods have the advantage of describing the regulatory dynamics and detecting the direction of regulations (). Furthermore, prior information, such as experimentally verified regulations, can be easily included in these models to improve the accuracy of network inference (). Moreover, model-based methods are found useful to remove possible redundant indirect regulations by forcing sparseness on the model (), such as the shortcut removing technique that has been proved to be efficient in GRN inference (). In this work, we propose a novel method, namely NARROMI, to improve the accuracy of GRN inference from gene expression data using a noise and redundancy (NAR)reduction technology by combining ordinary differential equation (ODE)-based recursive optimization (RO) and informationtheory based MI, and therefore it has the advantages of both model-based and machine learning-based methods. Specifically, the noisy regulations and partial significant indirect regulations can be firstly deleted and filtered using MI as a measure of dependence, and the redundant (indirect) regulations are subsequently removed gradually by the RO algorithm, thereby reducing both false positives and false negatives. In addition, our method can determine regulatory directions without prior information of regulators. The results on simulation datasets from DREAM challenge () and experimentally confirmed network () in Escherichia coli with real gene expression data () show that our method significantly outperforms other popular methods in terms of false positives and accuracy.
CONCLUSIONWe proposed a novel method NARROMI to improve the accuracy of GRN inference by simultaneously implementing the NAR regulation reduction. In this algorithm, the noisy regulations with low pair-wise correlations and the redundant regulations from indirect regulators are removed with MI and RO, respectively. Moreover, the dimension shrinking of the technique improves the efficiency of optimization and further increases the accuracy of network inference. The method was validated on the simulated benchmark GRNs from DREAM challenge and the experimentally verified network in E. coli with real gene expression data. The cross-validation results confirmed the effectiveness of our method (NARROMI), which outperformed previous methods.