The NARWHAL software pipeline has been developed to automate the primary analysis of Illumina sequencing data. This pipeline combines a new and flexible de-multiplexing tool with open-source aligners and automated quality assessment. The entire pipeline can be run using only one simple sample-sheet for diverse sequencing applications. NARWHAL creates a sample-oriented data structure and outperforms existing tools in speed.
INTRODUCTIONMassive parallel sequencing has reduced the costs of DNA sequencing to a fraction of that of traditional Sanger sequencing by performing many immobilized reactions in parallel. At the introduction of this technology in 2007, 400 000 reactions could be performed in parallel per run (). Now, with the introduction of the latest generation of sequencing equipment, over 100 million DNA fragments are sequenced per sample. Such a large number of sequences is not necessary for many applications and are therefore better distributed over multiple samples. In multiplexing, individual DNA fragments are associated to unique DNA sequences (barcodes). These barcodes allow individual reads to be assigned to a single sample. By multiplexing many samples in a single sequencing run, the costs of functional sequencing experiments are lowered dramatically. As a result, the price of RNASeq is now similar to that of expression microarrays and the expectation is that the price of sequencing and thus RNASeq will lower even further. Due to these developments, the number of individual samples is expected to increase greatly. As many researchers do not have access to an extensive ITinfrastructure, most sequencing centers perform a basic primary analysis of the produced data and align the sequences to a reference. With the increase in the number of samples and the amount of data, the standard software, Casava (http://www.illumina.com/), has difficulty coping both in terms of sample tracking and in terms of computational efficiency. The publically available aligners Bowtie and BWA () are able to align sequencing data more efficiently than the Eland aligner of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. Casava. These open-source aligners are implemented as stand-alone command-line tools with many settings influencing their results. To run these manually for large numbers of samples with differing applications and thus settings can become quite laborious and error prone. In order to automatically process samples sequenced using the Illumina sequencers, we have developed the NARWHAL software pipeline. This pipeline combines a new and flexible de-multiplexing tool with open-source aligners and automated quality assessment.
CONCLUSIONThe NARWHAL sequence analysis pipeline allows for the automated processing and analysis of different and multiplexed datasets obtained from Illumina sequencers. NARWHAL allows easy alignment of individual samples to the reference genome of choice using predefined alignment profiles. The output files from NARWHAL are in the typical standard formats used in the field of sequencing (FastQ, SAM and BAM) and can be easily loaded into downstream analysis software. By taking these tools and pipelines into account with specific profiles, NARWHAL provides a coherent data analysis workflow with minimal hands-on time, a reduced chance of human error and faster analysis.