Motivation: Predicting the biological functions of proteins is one of the key challenges in the post-genomic era. Computational models have demonstrated the utility of applying machine learning methods to predict protein function. Most prediction methods explicitly require a set of negative examples—proteins that are known not carrying out a particular function. However, Gene Ontology (GO) almost always only provides the knowledge that proteins carry out a particular function , and functional annotations of proteins are incomplete. GO structurally organizes more than tens of thousands GO terms and a protein is annotated with several (or dozens) of these terms. For these reasons, the negative examples of a protein can greatly help distinguishing true positive examples of the protein from such a large candidate GO space. Results: In this paper, we present a novel approach (called NegGOA) to select negative examples. Specifically, NegGOA takes advantage of the ontology structure, available annotations and potentiality of additional annotations of a protein to choose negative examples of the protein. We compare NegGOA with other negative examples selection algorithms and find that NegGOA produces much fewer false negatives than them. We incorporate the selected negative examples into an efficient function prediction model to predict the functions of proteins in Yeast, Human, Mouse and Fly. NegGOA also demonstrates improved accuracy than these comparing algorithms across various evaluation metrics. In addition, NegGOA is less suffered from incomplete annotations of proteins than these comparing methods. Availability and Implementation: The Matlab and R codes are available at https://sites.google.com/ site/guoxian85/neggoa.
IntroductionGene Ontology Consortium (GOC), an international effort to provide controlled structured vocabularies for molecular biology that serve as terminologies, classifications and ontologies to further data integration, analysis and reasoning (), over the past decade, has been regularly updating the use of controlled vocabularies to describe GO terms, and also the structure relationship among terms. GOC and partners also provide GO annotations of gene products (i.e. proteins) to describe their biological functions from molecular to organism levels. Recent advances in highthroughput techniques produced various proteomic data, and also accumulated some GO annotations of these data. Yet, the pace of annotating the biological roles of these proteins by wet-lab experiments is far lagging behind the influx of biological data. On the other hand, the knowledge of functional roles of proteins can boost the pace of drug development, understanding the life process and many other potential applications (). Therefore, many groups have been applying machine learning-based methods to take advantage of the available wealth of biological data to automatically predict protein function and show the feasibility (). Despite advances in computational function prediction, few groups take into account the imbalanced nature of protein function prediction and the sparsity of GO annotations (). This is because GO mainly provides the association that a protein is annotated with a GO term, but rarely specifies which terms are not annotated to that protein. The unspecified association between a protein and a term should not be simply treated as a negative examplethe protein is not annotated with that term. This association may not be experimentally confirmed or appended into GO database by GO curators, which arises due to lack of experimental resources, biologists' research interests (). To date, there are more than 50 000 GO terms, each term corresponds to a distinct biological function, but a protein is often annotated with several or dozens of these terms. For these reasons, it is difficult to distinguish true positive examples of a protein from such a large number of candidate terms. Many function prediction algorithms ask for explicit positive and negative examples to achieve discriminative predictions. However, GO mainly provides the positive examples and rarely records the negative examples of a protein. Some approaches directly utilize available positive annotations and PPI networks (or other data sources, i.e. amino acid sequences and domain families) to rank relevant terms of proteins and predict the most relevant terms as positive annotations (). Some positive-unlabeled learning algorithms (), taking advantage of positive and unlabeled data, are introduced into protein function prediction. For example,took proteins annotated with the target term as labeled data, while proteins annotated with other terms instead of the target term as unlabeled data. This setting is motivated by the assumption that, proteins currently not annotated with the target term might be annotated with the term as more evidences accumulated. Next, they automatically selected negative examples from the unlabeled data in the learning process. In this paper, we introduce an approach called NegGOA to select negative examples of proteins. NegGOA takes advantage of a hierarchical semantic similarity between GO terms to exploit the GO hierarchy. To account for the evolvement of annotations, it applies downward random walks with restart () on the hierarchy, and on the empirical conditional probability that two terms co-annotated to a protein, to model the missing annotations. Next, it integrates the available annotations of a protein and potentiality of missing annotations to select negative examples of the protein. The empirical study on archived GOA files of Yeast, Human, Mouse and Fly genomes shows the proposed NegGOA makes much fewer false negative predictions than recently proposed and related approaches. In addition, by incorporating the negative examples selected by NegGOA (or by these related approaches) into SWSN (), a Gaussian random field-based algorithm for label propagation with positive examples and selected negative examples, NegGOA also achieves more accurate prediction than these approaches across various evaluation metrics.