Motivation: The interactions among proteins and the resulting networks of such interactions have a central role in cell biology. Aligning these networks gives us important information, such as conserved complexes and evolutionary relationships. Although there have been several publications on the global alignment of protein networks; however, none of proposed methods are able to produce a highly conserved and meaningful alignment. Moreover, time complexity of current algorithms makes them impossible to use for multiple alignment of several large networks together. Results: We present a novel algorithm for the global alignment of pro-tein–protein interaction networks. It uses a greedy method, based on the alignment scoring matrix, which is derived from both biological and topological information of input networks to find the best global network alignment. NETAL outperforms other global alignment methods in terms of several measurements, such as Edge Correctness, Largest Common Connected Subgraphs and the number of common Gene Ontology terms between aligned proteins. As the running time of NETAL is much less than other available methods, NETAL can be easily expanded to multiple alignment algorithm. Furthermore, NETAL overpowers all other existing algorithms in term of performance so that the short running time of NETAL allowed us to implement it as the first server for global alignment of protein–protein interaction networks. Availability: Binaries supported on linux are freely available for download at
INTRODUCTIONThe interactions among proteins are of high importance within the majority of biological functions. A protein may interact with another protein for the sake of modification; it also may interact to form part of a protein complex or it may carry another protein (). There are numerous experimental techniques including yeast two-hybrid () and protein co-immunoprecipitation () that demonstrate large-scale proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) for organisms, including Saccharomyces cerevisiae (), Homo sapiens () and Drosophila melanogaster (). As the data from these experiments have a lot of false-positive interactions, putting several studies containing other data types, such as gene expression into account, they have been used to reduce the number of such interactions (von). Such an analysis is the alignment between networks that identify functional or structural conserved components in species. The purpose of network alignment is to align nodes of the input networks to maximize the overall match between them. This alignment not only gives the global similarities between the networks of species but also yields knowledge about the topology of the proteins in the networks that is valuable in evolutionary biology. Given a group of such PPI networks, the scores of the pairwise alignment between them can be used to construct their phylogenetic tree. Most of the previous approaches focused on local network alignment (LNA). LNAs find local similar subnetworks that are probably conserved components either functional or structural. PathBLAST (), NetworkBLAST (), Mawish () and Graemlin 1.0 are examples of local network alignment. PathBLAST uses both BLAST similarities of the proteins and the probabilities of interactions to find the biological pathways. These probabilities indicate how much an interaction is true and is not false positive (). NetworkBLAST generates a network alignment graph based on the sequence similarities and performs a search over the network to identify conserved pathways and clusters. Mawish models the biological deletion and duplication and uses the weighted edge of the network to find the maximum weight induced subgraph. Graemlin1.0 () uses a scoring scheme based on two models, in one of which the module is subject to evolutionary constraints; however, in other proteins, the modules are under no constraints. As mapping of LNA is categorized as one-to-many mapping, it may be ambiguous. In other words, in this kind of alignment, one node can be aligned with different nodes in different local *To whom correspondence should be addressed. conserved subnetworks. Although this may indicate gene duplication, in some cases, it may cause implausibly numerous matches for a protein (). Previous LNA algorithms have not generally been able to detect large connected subgraphs that are conserved during the evolution (). In contrast, the purpose of global alignment is to find a unique correspondence between all nodes of the input networks. Such an overall alignment can result in detection of functional orthologs and cross-species variations (). The pioneering work in this area was carried out by IsoRank () that mapped the nodes of two input networks based on the similarity of their neighborhood topology. It uses a preprocessed matrix that indicates the efficiency of aligning each node of the network to all others. Afterward, IsoRankN was proposed for aligning multiple networks (). This algorithm uses original IsoRank to find the alignment scores between any pair of networks. It uses a developed PageRank-Nibble algorithm () to infer the alignment clusters based on these scores. Graemlin 2.0 () is a parameter-learning algorithm that finds the alignment between multiple networks by relying on their phylogenetic relationships. GA and PATH are based on one and two relaxations over the set of doubly stochastic matrices (). They use the same objective function that balances the matching similar pairs with increasing the number of conserved edges. PISwap () uses a local optimization to find the optimal alignment. This algorithm initially finds an alignment using only sequence data and then adjusts it by incorporating topological information. Natalie () is a lagrangian relaxation approach that uses homology information with a branch-and-bound method to compute the global alignment. HopeMap () is a parameter-free algorithm that iteratively refines the conserved regions by applying a connected-componentbased process. GRAAL () and HGRAAL () rely solely on topological network similarities based on the graphlet degree vector. Although GRAAL is a greedy seed and extend approach, HGRAAL uses Hungarian algorithm () to find the optimal alignment. MI-GRAAL () uses both node similarity and topological network similarity measures to break the ties and find a more stable alignment. Inone can see the categorization of different tools, including NETAL, which shows how the strategies are different. Broadly, network alignment algorithms (local or global) can be categorized into two groups: pairwise alignment and multiple alignment. Pairwise alignment algorithms align two PPI networks. Mawish, Natalie, HopeMap, PISwap, IsoRank, GRAAL, H-GRAAL and MI-GRAAL are examples of pairwise alignment algorithms. However, multiple alignment algorithms try to create an alignment between more than two PPI networks. IsoRankN, NetworkBLAST and Graemlin are in this group. Previous algorithms for the problem of PPI network alignment use two main approaches for scoring the alignments. Some of the algorithms such as GRAAL use solely the topology of networks, whereas most of the alignment methods like Mawish, NetworkBLAST, IsoRankN and Graemlin incorporate previous biological information about nodes, such as the similarities of protein sequences and phylogenetic relationships in PPI networks. In this article, we propose a novel algorithm, NETAL (network aligner), as a solution to the pairwise global PPI network alignment. This problem can be formulated as follows (): given two networks, find an injective mapping so each node in the smaller network is mapped to one node in the larger network. All the details of our algorithm are discussed on pairwise alignment, but it can be easily promoted to multiple alignment. This algorithm uses a scoring function based on both biological and topological information. The topological information between each pair of nodes is updated gradually during execution. The main advantages of our proposed method are finding the best global PPI alignment and the ability to find big connected common subgraph that is so useful for extracting the biological information. We compare the results of our program with MI-GRAAL, GRAAL and IsoRank to demonstrate the effectiveness and usability of our method. The reason for choosing these tools for comparison is because of the accuracy of their results in comparison with other existing tools that have been used so far.