Motivation: Discovering drugs Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification rules at molecular level is of vital importance to understand a vast majority of drugs action. However, few studies attempt to annotate drugs potential ATC-codes by computational approaches. Results: Here, we introduce drug-target network to computationally predict drugs ATC-codes and propose a novel method named NetPredATC. Starting from the assumption that drugs with similar chemical structures or target proteins share common ATC-codes, our method, NetPredATC, aims to assign drugs potential ATC-codes by integrating chemical structures and target proteins. Specifically, we first construct a gold-standard positive dataset from drugs ATC-code annotation databases. Then we characterize ATC-code and drug by their similarity profiles and define kernel function to correlate them. Finally, we use a kernel method, support vector machine, to automatically predict drugs ATC-codes. Our method was validated on four drug datasets with various target proteins, including enzymes, ion channels, G-protein couple receptors and nuclear receptors. We found that both drugs chemical structure and target protein are predictive, and target protein information has better accuracy. Further integrating these two data sources revealed more experimentally validated ATC-codes for drugs. We extensively compared our NetPredATC with SuperPred, which is a chemical similarity-only based method. Experimental results showed that our NetPredATC outperforms SuperPred not only in predictive coverage but also in accuracy. In addition, database search and functional annotation analysis support that our novel predictions are worthy of future experimental validation.
INTRODUCTIONThe Anatomical Therapeutic Chemical (ATC) classification system categorizes drug substances at different levels by their therapeutic properties, chemical properties, pharmacological properties and practical applications. This classification system is recommended by the World Health Organization (WHO), and drug's ATC-codes have been widely applied in almost all drug utilization studies (). Specifically, ATC classification system can be used as a basic tool for drug utilization research. It also provides the presentation and comparison of drug consumption statistics at international level and will greatly facilitate the recent drug repositioning and drug combination studies. Though useful, mapping ATC-codes to drugs is challenging. Recently, ATC-codes for some well-characterized drugs have been deposited in databases, such as Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) Biomolecular Relations in Information Transmission and Expression (BRITE) () and DrugBank (). These databases provide high quality expert curated data. However, they are in small scale, and the coverage is far from enough to serve practical usage. Even for some well-collected drug datasets, the ATC-code assignments for drugs are far from complete. For example, the dataset incontains drugs with four different type target proteins including enzymes, ion channels (ICs), G-protein couple receptors (GPCRs) and nuclear receptors (NRs). These drugs all have manually curated target proteins from KEGG BRITE (), BRENDA (), SuperTarget () and DrugBank (). Even in this high-quality dataset, there are 102 drugs that do not have any ATC-codes in all 445 drugs targeting enzyme, 13 drugs that do not have any ATC-codes in all 210 drugs targeting IC, 23 drugs that do not have any ATC-codes in all 223 drugs targeting GPCR, and 4 drugs that do not have any ATC-codes in all 54 drugs targeting NR. The percentage of drugs without ATC codes varies from 10 to 25%. The bottleneck is that current data collection procedure heavily relies on human curation and is not efficient. One way out is to learn the underlying ATC classification rules from the available high quality ATC-code annotations, and further automatically assign new ATC-codes to drugs by a computational predictor. This strategy will accelerate the functional characterization of drugs under the ATC classification systems, especially those barely characterized drugs. Importantly, it will greatly speed up the mechanism understanding of a vast majority of *To whom correspondence should be addressed. drugs action and narrow down the gap between the medical indications and drug effects elucidation at molecular level (). However, few studies attempt to address this important problem. Dunkel et al. tackled this challenge by proposing a computational method to classify the given compounds into ATC classification system. Their method is based on the drug similarity in chemical structures and physicochemical properties (). They also developed a useful web-server, which allows prognoses about the medical indication of novel compounds and to find new leads for known targets (). Nevertheless, the chemical structure only describes the static state of drugs. Cells use proteins and small molecules (drugs, metabolites, or ligands) networks to dynamically coordinate multiple biological functions. For instance, single drug may possess different biological functions by targeting different proteins. Therefore, if the drug target information is integrated into the prediction, the performance improvement can be expected. In this article, we follow this idea to design a new predictive method. That is, we map ATC-codes to a given drug based not only on its chemical structure similarity with other compounds but also on its target proteins. The commonly accepted assumption in drug discovery is that drugs with similar pharmacological or therapeutic properties usually share common functions (). Existing efforts demonstrated that chemical structure similarity is useful in classifying compounds into ATC classification system (). Here, we note that drug's pharmacological or therapeutic similarity may due to the fact that they interact with common or similar target proteins. Thus, it is reasonable to assume that drugs similar in target proteins usually share common ATC-codes. Starting with this assumption, we propose a novel computational approach called NetPredATC to predict potential ATC-codes for drugs. Specifically, we first construct the drug and ATCcode interaction network based on the known drug ATC-code annotations. Then we characterize ATC-code and drug by their similarity profiles and define kernel function to correlate drug with ATC-code. Finally, we infer drug's ATC-codes by training a machine-learning model, i.e. support vector machines (SVMs). SVMs are motivated by statistical learning theory and have been successful on many different classification problems in bioinformatics (). Our contributions here are not only in incorporating drug targets information for the first time into the ATC-code prediction but also in designing a novel predictive model by data integration. The performance of our method was validated on four classes of drug target proteins, including enzymes, ICs, GPCRs and NRs. We show that both chemical structure and target protein are predictive via cross-validation experiments and statistical evaluation. Moreover, target protein information is more powerful. By combining them, our method outperforms the chemical similarity-only based method, and more experimentally observed drug ATC-code annotations can be uncovered.