Motivation: Networks are vital to computational systems biology research , but visualizing them is a challenge. For networks larger than $100 nodes and $200 links, ball-and-stick diagrams fail to convey much information. To address this, we developed Network2Canvas (N2C), a web application that provides an alternative way to view networks. N2C visualizes networks by placing nodes on a square toroidal canvas. The network nodes are clustered on the canvas using simulated annealing to maximize local connections where a nodes brightness is made proportional to its local fitness. The interactive canvas is implemented in HyperText Markup Language (HTML)5 with the JavaScript library Data-Driven Documents (D3). We applied N2C to visualize 30 canvases made from human and mouse gene-set libraries and 6 canvases made from the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)-approved drug-set libraries. Given lists of genes or drugs, enriched terms are highlighted on the canvases, and their degree of clustering is computed. Because N2C produces visual patterns of enriched terms on canvases, a trained eye can detect signatures instantly. In summary , N2C provides a new flexible method to visualize large networks and can be used to perform and visualize gene-set and drug-set enrichment analyses. Availability: N2C is freely available at http://www.maayanlab.net/N2C and is open source.
INTRODUCTIONSince the late 1990s, networks have been popularized for helping to increase our understanding of complex systems across various scientific disciplines (;), including systems biology and systems pharmacology. Commonly, networks are used to model complex systems by representing the various types of entities as nodes and their relationships as links. Network representation is useful for organizing the accumulating data about the system, which allows identifying novel non-trivial relationships. For example, network representation is useful for finding clusters in proteinprotein interaction networks () or for detecting network motifs (), such as feedforward and feedback loops. In addition, selected nodes with common properties, such as disease genes or differentially expressed genes, can be projected onto networks to highlight specific regions in the system, whereas forming a network can be a first step toward modeling the system's dynamics. In the fields of systems biology and systems pharmacology, networks are used to represent proteinprotein interactions (), cell signaling pathways (), gene regulatory networks (), metabolic networks (), drug-target networks () and other types of networks where nodes and links may represent different types of relationships (). Although network representation has been proven to be useful, large networks are difficult to visualize. The most popular approach to visualize networks is ball-andstick diagrams. Many software tools are available to convert networks saved in a tabular format into a graphic ball-andstick representation (). However, when there are more than $100 nodes and 200 links, a situation that is common in systems biology and systems pharmacology, ball-and-stick diagrams fail to convey much useful information. Alternative methods such as TreeMaps (), chord diagrams () or clustered adjacency matrix heatmaps can also visualize networks. These approaches have their own advantages and disadvantages, but most of these alternative methods have not been widely adopted. In the past, we have developed the software tool grid analysis of time-series expression (GATE), which is a tool to visualize time series gene expression data on a hexagonal grid movie (). Neighboring genes on the GATE hexagonal grid can be considered connected in a network where links between genes are established based on a genegene time-series correlation. This gave us the idea that any network can be visualized on a hexagonal grid. More recently, we developed an algorithm called Sets2Networks to construct functional association genegene and drugdrug networks based on their shared properties (). Given gene-or drug-set libraries, typically used for gene-set enrichment analyses (), the algorithm converts these gene-or drug-set libraries to functional association networks (FANs) based on various measures of gene or drug co-occurrence. In the FANs, genes are connected if they share many functional terms, such as belonging to the same pathway or regulated by the same transcription factor. Using the same approach, gene-set libraries can be transposedmaking the genes the terms, and the terms the set members associated with each gene; for example, a transposed gene-set library created from the Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) signaling pathways database () can be created where a gene/protein is the term, and members of each set are pathways that contain the gene/protein. Applying the Sets2Networks algorithm on transposed gene-set libraries results in termterm FANs. Similar networks have been developed for the Cytoscape (), plug-ins BiNGO () or EnrichmentMap (), which display ball-and-stick diagrams of related gene ontology (GO) terms (). With the popular tools BiNGO and EnrichmentMap, enriched terms are visualized on the network by highlighting the enriched nodes (GO terms) in different colors and size given input gene lists entered by users. Here we implemented a new approach to visualize large networks. We project the network nodes onto a square grid canvas. The method and tool are called Network2Canvas (N2C). N2C arranges nodes on the canvas to maximize local connections where a node's brightness is made proportional to its local fitness. In addition, we use this network visualizing approach to perform gene-set enrichment analyses (). Conceptually, this approach provides similar functionality as BiNGO and EnrichmentMap, highlighting enriched terms on FANs. However, instead of visualizing termterm networks using balls-and-sticks, we visualize the networks of terms on a canvas where each square on the canvas represents a functional term, and terms are organized on the canvas based on their gene-set content similarity. This provides a condensed and appealing view of the results. Besides creating canvases for the three GO ontologiesbiological process, cellular component and molecular functionas implemented for BiNGO and EnrichmentMap, we created canvases for 27 additional gene-set libraries. To make the plots interactive, webbased, lightweight and publication ready, we implemented the application using the JavaScript library Data-Driven Documents (D3) ().