Motivation: High-throughput profiling in biological research has resulted in the availability of a wealth of data cataloguing the genetic, epigenetic and transcriptional states of cells. These data could yield discoveries that may lead to breakthroughs in the diagnosis and treatment of human disease, but require statistical methods designed to find the most relevant patterns from millions of potential interactions. Aberrant DNA methylation is often a feature of cancer, and has been proposed as a therapeutic target. However, the relationship between DNA methylation and gene expression remains poorly understood. Results: We propose Network-sparse Reduced-Rank Regression (NsRRR), a multivariate regression framework capable of using prior biological knowledge expressed as gene interaction networks to guide the search for associations between gene expression and DNA methy-lation signatures. We use simulations to show the advantage of our proposed model in terms of variable selection accuracy over alternative models that do not use prior network information. We discuss an application of NsRRR to The Cancer Genome Atlas datasets on primary ovarian tumours. Availability and implementation: R code implementing the NsRRR model is available at http://www2.
INTRODUCTIONWidespread adoption of high-throughput molecular profiling technology by the biological research community has resulted in a vast public resource of paired genomic data, where thousands of measurements of different types are available for the same biological samples. This in turn presents the opportunity to develop appropriate statistical tools to infer relationships between such paired datasets in different biological contexts (). Here we are particularly interested in identifying associations between paired DNA methylation profiles and expression levels of genes obtained from cancer samples. DNA methylation involves addition of a methyl group to cytosines in DNA. Where this is concentrated in promoter regions, it tends to lead to silencing of expression of the downstream gene. The association between DNA methylation and gene expression is far from straightforward, and DNA methylation has also been shown to be associated with active transcription of genes (). Aberrant DNA methylation has been observed in almost every type of cancer and patterns of DNA methylation have been linked to changes in gene expression that associate with the development of drug resistance. Obtaining insights into the links between DNA methylation and gene expression in cancer is expected to be particularly helpful in moving towards addressing the issue of acquired drug resistance, which remains one of the main unmet clinical needs in cancer medicine (). A number of efforts have been made recently to address the problem of detecting associations between DNA methylation and gene expression profiles. By far, the most common scenario involves the mapping of loci with DNA methylation to genes, and using some measure of association between the levels of DNA methylation and the levels of expression of the same gene. Example measures of association include Pearson's correlation coefficient () and maximal information coefficient (). In casecontrol designs, a common approach consists in first identifying differentially methylated sites and differentially expressed traits, often using standard two-sample univariate statistical tests (e.g. a t-test), and then comparing the two resulting lists to detect potential overlaps () In this article, we take a predictive modelling approach in which we aim to identify a subset of DNA methylation measurements that are highly predictive of a subset of gene expression traits across a set of heterogeneous biological samples that, nonetheless, share some characteristic of interest (e.g. patients with the same disease, and for which control samples may not be available). The precise mechanisms by which DNA methylation influence gene expression are far from fully understood, particularly when it comes to inter-and intra-genic methylation (), and trans-acting regulation in which the 3D structure of chromatin enables interactions between nonadjacent regions of the genome (). A recent study investigating genome-wide epigenetic and transcriptional changes following acquisition of platinum resistance in ovarian cancer cell lines showed that only a small proportion of genes with an increase in DNA methylation had a corresponding down-regulation of gene expression (). For this reason, and to identify patterns of regulation where multiple *To whom correspondence should be addressed. sites of methylation can drive a systematic alteration of a functional expression program (akin to a higher eukaryotic equivalent of a bacterial operon), we do not wish to restrict our discovery to only those interactions for which each CpG locus is mapped to a gene and directly related to that same gene's expression level. Instead, we would like to be able to identify clear relationships between varying levels of DNA methylation at any loci and corresponding changes in expression of any genes, ideally with some relevance to some biological function. The simplest approach to this problem would consist of fitting all possible univariate linear regression models, in which each gene expression value is regressed on each DNA methylation level, and all the resulting pairs are ranked based on the magnitude and/or statistical significance of the regression coefficients. We will refer to this method as mass-univariate linear modelling (MULM). Such an approach, however, has two major drawbacks: first, because of the large number of hypothesis tests that are simultaneously carried out, the experiment-wide significance level would be far too stringent; second, all predictors and responses are modelled as statistically independent while also ignoring any functional relationship between genes. To tackle these limitations, we present a multivariate regression model for the simultaneous selection of highly predictive DNA methylation predictors and the most predictable gene expression profiles. The high dimensionality and the small sample size pose the challenging problems of coefficient estimation and variable selection. Models involving dimension reduction techniques in conjunction with ' 1 penalization on the coefficients, such as sparse partial least squares (sPLS), have been explored in related applications, including the integrated analysis of paired 'omics' data (l e). In this work, we adopt a reduced-rank regression (RRR) approach, which assumes a linear association between DNA methylation and gene expression variables; the predictor vectors are projections of the methylation variables matrix into a lower dimensional space, and the response vectors are projections of the gene expression variables into a lower dimensional space. In light of the complex interactions between nucleic acids, proteins and metabolites in all organisms, networks have become fundamental in the understanding of biological systems. In fact, these networks appear to underpin biological processes found throughout living things. For instance, in a recent methylationgene expression study, while validating the findings of top-ranking gene pairs, a substantially larger proportion of them were found to be connected in the ProteinProtein Interaction (PPI) network compared with the expected number from a random distribution (). Multiple interacting components work together in functional modules to bring about disease phenotypes or other traits (). From a statistical standpoint, the utilization of prior information encoded in biological networks provides a form of regularization, and has been shown to improve inference from highdimensional datasets (). We seek to improve variable selection accuracy and the interpretability of our regression model by guiding variable selection to highlight sets of comethylated and co-expressed genes that are known to co-operate in enacting some biological processes. This is achieved by extending our previous work () on penalized regression through the use of an additional penalty function on the regression coefficients, which incorporates prior information regarding the functional relatedness between predictor variables and between response variables, respectively. We call the resulting model Network-sparse Reduced-Rank Regression (NsRRR). When the response variable is univariate, incorporating such structural information to encourage the selection of mutually interacting genes has been shown to give improved variable selection result in terms of both accuracy and interpretability (). Here we extend this principle to multivariate responses arising when studying genome-wide expression levels. An illustration of the NsRRR principle is given in, in which trivial networks of predictor variables and response variables are shown, with an example of possible sets of selected variables highlighted in a darker colour. For example, if variation in the levels of the darker response variables is explained by variation in the darker predictor variables, they are likely to be selected in the NsRRR model because each set is also connected within its respective network topology. The remainder of the article is organized as follows: In Section 2, we introduce the NsRRR model, the estimation algorithm and a procedure for parameter tuning. In Section 3, we report on extensive simulation studies set up to explore the properties of the model, and compare its performance on alternative approaches using both artificial and real datasets. In Section 4, we present an integrative analysis of ovarian cancer data containing genome-wide profiles of both DNA methylation and gene expressions.