Motivation: Networks and pathways are important in describing the collective biological function of molecular players such as genes or proteins. In many areas of biology, for example in cancer studies, available data may harbour undiscovered subtypes which differ in terms of network phenotype. That is, samples may be heterogeneous with respect to underlying molecular networks. This motivates a need for unsupervised methods capable of discovering such subtypes and elucidating the corresponding network structures. Results: We exploit recent results in sparse graphical model learning to put forward a network clustering approach in which data are partitioned into subsets that show evidence of underlying, subset-level network structure. This allows us to simultaneously learn subset-specific networks and corresponding subset membership under challenging small-sample conditions. We illustrate this approach on synthetic and proteomic data. Availability:
INTRODUCTIONNetworks and pathways are important in understanding the collective biological function of molecular components such as genes or proteins. The importance of network-based thinking in current biology has motivated a rich body of work in bioinformatics on modelling approaches for biological networks, including networks involved in gene regulation and protein signalling (including). Most studies have focused on the case in which biochemical data are treated as homogeneous with respect to an underlying biological network structure. That is, the assumption is made that a single network model is broadly appropriate for a given set of data. This is a reasonable approach in many cases where it is clear that biological samples share overall phenotype, or where data can be filtered into roughly homogeneous groups using appropriate markers. However, in many scenarios available data may contain subtypes which differ * To whom correspondence should be addressed. in terms of underlying network structure. A topical example comes from cancer biology. Molecular studies have revealed a number of subtypes of cancer () that have been found to differ markedly in terms of both biology and response to treatment. The genomic aberrations harboured by such subtypes may in turn be manifested in terms of differences in gene regulatory or protein signalling networks. In settings where subtypes have already been characterized, this observation may simply motivate stratification by subtype in advance of network modelling or supervised network-based approaches (e.g.). However, when such biological heterogeneity has not been characterized a priori this is not possible. Moreover, if there are hitherto unknown subtypes which differ at the level of network structure, discovering the subtypes and elucidating their corresponding networks itself becomes an important biological goal. This article develops an unsupervised analysis called network clustering, which seeks to partition data that is heterogeneous in the sense described above into subsets showing evidence of shared underlying network structure. This is an approach which we believe has broad utility. For example, in the study of human diseases it is becoming clear that traditional diagnostic classifications may, in many cases, understate underlying molecular heterogeneity, often with therapeutic consequences. Indeed, in the cancer arena, the task of discovering cancer subtypes and developing treatment regimes that are subtype specific is emerging as one of crucial importance. Of course, biological subtypes may differ dramatically at the level of mean response, say in terms of gene or protein expression. In such cases, existing clustering methods are well suited to probing heterogeneity (and have successfully done so in many studies) and indeed a small number of key biomarkers may be sufficient to discover and discriminate subtypes. But when differences are truly at the network or pathway level, conventional clustering approaches are likely to prove inadequate, for reasons we discuss below. However, the network clustering problem stated here is a challenging one. Network inferencefrom a single, homogeneous datasetitself remains a non-trivial task and the subject of much ongoing work. The learning of network structure within an unsupervised framework is doubly challenging, because multiple rounds of network inference are likely to be needed, often at small sample sizes, in the same way that a standard clustering method typically involves multiple rounds of estimation on data subsets (or 'soft' equivalents thereof). We discuss below how we address these concerns by using undirected graphical models and exploiting recent work on 1-penalized inference. The manner in which molecular players vary in concert, i.e. their covariance, is central to the statistical description of the networks