Motivation: Only a few large systematic studies have evaluated the impact of copy number variants (CNVs) on common diseases. Several million individuals have been genotyped on single nucleotide variation arrays, which could be used for genome-wide CNVs association studies. However, CNV calls remain prone to false positives and only empirical filtering strategies exist in the literature. To overcome this issue, we defined a new quality score (QS) estimating the probability of a CNV called by PennCNV to be confirmed by other software. Results: Out-of-sample comparison showed that the correlation between the consensus CNV status and the QS is twice as high as it is for any previously proposed CNV filters. ROC curves displayed an AUC higher than 0.8 and simulations showed an increase up to 20% in statistical power when using QS in comparison to other filtering strategies. Superior performance was confirmed also for alternative consensus CNV definition and through improving known CNV-trait associations. Availability and Implementation: http://goo.gl/T6yuFM
IntroductionGenetic variations range from single nucleotide variations (SNPs) to large chromosomal rearrangement (aneuploidy). Within this spectrum deleted, inserted and duplicated stretches of nucleotides longer than 1 kb (sometimes 500 bp with the use of deep coverage NextGeneration Sequencing) are referred to as copy number variants (CNVs) (). CNVs have been found genome-wide in both disease and healthy populations (). Their function has been widely studied, in the context of the rare diseasesrare variant paradigm () or as motor of evolution (). Association with complex traits such as BMI has been shown in the case of the 16p11.2 rearrangement (), but also with cognitive functions in several general population cohorts [Decode () and Estonia (. Most successful CNV association studies are based on candidate gene approaches () andunlike SNPstheir genome-wide impact has not yet been fully elucidated.Consequently, large genome-wide CNV studies would be instrumental to decipher the impact of genetic rearrangements underlying complex traits and disease susceptibility. Initially, extremely large copy number alterations (35 megabases) were detected using karyotyping (). Then, fluorescence in situ hybridization increased the resolution enabling the detection of sub-microscopic events (). Nowadays, CNVs can be detected using different molecular technologies and methods. NGS technologies allow sequencing millions of reads in parallel and new methods for structural variants analysis have been developed, including paired-end mapping, read-depth analysis, split-read strategies and sequence assembly comparisons (). The other main methods to detect CNVs are based on micro-array technologies, either Comparative Genome Hybridization (CGH) arrays () or SNP genotyping arrays (). We focused on CNV detection based on SNP genotyping arrays, as millions of individuals have already been genotyped on SNP arrays and many of these samples were used in meta-analysis of Genome-Wide Association Studies (GWAS) (). Thus, a wealth of unexploited information remains available in these cohorts and could be re-analyzed for genome-wide CNVs association. The flip side of using genotyping arrays is the lower reliability of the CNV detection, as these platforms were not initially designed to detect such genomic events. However, more recent ones can contain CNV probes. Despite this limitation, several algorithms have been developed for CNV detection. At each probe, a relative copy number ratio can be obtained by combining the intensities of the two alleles and normalizing this quantity with respect to a reference (log R ratio LRR). Deviation from the copy number ratio baseline will correspond to either a loss or gain. Several publicly available software () improve copy number calls by exploiting the ratio of allelic intensities (normalized measure of the signal intensity ratio of the B and A allelesB Allele FrequencyBAF). In this article, we focus on the PennCNV software (), currently the most widely used software for Illumina chips (PennCNV: 955 citationsQuantiSNP: 432 citations). This software, based on a Hidden Markov Model (HMM), is extensively used for CNV detection on SNP. Its speed is a key advantage as number of available samples increase at an unprecedented scale. Nevertheless, CNV detection remains prone to false positives, which adds noise when such calls are used for trait association. There is a need to develop a new quality score (QS) for CNVs detected by PennCNV, prior to performing CNV-based association studies. Our contribution can be viewed as a post-processing step of PennCNV calls, whereby various CNV metrics are combined to estimate the probability of a called CNV to be a likely consensus call. This probability could then be used as copy number dosage for trait associations. We chose to improve CNV detection in a way that is directly applicable for large meta-analytic GWAS, where analysts preferably want to run only a single and fast CNV calling pipeline and provide association summary statistics from various platforms.
DiscussionOur QS has been built in order to estimate the probability of a CNV to be a consensus call based on the fact that consensus CNV is defined as the overlap of CNV calls from three distinct software applied to Illumina genotyping arrays. We have demonstrated through ROC, correlation and power analyses that our QS can better recover consensus CNVs than other CNV quality metrics. Naturally, many other consensus definitions could be used. For example, CNVs called by only one other software may not necessarily be false and hence could have been classified as neither false, nor true calls. This definition of consensus, however, did not change the conclusions (Supplementary Figs. S22S24). Using trio data, we have also explored a definition where CNV calls confirmed in (at least) one of the parents are deemed as consensus CNVs. Notably, our QS recovered these consensus calls significantly better than other quality measures and filters. Finally, we demonstrated the advantage of the QS through (re-)discovering the known 16p11.2 CNV-BMI associations in the UK Biobank. Here again, association P-values for the QS were 10-fold smaller than those of any other CNV quality metric. We thus recommend the use of this metric, as a probabilistic CNV dosage for CNV association studies. This metric has been used to search association between CNV load and cognitive phenotypes in unselected populations (). Our CNV calls reliably led to stronger association results and retrieved the same CNV frequencies as in the discovery cohort [where some CNVs have been manually confirmed (. It would have been possible to define the consensus as the overlap between CNV calls from multiple genotyping technologies [e.g. genotyping arrays, array CGH (aCGH) or whole genome sequencing (WGS)] applied for the same study participants. Unfortunately, even though aCGH is widely used for CNVs detection in clinical settings, there is no gold standard software () for genome-wide CNV calling in large population samples. Similarly, algorithms calling CNVs from WGS are in early stages (). Another problem is data availability: there are over hundred-fold more population-based samples available with genotyping chip data than those with aCGH or WGS. An additional problem for WGS is that the coverage is usually below 10, which insufficient for reliable CNV calling (http:// www.haplotype-reference-consortium.org/). In the future, when such data become available on larger scale one can apply our approach to other consensus CNV definitions. Over the past years, many GWAS based on Illumina SNP array data have been performed for different traits (). All these data could be reanalyzed to perform CNV association studies using our QS as CNV allele dosage for associations just like the currently used imputed genotype dosages (). This would allow a better filtering and would increase statistical power especially for rare deletions as it has been demonstrated in the Results. Such rare variants 0.0 0.5 1.0 1.5 2.. CNV-phenotype association simulation based on deletions detected in the Hypergenes Geneva samples. Associations were done with different quality metrics such as the QS, the confidence score, the classical filters: A (), B (), C (), D () and E (), as defined the method section, and the raw CNV calls. CNVs were classified according to their precision and frequency. The frequency range for this boxplot is between 1 and 5% while the precision range is between 10 and 20%. This plot shows the statistical power as a function of the effect size for the different quality metrics. N corresponds to the number of unique probes being in the precision and CNV frequency window have to be meta-analyzed in a way such that the imputation quality is taken into account in the meta-analysis. As shown in our simulations, the power advantage offered by the QS may not be remarkable for individual cohorts, but much more so in the context of meta-analysis facilitating the collection of large samples. Although larger and larger association studies of common/rare single nucleotide variants reveal increasing proportions of the 'missing heritability', rare CNVs are relatively neglected apart from a few successful examples (). Therefore, as a future work, we will apply this quality measure in the context of large meta-analytic CNV-association studies on anthropometric traits. In particular, for BMI, the heritability of which is estimated to be 4070%, but common variants seem to account for 25% (). To this purpose, we wrapped up the QS calculation in a pipeline designed to run CNV trait associations. This pipeline has been tested with 18 analysts (on 70 000 samples) and is available online (http://goo.gl/T6yuFM).