Motivation: The generation of time series transcriptomic datasets collected under multiple experimental conditions has proven to be a powerful approach for disentangling complex biological processes, allowing for the reverse engineering of gene regulatory networks (GRNs). Most methods for reverse engineering GRNs from multiple datasets assume that each of the time series were generated from networks with identical topology. In this study, we outline a hierarchical, non-parametric Bayesian approach for reverse engineering GRNs using multiple time series that can be applied in a number of novel situations including: (i) where different, but overlapping sets of transcription factors are expected to bind in the different experimental conditions; that is, where switching events could potentially arise under the different treatments and (ii) for inference in evolutionary related species in which orthologous GRNs exist. More generally, the method can be used to identify context-specific regulation by leveraging time series gene expression data alongside methods that can identify putative lists of transcription factors or transcription factor targets. Results: The hierarchical inference outperforms related (but non-hierarchical) approaches when the networks used to generate the data were identical, and performs comparably even when the networks used to generate data were independent. The method was subsequently used alongside yeast one hybrid and microarray time series data to infer potential transcriptional switches in Arabidopsis thaliana response to stress. The results confirm previous biological studies and allow for additional insights into gene regulation under various abiotic stresses.
INTRODUCTIONThe generation and analysis of highly resolved time series datasets measuring transcriptional change has become an increasingly common and powerful approach for disentangling complex biological processes, with several consortia having generated detailed time series under different experimental conditions/ perturbations, for example, the AtGenExpress consortium (To whom correspondence should be) or PRESTA consortium 1 (). A major goal in the analysis of such data is the identification of regulatory relationships by reverse engineering gene regulatory networks (GRNs). Recent approaches for the reverse engineering of GRNs from time series data make use of nonparametric Bayesian learning strategies that have proven competitive with other state-of-the-art approaches, particularly when learning from multiple datasets (). To be computationally manageable, these methods assume that the number of transcription factor (TF) proteins binding the promoter region of a given gene at any given time are limited, corresponding to a fan-in restriction. Recent studies using yeast one-hybrid screens of Arabidopsis thaliana TFs, however, suggest that large numbers of TFs have the potential to bind any given gene (). Additionally, in order for these nonparametric methods to learn from multiple datasets, it was assumed that the individual time series were generated from networks with identical topology. In light of the number of TF-binding promoter regions, it is likely that most organisms use a series of transcriptional switches to cope with the variety of stresses and environmental challenges they face, with the TFs binding under a given condition not necessarily the same as those binding in another condition or in different tissues. In these situations, the number of TFs binding under any given condition is likely to be fewer than the total number that can possibly bind. Consequently, it is of interest to identify which subsets of TFs are binding under different conditions, by identifying treatment-specific GRNs which may, or may not share some common structure. In this regard, identifying context-specific regulatory networks represents a useful way of combining time series gene expression data with methods that can identify putative transcriptional regulators, including yeast one-hybrid () and multiple ChIP-chip/Seq experiments (). Alternatively, the GRNs of evolutionarily related species might be expected to share some common structure by virtue of a shared ancestral network. Time series data generated in the two species could therefore be informative of one another. In these cases, it might be of interest to identify the similarities and differences in the GRNs of the two species (). Such an approach could prove immensely useful for leveraging information from simpler, but better understood model systems, into more complex organisms, allowing for useful biological insights, such as addressing why
DISCUSSIONRecent approaches for reverse engineering GRNs make use of nonparametric Bayesian methods () and have proven competitive with other approaches (; Penfold and Wild, 2011). A key advantage of these nonparametric approaches is their ability to learn from multiple experimental perturbations. To do so, however, these methods must make assumptions about the number of TFs that can bind any given gene, and further assume that each of the time series (perturbations) were generated from an identical network. These assumptions do not appear to hold in vivo, where large numbers of TFs can bind, albeit with different subsets likely acting under different perturbations/conditions. To address these limitations, we have used a hierarchical modelling framework that that should be applicable to a variety of novel situations including:(1) Modelling GRNs under different experimental conditions, different tissues or ecotypes, where different but overlapping sets of transcription factors are expected to bind in the different treatments, with a limited number of TFs binding under any given condition/tissue/ecotype.(2) Modelling of orthologous networks in evolutionary-related species, where orthologous genes are expected to form similar (but non-identical) networks. In these situations, the hyperparent can be interpreted as the network structure of a common ancestor, with the individual temperature parameters representing evolutionary distance from the common ancestor.(3) For leveraging multiple sources of (potentially contradictory) prior information, such as competing network structures, similar to the use in Werhli and Husmeier (2007).