Motivation: The model bacterium Escherichia coli is among the best studied prokaryotes, yet nearly half of its proteins are still of unknown biological function. This is despite a wealth of available large-scale physical and genetic interaction data. To address this, we extended the GeneMANIA function prediction web application developed for model eukaryotes to support E.coli. Results: We integrated 48 distinct E.coli functional interaction data-sets and used the GeneMANIA algorithm to produce thousands of novel functional predictions and prioritize genes for further functional assays. Our analysis achieved cross-validation performance comparable to that reported for eukaryotic model organisms, and revealed new functions for previously uncharacterized genes in specific biopro-cesses, including components required for cell adhesion, iron–sulphur complex assembly and ribosome biogenesis. The GeneMANIA approach for network-based function prediction provides an innovative new tool for probing mechanisms underlying bacterial bioprocesses. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONAs the primary model organism for microbial biology, Escherichia coli has been studied for decades using countless large-and smallscale biochemical assays of gene function. More recently, the physical (proteinprotein) and functional (genegene or epistatic) relationships between E.coli genes have been extensively studied by our group () and others () in the hopes of understanding the entire complement of biological pathways in a prokaryotic organism. These studies have revealed much of the physical and functional organization of the E.coli bacterial proteome. However, as many of the low-throughput studies were particularly concerned with specific, smaller groups of genes, and the larger scale studies were conducted using methodologies that inherently enrich for certain physical (i.e. transient versus more stable protein interactions) or genetic interactions, defining a single pathway level map of E.coli function can be problematic. Complicating matters further is the inherent difficulty in querying, navigating, and visualizing such complex biological networks in a meaningful way as each study only identifies part of the map and is idiosyncratically biased. Thus, despite rapid progress, we are far from understanding the biological roles and functional relationships of the 4247 E.coli genes from an integrated 'systems' perspective. As $ 45% (1925 of 4247) of this organism's genome (i.e. K-12 W3110) still remains functionally unannotated, methods more sensitive at interpreting existing data appear warranted. Underlying this disconnect between the volume of data available and the lack of annotation is a paucity of user friendly tools for the accurate and automatic inference of a gene's function. While many gene function prediction systems based on functional interaction networks exist (), few are readily available for prokaryotes [e.g. eNet (); EcID (); STRING (, and none consider the breadth of evidence supporting functional interactions available today, such as phenomics and epistatic interactions, which have only recently become available. Here, we extend the GeneMANIA resource to support E.coli () for gene function prediction. We validate novel predictions supporting a role in iron (Fe)-sulphur (S) cluster binding, cell adhesion and ribosomal protein degradation and biogenesis for more than half a dozen uncharacterized (orphaned) E.coli genes. An online implementation of GeneMANIA including all E.coli biological *To whom correspondence should be addressed. networks used to generate our predictions has been made publically available (www.genemania.org), and we have also created a stand-alone program and plugin for the Cytoscape network visualization environment (). We find that integration of these E.coli datasets into a single unified network using GeneMANIA furthers our understanding of how bacterial components are connected in complexes and pathways, and enables functional prediction of previously uncharacterized or under-characterized bacterial gene products.