Motivation: Tests of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) from microarray experiments are based on the null hypothesis that genes that are irrelevant to the phenotype/stimulus are expressed equally in the target and control samples. However, this strict hypothesis is not always true, as there can be several transcriptomic background differences between target and control samples, including different cell/tissue types, different cell cycle stages and different biological donors. These differences lead to increased false positives, which have little biological/medical significance. Result: In this article, we propose a statistical framework to identify DEGs between target and control samples from expression microarray data allowing transcriptomic background differences between these samples by introducing a modified null hypothesis that the gene expression background difference is normally distributed. We use an iterative procedure to perform robust estimation of the null hypothesis and identify DEGs as outliers. We evaluated our method using our own triplicate microarray experiment, followed by validations with reverse transcription– polymerase chain reaction (RT–PCR) and on the MicroArray Quality Control dataset. The evaluations suggest that our technique (i) results in less false positive and false negative results, as measured by the degree of agreement with RT–PCR of the same samples, (ii) can be applied to different microarray platforms and results in better reproducibility as measured by the degree of DEG identification concordance both intra-and inter-platforms and (iii) can be applied efficiently with only a few microarray replicates. Based on these evaluations, we propose that this method not only identifies more reliable and biologically/medically significant DEG, but also reduces the power-cost tradeoff problem in the microarray field. Availability: Source code and binaries freely available for download at
INTRODUCTIONMicroarray technology is widely used for gene expression analysis of biological samples that undergo different treatments or represent different phenotypic groups. The treated sample or the group of interest is called the 'target', and the other sample/group is called the 'control'. One of the most important usages of such an experimental design is to identify genes that are differentially expressed between target and control. This is usually achieved by statistical tests using biological replicates (replicates using different biological cases) and technical replicates (replicates of a single case on multiple arrays) (). Usually t-test or analysis of variance on the equality of mean microarray gene expression measurement between the target group and the control group are employed to identify differentially expressed gene (DEG) (). Fold change (FC) method is also used as a simple and empirical alternative. More sophisticated tests, such as shrinkage methods () are available and possess greater power. All of these methods are based on the null hypothesis that genes that are irrelevant to the phenotype/stimulus are expressed equally in the target and control samples. However, this strict hypothesis is not always true, as there can be several transcriptomic background differences between target and control, including different cell/tissue types, different cell cycle stages and different biological donors. These differences lead to increased false positives, which have no biological/medical significance, when traditional statistical tests are employed. For example, when the sample size is large, the testing of gene expression differences between brain tissue samples and blood samples will identify most genes as DEG. Following the traditional framework investigators will also exhaust their financial resources to maximize the sample size in order to gain greater power for the identification of smaller gene expression differences (). However, the small differences they seek may be simply explained by the aforementioned transcriptomic background differences, which are irrelevant to the phenotype or stimulus of interest. To overcome the problems that can be encountered when using the traditional statistical testing framework, we propose a new approach to identify DEG in the presence of different transcriptomic backgrounds. We extend and broaden the traditional null hypothesis of no difference to normal distributed differences and identifyPage: 1432 14311436
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we present a statistical framework to identify DEGs from microarray experiments in the presence of transcriptomic background differences between target and control samples. We evaluate its performance by our own triplicate microarray experiment followed by RTPCR validation and a comparison with the MAQC dataset on multiple microarray platforms. Our method can reduce both false positive and false negative (in biological/medical sense) results and can be applied effectively with fewer replicates compared with other methods. The technique is also portable across different microarray platforms. Its reproducibility is not only higher than the traditional t-test, but is also robust, since it is not greatly affected by the significance cutoff threshold. This method brings new insight to the significance of DEGs and may provide supporting evidence for those DEGs that would be accepted by more biomedical investigators. The definition of statistical significance depends on how the null hypothesis is defined. Currently, most methods define the null hypotheses as d g = 0 and develop a corresponding testing framework. This null hypothesis, however, is too idealistic and sensitive if its biological meaning is seriously considered. In reality, cells or biological tissues can never be exactly the same, especially after undergoing different treatments: (i) suppose we have highly matched cells lines, and the cell expression network changed as a whole after the treatment. We can image that expression level goes up and down across different genes, but only those leading genes indicated by obvious response to the treatment is of our interest while the rest result from background expression differences; (ii) many experimental designs are not so perfect that they compare different cells at different time points, different tissues and different status (e.g. cancer and nearby tissue). Another example is the benchmark datasets created by MAQC consortium compares human universal RNA against human brain RNA. Slight variations in d g around zero should be allowed, otherwise the null hypothesis will be always rejected when the sample size is large enough, which would result in many meaningless positive findings. Therefore, in this article, the null hypothesis was loosened to become more realistic and robust, as indicated by d g  N(0, 2 0 ). The marginal distribution of the sample-averaged target-control difference was still normally distributed, even with the addition of the unknown variance  2 0. Given that the number of genes in microarray experiment is usually large, the overall variance  2 can be estimated using the transcriptome-wide distribution of d g. The robust estimators MAD or Qn were selected to estimate  2 0 in the presence of DEG pollution. Although MAD is easy and quick to calculate, it has a low Gaussian efficiency (37%). On the other hand, the Qn calculation is computationally slow but has a high Gaussian efficiency (82%) (). Both MAD and Qn have the maximum 50% breakdown point, at which their maximum robustness is indicated. Our method assumes that the mean target-control difference of the g-th gene is distributed as d g  N(d g ,  2 1 ). In order to ensure that this assumption can be approximately held, the signal should be properly normalized and transformed. In this article, quantile normalization and the Box-Cox power transformation were selected. Extensive comparison between these two methods and other methods was not performed, since they work well enough on our dataset (). The RTPCR significance cutoff was set to a 2-fold change, which is consistent with that used by the fold change methods. This cutoff is arbitrary but generally acceptable by biomedical investigators. The high degree of concordance of our results with those obtained in the RTPCR analyses suggests that the DEGs identified by highthroughput microarray experiments using our method can be trusted and applied to other situations with little risk. Our findings demonstrate that the reproducibility/portability of our method is higher than that of t-test. This is because t-test requires estimation of individual gene variance which is inaccurate and unstable in small sample size, thus its reproducibility is limited. On the contrary, our method estimates one common variance (contributed by both background variance and measuring variance) across thousands of genes and thus is more stable and reproducible.