Given a set of biallelic molecular markers, such as SNPs, with genotype values encoded numerically on a collection of plant, animal or human samples, the goal of genetic trait prediction is to predict the quantitative trait values by simultaneously modeling all marker effects. Genetic trait prediction is usually represented as linear regression models. In many cases, for the same set of samples and markers, multiple traits are observed. Some of these traits might be correlated with each other. Therefore, modeling all the multiple traits together may improve the prediction accuracy. In this work, we view the multitrait prediction problem from a machine learning angle: as either a multitask learning problem or a multiple output regression problem, depending on whether different traits share the same genotype matrix or not. We then adapted multitask learning algorithms and multiple output regression algorithms to solve the multitrait prediction problem. We proposed a few strategies to improve the least square error of the prediction from these algorithms. Our experiments show that mod-eling multiple traits together could improve the prediction accuracy for correlated traits.
IntroductionWhole genome prediction of complex phenotypic traits using highdensity genotyping arrays has attracted lots of attention, as it is relevant to the fields of plant and animal breeding and genetic epidemiology (). Given a set of biallelic molecular markers, such as SNPs, with genotype values typically encoded as {0, 1, 2} on a collection of plant, animal or human samples, the goal is to predict the quantitative trait values by simultaneously modeling all marker effects. The problem is called genetic trait prediction or genomic selection. More specifically, the genetic trait prediction problem is defined as follows. Given n training samples, each with m ) n genotype values (we use 'feature', 'marker', 'genotype', 'SNP' interchangeably) and a trait value, and a set of n 0 test samples each with the same set of genotype values but without trait value, the task is to train a predictive model from the training samples to predict the trait value, or phenotype of each test sample based on their genotype values. Let Y be the trait value of the training samples. The problem is usually represented as the following linear regression model:where X i is the ith genotype value, m is the total number of genotypes and b i is the regression coefficient for the ith genotype, e l is the error term. There have been lots of work on predicting genetic trait values from genotype data, such as rrBLUP (Ridge regression BLUP) (), Elastic-Net, Lasso, Ridge Regression (), Bayes A, Bayes B (), Bayes C p () and Bayesian Lasso (), as well as other machine learning methods. Most of the work assumes that for each set of samples there is only one trait, and therefore, a single regression is conducted to predict the trait value. However, in reality, it is quite often the case that we could observe and measure multiple traits rather than one, especially for crops and animals. For example, for plant dataset, once we obtain a fruit, we could measure its weight, size, etc. This will give us multiple traits. Obviously some V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press.