NucleusJ is a simple and user-friendly ImageJ plugin dedicated to the characterization of nuclear morphology and chromatin organization in 3D. Starting from image stacks, the nuclear boundary is delimited by combining the Otsu segmentation method with optimization of nuclear sphericity. Chromatin domains are segmented by partitioning the nucleus using a 3D watershed algorithm and by thresholding a contrast measure over the resulting regions. As output, NucleusJ quantifies 15 parameters including shape and size of nuclei as well as intra-nuclear objects and their position within the nucleus. A step-by-step documentation is available for self-training, together with data sets of nuclei with different nuclear organization. Availability and implementation: Dataset of nuclei is available at https://www.gred-clermont.fr/ media/WorkDirectory.zip. NucleusJ is available at http://imagejdocu.tudor.lu/
IntroductionThe nucleus is a compartmentalized organelle containing distinct chromosomal domains and a variety of nuclear bodies. Organization and positioning of chromatin domains within the nuclear space, such as clusters of heterochromatin termed chromocentres (), impact gene expression (). To link nuclear structure and function, imaging tools that quantify nuclear morphology, positioning and organization of chromatin domains in three dimensions (3D) are needed. Although proprietary softwares or open source programs such as NEMO and TANGO are available (), they either require financial investment or minimal knowledge of image processing algorithms. Our NucleusJ plugin assembles a complete set of methods in a coherent strategy, quantifies 15 different nuclear and chromatin parameters and does not require expertise in image analysis.
ConclusionComputational image analysis provides precise, objective and reproducible quantitative data from images. Our plugin generates, within a few steps, 3D quantitative measurements from single images or large data sets, without requiring expertise in image analysis. Nuclear domains visible with DNA dyes, such as chromocentres, are not specific to plants. NucleusJ will, therefore, be useful for a large community of users interested in quantifying size and shape of nuclei, nuclear objects or chromatin domains as well as positioning of the latter in nuclear space. In the future, we expect to improve our segmentation methods, to extend NucleusJ to quantify fluorescent in situ hybridization (FISH) and immunochemistry signals and to define a new method to automatically segment chromocentres.