Oasis is a web application that allows for the fast and flexible online analysis of small-RNA-seq (sRNA-seq) data. It was designed for the end user in the lab, providing an easy-to-use web frontend including video tutorials, demo data and best practice step-by-step guidelines on how to analyze sRNA-seq data. Oasis exclusive selling points are a differential expression module that allows for the multivariate analysis of samples, a classification module for robust biomarker detection and an advanced programming interface that supports the batch submission of jobs. Both modules include the analysis of novel miRNAs, miRNA targets and functional analyses including GO and pathway enrichment. Oasis generates downloadable interactive web reports for easy visualization, exploration and analysis of data on a local system. Finally, Oasis modular workflow enables for the rapid (re-) analysis of data.
IntroductionSmall RNAs play pivotal roles in many biological processes, ranging from organismal development to disease states including cancer. As such, they have gained recent interest not only in basic research, but also as therapeutic targets and biomarkers of disease in clinical settings (). The current method of choice for small RNA analysis is deep sequencing, which allows for the comprehensive charting of small RNAs at a reasonable price. Consequently, it is not the generation of data but the subsequent analysis that is usually limiting. To this end several web applications have been developed that allow for the analysis of small-RNA-seq (sRNA-seq) data. Especially recent additions to the small RNA analysis landscape convince with their user friendliness, analysis portfolio and their performance. These include MAGI (), an all-in-one application featuring structured interactive output, ISRNA () which combines powerful search functionality with an online project database and CPSS () a web application that detects miRNA edits and modifications. Although many good web platforms for the analysis of sRNAseq data exist some important analysis features have yet to be integrated. For example, no current web application allows for multivariate data analysis, including multi-group comparisons and the incorporation of covariate and interaction information. Also, there is currently no web application that allows for the identification of biomarkers of disease via integrated machine-learning modules. Finally, current sRNA-seq web services do not allow for automated analysis or batch submission of jobs via an advanced programming interface (API), a feature that would greatly facilitate analysis workflows for frequent users. In the end, these functionalities should be paired with a solid prediction of novel miRNAs, their targets and functional analyses using gene ontology and pathway enrichment.