Motivation: Mass spectrometry-based iTRAQ protein quantification is a high-throughput assay for determining relative protein expressions and identifying disease biomarkers. Processing and analysis of these large and complex data involves a number of distinct components and it is desirable to have a pipeline to efficiently integrate these together. To date, there are limited public available comprehensive analysis pipelines for iTRAQ data and many of these existing pipelines have limited visualization tools and no convenient interfaces with downstream analyses. We have developed a new open source comprehensive iTRAQ analysis pipeline, OCAP, integrating a wavelet-based preprocessing algorithm which provides better peak picking, a new quantification algorithm and a suite of visualizsation tools. OCAP is mainly developed in C++ and is provided as a standalone version (OCAP_standalone) as well as an R package. The R package (OCAP) provides the necessary interfaces with downstream statistical analysis. Availability: OCAP is freely available and can be downloaded at
INTRODUCTIONAccurate identification and quantification of protein expressions are crucial in developing new diagnostic, prognostic and therapeutic products for the treatment of various diseases. With the introduction of isobaric quantification technologies, such as iTRAQ and TMT, researchers are able to determine relative expressions of thousands of proteins simultaneously. However, analysis of iTRAQ data remains a very challenging task. Typical workflow of iTRAQ data analysis can be viewed as two major components, the preprocessing of the data and higher statistical analysis. The first component can be further divided into three main stages: (i) spectrum peak picking; (ii) peptide and protein identification; and (iii) protein quantification. The second component consists of quality control, and higher level statistical analyses such as identification of differentially expressed proteins and prediction. Some and/or all of the components are usually combined in an analysis pipeline. Currently, there are several pipelines designed for other purposes, e.g. TOPP () for label-free quantification, maxQuant () for SILAC analysis. However, there are a limited number of public available pipelines specifically * To whom correspondence should be addressed. designed for iTRAQ from the initial preprocessing phase right through to higher level statistical analysis, and existing pipelines include the Trans-Proteomic Pipeline (TPP;), Multi-Q () and MSnbase (). Many existing open source pipelines that support iTRAQ focus primarily on preprocesssing of iTRAQ data and offer limited visualization tools for efficiently exploring the data, e.g. TPP pipeline. As the eventual aim of iTRAQ analysis includes identifying differentially expressed proteins and finding biomarkers for good prediction outcome, it is important that the output from the three main stages from the preprocessing component is effectively integrated with major statistical softwares such as R, SPSS and SAS to facilitate downstream analyses. To this end, we have developed a new comprehensive iTRAQ data analysis pipeline with the three main stages of the first component forming a standalone software. In addition, we have provided an R-interface (OCAP) of this software that includes additional visualization tools for exploring the data. This interface also provides easy access to the suite of downstream analytical packages including limma (), pamR () and isoBar ().
CONCLUSIONBeing open source, OCAP can be easily extended and modified to fit specific analyses. It provides an alternative workflow to the TPP pipeline. OCAP also incorporates a range of visualization tools for exploring the iTRAQ data and a convenient interface to many downstream analyses, greatly facilitating the understanding of the underlying biological problem.