Targeted therapies interfering with specifically one protein activity are promising strategies in the treatment of diseases like cancer. However, accumulated empirical experience has shown that targeting multiple proteins in signaling networks involved in the disease is often necessary. Thus, one important problem in biomedical research is the design and prioritization of optimal combinations of interventions to repress a pathological behavior, while minimizing side-effects. OCSANA (optimal combinations of interventions from network analysis) is a new software designed to identify and prioritize optimal and minimal combinations of interventions to disrupt the paths between source nodes and target nodes. When specified by the user, OCSANA seeks to additionally minimize the side effects that a combination of interventions can cause on specified off-target nodes. With the crucial ability to cope with very large networks, OCSANA includes an exact solution and a novel selective enumeration approach for the combina-torial interventions problem. Availability: The latest version of OCSANA, implemented as a plugin for Cytoscape and distributed under LGPL license, is available together with source code at http://bioinfo.curie.fr/projects/ocsana.
INTRODUCTIONCellular functions and activities are governed by complex signaling and regulatory networks. Diseases arise from abnormal behavior in these networks. Thus, the design of targeted therapies from a systems biology approach aims to identify which molecules to intervene in these networks, to repress a pathological behavior while minimizing side effects. Accumulated empirical experience has shown that combination or multicomponent interventions are necessary to cope with the redundancy and multi-functionality that characterize biological networks (). Redundancy requires for several pathways to be targeted, as alternate routes can compensate the disrupted pathways' function. Multi-functionality implies that intervening molecules that play a central role in the cell may cause side effects, requiring alternative points of intervention (). Some methods have been proposed to address some aspects of this problem (Hadicke). However, limited scalability of the methods and the lack of a prioritization criterion are hindering factors for their applicability to large biological networks. We introduce OCSANA, a software for the identification and prioritization of optimal minimal combinations of interventions (CIs). We define a CI as a set of nodes such that each elementary path (a path from source to target node) contains at least one node from this set. This CI set indicates the nodes to be intervened to disrupt all the identified elementary paths. The interventions can be knock outs (deletion of genes/proteins) and knock ins (overexpressions of genes/proteins). A CI is minimal if no proper subset of the CI is a CI itself, and its optimality is defined in terms of a heuristic scoring (see Section 2). To ensure the method's scalability, OCSANA includes an EXACT SOLUTION via an adaptation of Berge's algorithm () and a novel SELECTIVE ENUMERATION approach based on a weightedgreedy algorithm. The EXACT SOLUTION computes all minimal CIs of all sizes, and, similar to (Hadicke), it is adapted to compute all CIs up to a specified size. The SELECTIVE ENUMERATION computes optimal minimal CIs up to a specified size, and it can be parametrized to identify such CIs sets by FULL ENUMERATION.