Motivation: The existence of families with many individuals affected by the same complex disease has long suggested the possibility of rare alleles of high penetrance. In contrast to Mendelian diseases, however, linkage studies have identified very few reproducibly linked loci in diseases such as diabetes and autism. Genome-wide association studies have had greater success with such diseases, but these results explain neither the extreme disease load nor the within-family linkage peaks, of some large pedigrees. Combining linkage information with exome or genome sequencing from large complex disease pedigrees might finally identify family-specific, high-penetrance mutations. Results: Olorin is a tool, which integrates gene flow within families with next generation sequencing data to enable the analysis of complex disease pedigrees. Users can interactively filter and prioritize variants based on haplotype sharing across selected individuals and other measures of importance, including predicted functional consequence and population frequency.
INTRODUCTIONNext generation sequencing has rapidly become the standard approach for identifying mutations responsible for Mendelian diseases (). Although software and file formats for the processing of raw sequence data are relatively robust (), there is currently a lack of easy-to-use software for downstream analysis of these data. For some study designs, such as focused analysis of fully penetrant de novo mutations or autosomal recessive inheritance, exome sequence data can be analysed and filtered relatively simply. Increasingly, however, sequence-based approaches are being applied to complex diseases, which are unlikely to follow a simple genetic model, such as autism (), and to more complicated scenarios, such as large pedigrees with incomplete penetrance. These studies require new tools to enable the diverse community of researchers working on such families to interactively and comprehensively analyze next generation sequence data.shows how our new program, Olorin, integrates within-family linkage analysis with exome sequencing in a user-friendly package.