Recent major cancer genome sequencing studies have used whole-genome sequencing to detect various types of genomic variation. However, a number of these studies have continued to rely on SNP array information to provide additional results for copy number and loss-of-heterozygosity estimation and assessing tumour purity. OncoSNP-SEQ is a statistical model-based approach for inferring copy number profiles directly from high-coverage whole genome sequencing data that is able to account for unknown tumour purity and ploidy.
INTRODUCTIONMany cancers are characterized by complex structural rearrangements involving copy number alterations (CNAs) and/or losses of heterozygosity (LOH) events (). Genetic abnormalities in specific regions may be related to the aggressiveness of a cancer and be associated with clinical outcomes (). OncoSNP-SEQ is a statistical model-based approach for identifying CNAs and LOH events directly from next-generation sequencing data that builds on the OncoSNP tool for SNP array analysis (). The statistical model used differs from previous methods such as BIC-seq (), Control-FREEC () and APOLLOH/HMMcopy () by addressing three major issues in the analysis of cancer samples: (i) normal cell contamination, (ii) intra-tumour heterogeniety and (iii) polyploidy, within a fully integrated statistical framework for using both read depth and allele-specific information in highcoverage experiments. In the following, we describe the statistical model and its application to a publicly available normal-cancer cell line dataset, simulated mixtures and a heterogeneous cancer.
CONCLUSIONOncoSNP-SEQ is a tool for automatic detection of CNAs and LOH regions using high-coverage (60 and above) wholegenome sequencing data. High-coverage data allows allele-specific information to be utilized, and, in the case of tumour samples, OncoSNP-SEQ uses this information to evaluate the level of contamination by normal cells as well as allowing for degrees of intra-tumour heterogeneity. The formal assessment of the accuracy of this latter capability will need to be ascertained using independent assays, e.g. FISH, in future studies. For polyploid tumours, OncoSNP-SEQ provides a probabilistic means of evaluating different ploidy configurations. The software is written in MATLAB, and the source codes are freely available for modification, re-engineering or incorporation into genomic analysis pipelines.. Tumour purity estimation and copy number/LOH discordance for simulated normal-cancer mixtures