Motivation: Comprehensive analysis of genome-wide molecular data challenges bioinformatics methodology in terms of intuitive visualization with single-sample resolution, biomarker selection, functional information mining and highly granular stratification of sample classes. oposSOM combines those functionalities making use of a comprehensive analysis and visualization strategy based on self-organizing maps (SOM) machine learning which we call high-dimensional data por-traying. The method was successfully applied in a series of studies using mostly transcriptome data but also data of other OMICs realms. Availability and implementation: oposSOM is now publicly available as Bioconductor R package.
IntroductionBioinformatics tools are needed which allow to statistically, functionally and visually summarise high-dimensional data such as transcriptome studies at different levels of resolution ranging from individual samples and genes to sample classes and expression modules of co-regulated genes. For this purpose, we developed a bioinformatics analysis pipeline based on self-organizing map (SOM) machine learning which facilitates a holistic view on this data (). We termed this technique 'high-dimensional data portraying'. It subsumes the visualization of the data landscape of each individual, a series of downstream bioinformatics and statistics analysis options and the detailed and comprehensive reporting of the results. We have chosen SOM machine learning as backbone because it combines strong clustering, dimension reduction, multidimensional scaling and visualization capabilities which have been shown to be advantageous compared to alternative methods such as clustering heatmaps and negative matrix factorization when applied to molecular high-throughput data (seeand references cited therein). We complemented the basal SOM algorithm with a sophisticated data analysis workflow including visualization of the individual feature landscapes, statistical testing for differential features and biomarker selection, mining of biological function, and also sample diversity analysis to assess classes of samples. oposSOM continues and largely extends the scope of a previous SOM-based expression analysis tool, the 'gene expression dynamic inspector' (GEDI) (): oposSOM is under steady development, provides a multitude of sample diversity analyses and, most importantly, provides comprehensive functional annotations. Our portraying-method has been developed in first instance for gene expression data comprising from tens up to thousands of samples (e.g. tumour specimen in patient cohorts, experimental conditions in cell line experiments). The portraying functionality is unique and suited especially for scientists who attach importance to visual control and intuitive perception of complex data. The software was applied in a series of previous studies aiming at discovering the gene expression landscapes of healthy human tissues (), of cancer subtypes () and of stem cell development (). Further applications addressed the integrative analysis of mRNA and miRNA expression data (), the proteome of algae (), whole genome histone) and the genomic diversity of human ethnicities ().