Motivation: Superpositioning is an essential technique in structural biology that facilitates the comparison and analysis of conformational differences among topologically similar structures. Performing a superposition requires a one-to-one correspondence, or alignment, of the point sets in the different structures. However, in practice, some points are usually missing from several structures, for example, when the alignment contains gaps. Current superposition methods deal with missing data simply by superpositioning a subset of points that are shared among all the structures. This practice is inefficient, as it ignores important data, and it fails to satisfy the common least-squares criterion. In the extreme, disregarding missing positions prohibits the calculation of a superposition altogether. Results: Here, we present a general solution for determining an optimal superposition when some of the data are missing. We use the expectation–maximization algorithm, a classic statistical technique for dealing with incomplete data, to find both maximum-likelihood solutions and the optimal least-squares solution as a special case. Availability and implementation: The methods presented here are implemented in THESEUS 2.0, a program for superpositioning macromolecular structures. ANSI C source code and selected compiled binaries for various computing platforms are freely available under the GNU open source license from http://www.theseus3d.org.
INTRODUCTIONHow should we properly compare and contrast the 3D conformations of similar structures? This fundamental problem in structural biology is commonly addressed by performing a superposition, which removes arbitrary differences in translation and rotation so that a set of structures is oriented in a common reference frame (). For instance, the conventional solution to the superpositioning problem uses the least-squares optimality criterion, which orients the structures in space so as to minimize the sum of the squared distances between all corresponding points in the different structures. Superpositioning problems, also known as Procrustes problems, arise frequently in many scientific fields, including anthropology, archaeology, astronomy, computer * To whom correspondence should be addressed. vision, economics, evolutionary biology, geology, image analysis, medicine, morphometrics, paleontology, psychology and molecular biology (). A particular case we consider here is the superpositioning of multiple 3D macromolecular coordinate sets, where the points to be superpositioned correspond to atoms. Although our analysis specifically concerns the conformations of macromolecules, the methods developed herein are generally applicable to any entity that can be represented as a set of Cartesian points in a multidimensional space, whether the particular structures under study are proteins, skulls, MRI scans or geological strata. We draw an important distinction here between a structural 'alignment' and a 'superposition.' An alignment is a discrete mapping between the residues of two or more structures. One of the most common ways to represent an alignment is using the familiar row and column matrix format of sequence alignments using the single letter abbreviations for residues (). An alignment may be based on sequence information or on structural information (or on both). A superposition, on the other hand, is a particular orientation of structures in 3D space. Calculating an optimal superposition normally requires a one-toone correspondence (a bijection) between the atoms in the different structures (). For instance, a sequence alignment is necessary to superposition protein molecules. In many real cases, however, certain residues (and their atoms) are 'missing' in some of the structures. As a case in point, one crystal structure of a protein may omit loop regions that are present in another crystal structure of the same protein.shows a sequence alignment of four protein structures that we wish to superposition. In this example, the protein sequences are identical except that several residues are missing from some structures; only about half of the atoms to be superpositioned are shared among all four proteins (indicated by blue asterisks). An analogous situation exists when we wish to superposition a set of homologous proteins, which in general will have different sequences, various lengths, and gaps and insertions in the alignment (). In both cases, particular columns in the alignment will have gaps, and immediately the question emerges of how to properly incorporate these positions into a global superposition. Current multiple superposition methods explicitly require complete data (), and hence current superposition implementations deal with missing data crudely, usually by excluding many atoms from the calculation (;proteins, each of known structure, from seven different species. The gaps can be considered as 'missing data' in a likelihood framework. As in, the subset of residues completely shared among all four proteins is indicated by asterisks(a) A sequence alignment of four identical proteins, except that different residues are missing in each of the proteins. This could, for instance, correspond to the case of superpositioning different crystal structures where different regions of the protein are disordered in different crystal forms. The subset of residues completely shared among all four proteins is indicated by asterisks. (b) A second alignment of the same four proteins with different missing data. (c) A third alignment of the same four proteins with no 'common core,' in which no residues are completely shared among all four proteins). For the proteins inand 2, standard practice would calculate the superposition based on only the small subset of fully shared residues, often referred to as the 'common core' (indicated above the alignment by blue asterisks). This method, which corresponds to superpositioning based only on columns in the alignment that contain no gaps, is therefore inefficient as it disregards much of the observed data. Atoms that are not shared among all structures are nevertheless informative, and ideally they should be considered in calculating an optimal superposition. In the most extreme case, no residues are completely shared among the macromolecules (). Here, the practice of disregarding positions with missing data prohibits the calculation of a superposition altogether, because there is no common core and consequently nothing to include in the calculation. Ignoring some atoms in the superposition also clearly fails to satisfy the least-squares criterion, where the object is to minimize the sum of squared distances among all corresponding atoms, not just among a subset of the atoms. Despite the popularity of ordinary least squares as an optimality criterion for determining the best superposition, other criteria are better justified both theoretically and empirically (). According to the GaussMarkov theorem, two basic assumptions must be met to justify the use of least squares. In terms of a superposition, these two assumptions require that all atoms have the same variance and that none of the atoms are spatially correlated. Both of these assumptions are strongly violated with biological macromolecules, as certain regions of a structure are more variable than others (due to a combination of experimental imprecision, dynamics and conformational heterogeneity) and because atoms physically communicate with each other (e.g. via electrostatic, Van der Waals and covalent interactions). We previously presented a maximum-likelihood superposition method that addresses these problems with the least-squares criterion by explicitly allowing individual atoms to be correlated and to have different variances (). As is often true with Gaussian distributed data, the conventional leastsquares superposition solution falls out as a special case of the likelihood analysis (namely, when assuming uncorrelated data with equal variances). Most importantly for the present work, likelihoodbased methods can elegantly handle cases of missing data via the expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm (). Here, we present solutions for finding the optimal superposition with incomplete structural data. We use the EM algorithm, a classic statistical technique for dealing with missing data, to find maximum-likelihood solutions, which include the conventional least-squares solution as a special case. For completeness, we present two different classes of solutions, listed in decreasing order of generality, complexity and computational requirements:
CONCLUSIONWe have developed a method for superpositioning multiple structures when some of the structures have residues that other structures lack. Our algorithm uses the EM algorithm to find the optimal superposition by treating the gaps in an alignment as 'missing data.' To our knowledge, this is the first superposition solution proposed for cases with incomplete or missing structural information. The use of indicator matrices allows our EM method to be incorporated easily in conventional LS superpositioning procedures. Programs need only be modified to keep track of these matrices and to adjust the calculations accordingly. Hence, our method should be widely applicable to the diverse superposition problems found throughout molecular biology.