Motivation: Multiple sequence alignments (MSAs) are widely used approaches in bioinformatics to carry out other tasks such as structure predictions, biological function analyses or phylogenetic modeling. However, current tools usually provide partially optimal alignments, as each one is focused on specific biological features. Thus, the same set of sequences can produce different alignments, above all when sequences are less similar. Consequently, researchers and biologists do not agree about which is the most suitable way to evaluate MSAs. Recent evaluations tend to use more complex scores including further biological features. Among them, 3D structures are increasingly being used to evaluate alignments. Because structures are more conserved in proteins than sequences, scores with structural information are better suited to evaluate more distant relationships between sequences.
INTRODUCTIONMultiple sequence alignments (MSAs) are widely used strategies in current molecular biology. These approaches are often used for homology transfer (), where poorly characterized sequences are compared with well-studied homologs from typical model organisms. MSA strategies have traditionally been applied to researches in phylogenetic analyses, structural modeling, functional predictions or sequence database searching (). MSA tools have also been implemented in applications to predict protein structures and interactions (), mutations () or to reconstruct phylogenetic trees (). The development of novel experimental techniques, such as next-generation sequencing and high-throughput experiments, has prompted a great demand of MSA tools. Because these techniques provide mainly new nucleotide sequences and their subsequent products, MSA tools usually help to extract biological meanings from such information. Current MSA tools are capable of dealing with and efficiently analyze the massive amount of information generated by these former techniques by using advanced computational approaches based on well-known artificial intelligence and machine-learning algorithms (hidden Markov models (HMMs), support vector machines, etc). Besides, MSA methodologies also take advantage of functional, structural and genomic information to obtain more accurate alignments in a reasonable time (). Taking all these ideas into consideration, MSAs are becoming one of the most powerful and essential procedures of analysis in bioinformatics (). Traditionally, several strategies have been applied to align multiple sequences, mainly classified as progressive algorithms () or consistency-based methods (). Both approaches were also combined with other relevant computational strategies to obtain more accurate alignments. Recently, more sophisticated tools in MSA have *To whom correspondence should be addressed. included additional data referring to proteins (domains, structures or homologies) to align sequences (O'). Such additional features enrich the alignment information building more realistic solutions. However, the consumed time is excessive and improvements are just relevant in specific cases with less related sequences. Moreover, these methods can be run when additional features are unavailable or unknown, though they could provide inefficient alignments. Genetic algorithms (GAs) are also widely used to build MSAs. GAs are helpful in MSA because they can be implemented independently of the objective function (). Thus, GA algorithm can define multiple evaluations regardless of any modification in the optimization procedure. GAs can also be easily parallelized to significantly reduce the computational time. Consequently, several methodologies, such as SAGA (), MSA-GA (), RBT-GA () or VDGA (), have already applied GAs to build MSAs. Although there are many MSA methodologies, they usually achieve different solutions for the same set of sequences because each strategy is focused on specific biological features. Consequently, there is no consensus about which method builds more accurate alignments (). Besides, these MSA tools could achieve suboptimal solutions where specific regions within the alignments are more accurate than others depending on the biological features found at these particular regions. These divergences have also a negative influence on subsequent phylogenetic analyses, as wrong phylogenetic trees are obtained when alignments are inaccurate (). For this reason, some other methods () take advantage of jointly optimizing both phylogenetic trees and alignments. These methods aim to avoid the bias generated by guide trees in progressive methods, though they do not still achieve good performances in terms of structure. Therefore, the choice of the most suitable aligner is an essential problem, which has not been completely solved yet. Another challenge in MSA is to provide an efficient evaluation method to measure the alignment accuracy. MSA strategies have usually applied well-known matrices, such as point accepted mutation (PAM) () or BLOSUM (), which only consider nucleotide or amino acid information to evaluate every aligned pair of residues. However, when the number of sequences increases or longer and more distant sequences are included, alignments are more likely to be inaccurate using such scores (). In these cases, additional information is necessary to complement alignment evaluations. Therefore, current scores are increasingly using supplementary information, such as homologies or protein structures. Thus, some approaches can benefit from homology profiles provided, e.g. by PSI-BLAST (), to evaluate alignments. Additionally, as structures are evolutionarily more conserved than sequences in proteins, structural information also provides more distant relationships between sequences (). For instance,provided a novel scoring scheme to evaluate MSAs from their predicted secondary structures. Other scores, such as contact accepted mutation () and STRIKE () scores also estimated the molecular contacts from protein structures to calculate alignment accuracies. In this article, a novel multiobjective genetic approach has been developed. This method is named Multiobjective Optimizer for Sequence Alignments based on Structural Evaluations (MO-SAStrE). It takes advantage of three objectives that are used to evaluate alignments generated by the GA: STRIKE score (), totally conserved (TC) columns and percentage of non-gaps. Alignments are first coded in a novel representation, which is useful for applying efficient mutation and crossover operators. This algorithm is implemented through the well-known multiobjective non-dominated sorting genetic algorithm (NSGA-II) approach. It is assessed by the BAliBASE benchmark v3.0 (). Alignments from MO-SAStrE are finally compared with results shown by other known genetic and non-genetic alignment algorithms.