We present Oqtans, an open-source workbench for quantitative tran-scriptome analysis, that is integrated in Galaxy. Its distinguishing features include customizable computational workflows and a modular pipeline architecture that facilitates comparative assessment of tool and data quality. Oqtans integrates an assortment of machine learning powered tools into Galaxy, which show superior or equal performance to state-of-the-art tools. Implemented tools comprise a complete transcriptome analysis workflow: short-read alignment, transcript identification/quantification and differential expression analysis. Oqtans and Galaxy facilitate persistent storage, data exchange and documentation of intermediate results and analysis workflows. We illustrate how Oqtans aids the interpretation of data from different experiments in easy to understand use cases. Users can easily create their own workflows and extend Oqtans by integrating specific tools. Oqtans is available as (i) a cloud machine image with a demo instance at cloud.oqtans.org, (ii) a public Galaxy instance at galaxy.cbio.mskcc. org, (iii) a git repository containing all installed software (oqtans.org/ git); most of which is also available from (iv) the Galaxy Toolshed and (v) a share string to use along with Galaxy CloudMan.
INTRODUCTIONTechnological advance in large-scale sequencing has revolutionized molecular biology. Its application to profiling the transcriptome, the total complement of cellular RNA, called RNA-seq, provides an unmatched dynamic range for expression quantification and single base pair resolution for the discovery of new transcripts (). However, analyzing these complex data to their full potential requires computational frameworks.Here, we present Oqtans, the online platform for quantitative RNA-seq data analysis (online since 2010). Its integration into the Galaxy framework ensures transparent and reproducible computational analyses. Oqtans provides a Galaxy interface to many recently developed RNA-seq analysis tools, and this way considerably extends the standard repertoire of the Galaxy toolbox (usegalaxy.org). To reach non-expert users and experienced developers, we provide the Oqtans tool suite in five incarnations:(i) as a cloud machine image (see cloud.oqtans.org for a demo), (ii) as a public Galaxy instance at galaxy.cbio.mskcc.org, (iii) as a git repository (oqtans.org/git); most of these tools are moreover available from (iv) the Galaxy Toolshed and (v) a preconfigured share string to launch Galaxy CloudMan using sharing instance functionality.