We previously developed OrthoInspector, a package incorporating an original algorithm for the detection of orthology and inpar-alogy relations between different species. We have added new functionalities to the package. While its original algorithm was not modified, performing similar orthology predictions, we facilitated the prediction of very large databases (thousands of proteomes), refurbished its graphical interface, added new visualization tools for comparative genomics/protein family analysis and facilitated its deployment in a network environment. Finally, we have released three online databases of precomputed orthology relationships. Availability: Package and databases are freely available at http://lbgi. fr/orthoinspector with all major browsers supported.
INTRODUCTIONHigh throughput comparative analyses, functional annotations, or evolutionary studies involve massive transfers of information between organisms using orthology inference. As defined by, orthologs are homologous genes that diverged from an ancestral speciation event, while paralogs emerged from a duplication event. Today, it is widely accepted that orthologs generally share similar functions, whereas paralogs can potentially evolve new functions. Numerous algorithms based on the results of Blast searches were developed to infer orthology relations (seefor reviews). We previously developed an orthology inference algorithm also based on Blast and implemented it in the OrthoInspector (OI) package (). Our focus was to maintain a balance between sensitivity and specificity (). Contrary to most other packages, OI is not limited to predictions and provides tools for comprehensive mining of large orthology databases, nonspecialist use through a desktop graphical interface and can easily be deployed in a network environment. Here, we describe the main improvements implemented in the second version of the OrthoInspector package.
CONCLUSIONOI is a package dedicated to the efficient calculation and analysis of orthology data and allows a rapid and intuitive analysis of relationships associated with large clades. The OI web server allows the retrieval of precomputed orthology data from thousands of eukaryote and prokaryote proteomes.