Motivation: Protein interaction networks contain a wealth of biological information, but their large size often hinders cross-organism comparisons. We present OrthoNets, a Cytoscape plugin that displays protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks from two organisms simultaneously, highlighting orthology relationships and aggregating several types of biomedical annotations. OrthoNets also allows PPI networks derived from experiments to be overlaid on networks extracted from public databases, supporting the identification and verification of new interactors. Any newly identified PPIs can be validated by checking whether their orthologs interact in another organism. Availability: OrthoNets is freely available at http://wodaklab.org/ orthonets/.
INTRODUCTIONRecent technological advances have contributed to a rapid growth in the amount of data on gene and protein interactions as well as on protein and gene function (). Although organisms such as yeast are comparatively well characterized, othersincluding humanhave data for only a small fraction of their predicted genomes or proteomes. In this case, orthology relationships can be used to transfer information on function and interactions from one organism to another, thus assisting the prediction and validation of new interactors (). The OrthoNets plug-in for Cytoscape () enables simultaneous visual analysis of proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks in multiple organisms. By default, the plugin provides direct access to updated networks from five model organismsyeast, mouse, human, fly and wormconsolidated from 10 major PPI databases () and available from the iRefWeb resource () resource (http://wodaklab.org/iRefWeb). Interactions are annotated with supporting information, such as interaction type, experimental detection methods and supporting publications. Interacting proteins in OrthoNets are further annotated with domain architectures * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(), Gene Ontology terms and (if applicable) disease information from the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) database ().