Motivation: The regulatory functions performed by non-coding RNAs are related to their 3D structures , which are, in turn, determined by their secondary structures. Pairwise secondary structure alignment gives insight into the functional similarity between a pair of RNA sequences. Numerous exact or heuristic approaches have been proposed for computational alignment. However, the alignment becomes intractable when arbitrary pseudoknots are allowed. Also, since non-coding RNAs are, in general, more conserved in structures than sequences, it is more effective to perform alignment based on the common structural motifs discovered. Results: We devised a method to approximate the true conserved stem pattern for a secondary structure pair, and constructed the alignment from it. Experimental results suggest that our method identified similar RNA secondary structures better than the existing tools, especially for large structures. It also successfully indicated the conservation of some pseudoknot features with biological significance. More importantly, even for large structures with arbitrary pseudoknots, the alignment can usually be obtained efficiently. Availability and implementation: Our algorithm has been implemented in a tool called PSMAlign. The source code of PSMAlign is freely available at
IntroductionThe interest in RNA research was reinvigorated after discovering its regulatory and catalytic roles in many biological processes (). Those RNAs with such roles are called the noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs). They perform a diverse range of functions, such as regulating gene expression (), modifying ribosomal RNA (), and controlling muscle differentiation (). It is believed that a specific function of an ncRNA molecule is related to its structure (). Strong evidence is that ncRNAs are more evolutionarily conserved in their structures than their sequences (). Therefore, the two main studies in this area are the structure determination and the comparison among different structures. The former can be subdivided into experimental analysis () and computational prediction () using experimentally determined thermodynamics parameters (). On the other hand, structure comparison is purely computational. Moreover, since the structure is critical to the function, RNA molecules are compared with both structures and constituent base sequences. In this article, we are interested in the pairwise RNA secondary structure comparison problem. This problem can be further classified into the edit problem and the alignment problem (). The edit problem computes the minimum cost (distance) of modifying a given structure R 1 to another given structure R 2 ,that the total edition cost from R 1 and R 2 to R c is minimized. Early approaches model the RNA secondary structures as trees and consider the edit distance or similarity score among them (). Afterwards, various tools were developed, of which some produce optimal solutions, while the others are heuristics. RNA_align (), RNAForester () and Gardenia () are some examples that belong to the exact solution category. The average time complexity for the last two methods is O(n 2 ), where n is the length of the longer structure. () and the worst case complexity is O(n 4 ) (). MiGaL () and RNAStrAT () belong to the heuristics category. There are still two shortcomings impacting the usefulness and efficiency of these approaches. Firstly, most of them do not support pseudoknots since aligning structures with arbitrary pseudoknots is NP-hard (), but pseudoknots have already been known to perform diverse functions in many biological processes (). Significant comparison results could be obtained when such crossing motifs can be aligned, because they are usually highly conserved (). An approach allowing arbitrary pseudoknots for exact alignment has its time complexity dependent on the complexity of the input structures (). On the other hand, the polynomial time alignment algorithm is possible for a restricted set of pseudoknots (). However, both of them are still inadequate to compare the complex crossing motifs that have already been identified (). More importantly, none of them are available as a tool. Second, since ncRNAs often exhibit better conservation in their structures, exact alignment methods might not indicate some biologically significant structural features. This is because they consider both base sequences and structures equally, and hence some conserved structural motifs that are dissimilar in their sequences are difficult to align. Conversely, some motifs are spuriously aligned, disrupting the overall alignment. To overcome these limitations, we devised a heuristics, targeting the pairwise alignment of large RNA secondary structures with arbitrary pseudoknots.