Genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revolutionized the search for the variants underlying human complex diseases. However, in a typical GWAS, only a minority of the single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) with the strongest evidence of association is explained. One possible reason of complex diseases is the alterations in the activity of several biological pathways. Here we present a web server called Pathway and Network-Oriented GWAS Analysis to devise functionally important pathways through the identification of SNP-targeted genes within these pathways. The strength of our methodology stems from its multidimensional perspective, where we combine evidence from the following five resources: (i) genetic association information obtained through GWAS, (ii) SNP functional information, (iii) protein–protein interaction network, (iv) linkage disequilibrium and (v) biochemical pathways. Availability: PANOGA web server is freely available at: http://panoga. sabanciuniv.edu/. The source code is available to academic users as is on request.
INTRODUCTIONGenome-wide association studies (GWAS) aim to discover a subset of single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) that are associated with the onset and progression of complex disease phenotypes at a genome-wide scale. These studies have produced extraordinary successes in the past few years, with numerous new genetic variants identified with levels of significance that were once thought impossible to reach (). Standard GWAS approaches focus on single SNP analysis, and hence, it is difficult to incorporate weakly associated SNPs (). For multifactorial diseases, this incorporation is especially important because no particular variant on a particular gene may have a strong effect, but the combination of the multiple variants with small effects on the polygenic disease explains the overall susceptibility to disease (). In this regard, pathway-based approaches to GWAS, in which prior biological knowledge is integrated into association studies and sets of genes are analyzed simultaneously for association with a disease, have been proposed recently (). Because the analysis of single variants within isolated genes is not informative enough to explain the underlying disease mechanisms, another recent trend to further mine GWAS data is to integrate proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks (). Following a systems biology approach, these methods evaluate the pairwise or collective effects of genetic variants, where the functional consequence of each susceptibility allele may interfere with the interaction between pairs of proteins. A few studies available to date on the identification of the molecular interaction networks associated with the GWAS genes indicated that this approach can help to discover formerly unknown mechanisms underlying human diseases at the molecular level (). To better understand the biological processes underlying complex diseases, we also considered the functional effect of a typed SNP in GWAS. Although the DNA polymorphisms that change protein function can have significant consequences, other types of SNPs, such as synonymous SNPs, do not have such serious effects in disease development mechanism. Functionally important SNPs, such as those that change amino acids, splicing sites; those that lead to gain or loss of stop codon; those that result in frame shift; and those that are found in regulatory region, are priority targets in disease studies and large-scale genotyping projects (). Hence, we decided that SNP functional knowledge is valuable information to strengthen our pathway and network-oriented GWAS analysis (PANOGA) method. To support the steps from SNP functionalization into PPI network analysis to functional enrichment in a single program, we developed a web server for post-GWAS analysis called PANOGA. With its multifactorial basis, PANOGA has a good potential to decipher the combination of biological processes underlying disease. PANOGA has been tested on several complex diseases, including rheumatoid arthritis (Bakir), intracranial aneurysm (Bakir), epilepsy () and Behcet's disease (), and proved to be *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com useful. Throughout the time, the method has evolved with our efforts (Bakir). This web server presents the latest version of PANOGA.