PANTHER-PSEP is a new software tool for predicting non-synonymous genetic variants that may play a causal role in human disease. Several previous variant pathogenicity prediction methods have been proposed that quantify evolutionary conservation among homologous proteins from different organisms. PANTHER-PSEP employs a related but distinct metric based on evolutionary preservation: homologous proteins are used to reconstruct the likely sequences of ancestral proteins at nodes in a phylogenetic tree, and the history of each amino acid can be traced back in time from its current state to estimate how long that state has been preserved in its ancestors. Here, we describe the PSEP tool, and assess its performance on standard benchmarks for distinguishing disease-associated from neutral variation in humans. On these benchmarks, PSEP out-performs not only previous tools that utilize evolutionary conservation, but also several highly used tools that include multiple other sources of information as well. For predicting pathogenic human variants, the trace back of course starts with a human reference protein sequence, but the PSEP tool can also be applied to predicting deleterious or pathogenic variants in reference proteins from any of the 100 other species in the PANTHER database. Availability and implementation: PANTHER-PSEP is freely available on the web at http://pan therdb.org/tools/csnpScoreForm.jsp. Users can also download the command-line based tool at
IntroductionRecent advances in sequencing technology have increased the rate of genetic variation discoveries, thus exacerbating the problem of interpreting these genetic variations. Here, we focus on non-synonymous single nucleotide variants (NSVs), a type of genetic variation that results in a single amino acid substitution in an encoded protein. Most computational tools for predicting the functional consequences of NSVs, including SIFT (), PolyPhen () and PANTHERPSEC (), rely at least in part on the assumption that crucial amino acids for protein families are conserved through evolution due to negative selection (i.e. amino acid changes at these sites were deleterious in the past), and that mutations at these sites have an increased likelihood of being pathogenic (causing disease) in humans. In general, homologous sequences of a target protein are collected and aligned, and a metric of conservation is computed based on the weighted frequencies of different amino acids observed in the target position in the alignment. Here, we present a new tool, PANTHER-PSEP (position-specific evolutionary preservation) for predicting potentially pathogenic ordeleterious NSVs. PANTHER-PSEP is different from other variant prediction tools, in that PSEP uses a metric based on evolutionary preservation (). Preservation is related to conservation, as it also reflects the effect of negative selection that has acted to prevent evolutionary change at a given site in a protein. It is also related to earlier methods that utilize a phylogenetic tree in addition to a multiple sequence alignment, pioneered by the Evolutionary Trace method () and later applied to variant pathogenicity prediction in the PANTHER-PSECv2 () and Evolutionary Action () methods. But unlike these other approaches, preservation uses ancestral sequence reconstruction to assess evolutionary change specifically in the lineage leading to the sequence of interest. We have previously shown evolutionary preservation to be superior to conservation for identifying deleterious mutations (in a growth-based assay) in the human Mthfr protein, as well as the E.coli lacI protein (). Here, we describe a software tool based on the same concept of ancestral preservation, but using a simple, standardized metric for quantifying preservation. In PANTHER-PSEP, preservation is measured as the approximate length of time a site has been preserved, tracing back the lineage from the relevant human protein, or potentially any other protein in the PANTHER library (). Because PANTHER trees are reconciled with the known species tree, we can use best estimates of speciation times () to date the ancestral preservation of each site.