Motivation: Pathway or gene set analysis has been widely applied to genomic data. Many current pathway testing methods use univariate test statistics calculated from individual genomic markers, which ignores the correlations and interactions between candidate markers. Random forests-based pathway analysis is a promising approach for incorporating complex correlation and interaction patterns, but one limitation of previous approaches is that pathways have been considered separately, thus pathway cross-talk information was not considered. Results: In this article, we develop a new pathway hunting algorithm for survival outcomes using random survival forests, which prioritize important pathways by accounting for gene correlation and genomic interactions. We show that the proposed method performs favourably compared with five popular pathway testing methods using both synthetic and real data. We find that the proposed methodology provides an efficient and powerful pathway modelling framework for high-dimensional genomic data.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput genomic technologies, such as gene expression microarrays, single nucleotide polymorphism arrays and next-generation sequencing have revolutionized biological and medical research by making it possible to measure thousands to millions of biomarkers across the genome simultaneously. However, detecting meaningful signals and making appropriate inferences from these massive datasets remains challenging because of the high dimensionality and complex correlation and interactions that are at play. To reduce dimensionality, and to increase statistical test power, pathway (or gene set) analysis has become increasingly popular. Instead of applying statistical tests to one gene at a time, pathway analysis takes advantages of previous biological knowledge and examines the gene expression patterns of a group of related genes (e.g. grouped by biological functions) for their associations with disease outcomes. Since the well-known gene set enrichment analysis (GSEA) method () was published, a number of pathway analysis approaches have been developed, including parametric analysis of gene set enrichment (), averaged t-statistic gene set scores (), the maxmean statistic for improved GSEA (), the random-sets method (), mixed-effects models () and principal components (). Web-based pathway tools, such as DAVID (), GeneTrail () and the online GSEA interface at the Broad Institute, are also widely used. Although pathway analyses are designed to test effects from multiple genes in place of single genes, typically they rely on test statistics based on simple summary statistics (e.g. the mean) of individual genes that ignore correlation between genes, and more importantly, genegene interactions. Recent genomic studies have demonstrated the importance of genegene interactions and gene networks for complex diseases () that are not being addressed with these methods. One recent pathway analysis method for modelling genegene relationships makes use of random forests (RF) () by constructing RF for genes in each pathway and ranking pathways based on prediction accuracy. This method automatically incorporates two-way or high-order genes interactions effects with marginal association patterns (). However, a limitation of these RF pathway approaches is that they ignore genes outside of the targeted pathway. Complex diseases often result from multiple pathway disturbances and interactions. A well known example is the Ras pathway, which activates multiple signalling pathways to drive uncontrolled proliferation in cancer (). Therefore, a single pathway may not fully explain phenotype variations in complex diseases. Goeman anddiscussed the need to include genes outside the gene sets for pathway testing, and they indicated these should be dependent on biological hypothesis. The ideal solution is to combine all available candidate pathway gene expression data together for RF modelling. However, finding a reliable gene importance measure for ultra-high-dimensional genomic data and resolving the computational issues in RF are challenging. In this article, we propose a new pathway hunting algorithm for survival outcomes using random survival forests (RSF) () that prioritize important pathways by accounting for transcriptome-wise gene correlations and interactions. In Section 2, we describe the RSF framework, a minimal depth measure of variable importance, our pathway hunting *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author(s) 2012. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com algorithm and a testing procedure for pathway analysis. In Section 3.1, we show that our method performs favourably compared with five popular pathway testing methods using a simulation study. We illustrate the pathway hunting approach in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 using two microarray survival datasets involving colon cancer and ovarian cancer. Section 4 presents a summary discussion.
DISCUSSIONComplex diseases are generally the consequences of interactions from multiple genes and pathways. Although pathway enrichment and association testing approaches have been developed, because of computational and statistical modelling challenges, the information from genegene interactions are either ignored or restricted to within an individual pathway. In this article, we presented a novel RSF pathway hunting method for identifying and ranking the importance of pathways for their association with survival outcome. The proposed method is based on a new measure of variable importance, termed minimal depth, which has been shown to be an efficient and effective method for variable selection in high dimensions (). Our RSF pathway hunting approach is capable of capturing both marginal gene effects and genegene interactions at the genome level, and it approximates the complexity of the transcriptome by taking advantage of a priori biological knowledge. In our simulation studies, we specifically designed scenarios where censored survival outcomes were associated with gene interactions and pathway cross-talk. The RSF approachoutperformed standard well-known procedures. In our real data analyses involving colon and ovarian cancer, RSF identified key pathways. These findings indicate that the RSF pathway hunting algorithm can identify essential cancer signalling pathways with a relatively small sample size. In summary, we have described a new method to model complex genegene interactions and multiple interactions between pathways, integrated within a traditional pathway analysis framework. It can be further extended to model different phenotypes, such as categorical or continuous outcomes. This new approach helps to expand the scope of current pathway analysis to understand the complexities underlying diseases.