
INTRODUCTIONBiological researchers use pathway diagrams as the medium to relay information about interactions among biological entities. Graphical notations like the Molecular Interaction Map (MIM) notation and the Systems Biology Graphical Notation (SBGN) promote the creation of unambiguous biological pathway diagrams through the use of well-defined rules for syntax. The specifications for these notations are long and technical, and this is a barrier to the wider usage of these notations by researchers. This issue presents a clear need not only for tools that simplify the usage of these graphical notations, but also tools that guide users in their correct usage. PathVisio is an open-source Java-based tool for creating and editing biological pathways and linking diagram elements to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. external bioinformatics databases (van). By itself, PathVisio does not compel users to create diagrams using any particular notation; support for specific notations is added through the use of plugins, such as the MIM plugin () or the SBGN plugin, which is under development (http://www.pathvisio.org/wiki/SbgnPluginHelp). Given this open nature of PathVisio, we have developed a validation framework similar to what developers are accustomed to in source code editors that report syntax errors. This accommodates the validation of pathway diagrams against any notation that PathVisio can draw with just the click of a button. There are several projects related to standardized formats for computational biology that have associated validators, including well-known formats like BioPAX () and SBML (); there is also validation capability in BCML, a SBGN-compliant format (), and SBGNED (), an SBGN diagram editor. A key difference between SBGN-ED and the plugin presented here is the extensible support for other notations in the latter, which is especially important for the PathVisio community since its users may be using various graphical notations for diverse purposes. A second difference is that rulesets (specifically, Schematron rulesets) created for use with this plugin can be reused in other software projects. The use of Schematron is a feature that this plugin shares with some generic XML editors with validation capability, such as XMLSpy (http://xml-tools.com/ValidatorBuddy.htm).