Motivation: BioPAX is a standard language for representing complex cellular processes, including metabolic networks, signal transduction and gene regulation. Owing to the inherent complexity of a BioPAX model, searching for a specific type of subnetwork can be non-trivial and difficult. Results: We developed an open source and extensible framework for defining and searching graph patterns in BioPAX models. We demonstrate its use with a sample pattern that captures directed signaling relations between proteins. We provide search results for the pattern obtained from the Pathway Commons database and compare these results with the current data in signaling databases SPIKE and SignaLink. Results show that a pattern search in public pathway data can identify a substantial amount of signaling relations that do not exist in signaling databases. Availability: BioPAX-pattern software was developed in Java. Source code and documentation is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONBioPAX is a community standard for pathway representation developed by a broad community of researchers working on pathways and related resources (). It can represent metabolic and signaling pathways, molecular and genetic interactions and gene regulation networks. Currently, there are 430 pathway resources that support BioPAX representation, listed in Pathguide (). The detailed structure of BioPAX allows it to cover a wide spectrum of biological phenomena; however, its complexity also creates a significant barrier for researchers to effectively use it. Paxtools is a Java library that was developed to address this need. It exposes BioPAX models as Java objects and provides an array of utility methods () to query its contents. Although Paxtools facilitates simple searches, coding more complex queries that require evaluating links between multiple objects can be tedious and error-prone. What is often needed is a way to efficiently define and run such queries as graph patterns. Existing graph searching tools for biological networks are limited to simple binary graphs that use nodes for molecules and edges for the interactions between (Berg and LassigLassig, 2004;; and Giugno and Shasha 2002). Generic RDF/OWL tools such as SPARQL and OWL-Reasoners allow defining more complex searches; thus, it is more suitable for searching rich BioPAX pathways. Unfortunately, there are still many biologically relevant patterns that cannot be captured by RDF/OWL tools (see Supplementary Data). Here we present a framework and software tool that allows users to specify complex patterns using the rich BioPAX ontology and to search any BioPAX level 3 model for those patterns. We demonstrate the tool with a pattern sample that we query in Pathway Commons () database and provide the search result as Supplementary Data. The tool can be used as a standalone application or a library to seamlessly integrate pattern searches into the existing software.