Clustering methods are often needed for accurately assessing the quality of modeled protein structures. Recent blind evaluation of quality assessment methods in CASP10 showed that there is little difference between many different methods as far as ranking models and selecting best model are concerned. When comparing many models, the computational cost of the model comparison can become significant. Here, we present PconsD, a fast, stream-computing method for distance-driven model quality assessment that runs on consumer hardware. PconsD is at least one order of magnitude faster than other methods of comparable accuracy. Availability: The source code for PconsD is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONPredicting the 3D structure of protein from its sequence remains one of the yet unsolved problems of molecular biology. Recent improvements in the field allow for constructing more accurate models of protein structures, be it through relying on homologous structures, folding proteins ab initio or by combining multiple approaches. Regardless of the approach chosen, there is a need for a method of discriminating good (native-like) models from the mispredicted ones. This is the role of Model Quality Assessment Programs (MQAPs). The most successful approaches to MQAP problem is the use of clustering methods, as introduced by the Pcons method in CASP5 (). They are based on the premise that among different models of the same protein, the one that is most similar to the others is most likely to be correct. It is widely assumed that if a sufficiently accurate model generation method is used, most of the predictions will tend to cluster near the correct fold (). Consequently, the largest cluster of protein models is most likely to contain models of native-like fold, and cluster centroid is the most likely candidate for the most accurate structure in the ensemble. Most of clustering-based MQAPs rely on repeated pairwise structural superposition to find a largest subset of residues superimposable between models in question within a certain threshold. This approach is a computationally relatively expensive process, which renders clustering approaches unfeasible for model ensembles larger than some thousand proteins. An alternative to rigid superposition is comparing the inter-residue distance matrices of the models. This approach has been successfully used for quality assessment, both in terms of similarity of predictions to the native structure () and predicting the quality of models (). Authors postulate that this approach is capable of capturing the interactions relevant for protein structure better than rigid C superposition, as it accounts both for the local proximity of relevant residues (distances close to each other in the sequence space) and the general fold of the protein (long-range distances). Although avoiding the computational expense of repeated superposition, distance matrix comparison still requires 0:5  m  n 2 operations for computing the distances and 0:25  m 2  n 2 operations for their comparison, when given m models of n residues each. In this work, we introduce PconsD, a new model quality assessment program, which uses a massively parallel, OpenCLbased streaming approach, which attempts to alleviate the scaling issues and provide an efficient platform for future development in distance-driven quality assessment.