
INTRODUCTIONBiological macromolecules (proteins and nucleic acids) often execute their functions via molecular recognition with other biological macromolecules or organic small molecules. Characterization of the interactions between molecular complexes is thus helpful for interpreting the mechanism of various life processes. Modern X-ray crystallography and multidimensional nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) techniques have produced a wealth of structural information of molecular complexes. The worldwide Protein Data Bank (PDB) holds the largest open resource for experimentally determined biomolecular structures (). It has been growing rapidly during the past 20 years or so. By June 2014, over 100 000 structures had already been deposited into PDB. A number of derivative databases based on PDB have been developed with their own scopes and emphases, such as PDBsum (), Relibase+ (), Het-PDB Navi () and scPDB (). These databases provide annotated proteinligand complex structures or their special features, such as binding pockets and ligand molecules. Collectively, the structural information provided by these databases allows visual examination of interactions between a wide range of molecular complexes. On the other hand, energetic properties are also indispensable for obtaining an in-depth understanding of such events. Here, the major problem is that energetic data, such as binding data, are often scattered in the huge pool of literature so that they are difficult to access. To tackle this problem, some existing databases started to incorporate binding data; for example, ChEMBL () and PubChem () are perhaps the two most comprehensive databases in this category. They currently provide a large amount of experimental binding data of diverse bioactive compounds as well as relevant information on molecular targets, experimental conditions, etc. Other databases were created with a focus on binding data, e.g. BindingDB () and PDSP Ki (). Obviously, the rich knowledge of the interactions between bioactive small molecules and their potential targets provided by these databases is widely welcomed by chemical biologists and medicinal chemists. Nevertheless, the link between structural information and energetic properties is desirable especially for theoretical and computational studies on molecular recognition. This link is missing, or at least not the primary focus of the databases mentioned above. With more and more successful applications of computational methods to modern drug discovery (), the requirement for a combined knowledge of structures and binding data has become increasingly urgent. To fill the gap between structural information and energetic properties of biomolecular complexes, a practical strategy is to collect experimentally measured binding data for the biomolecular complexes deposited *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com in the PDB. Currently, PDBbind () and binding MOAD () are two outstanding databases created for this purpose. Both of them are based on a systematic sampling of the entire PDB. A few early databases also belong to this category, including LPDB (), PLD () and AffiDB (), but they are much smaller in size and have undergone virtually no updates since original release. A summary of current databases collecting structural information and/or binding data of proteinligand complexes in all three categories is given in the Supplementary. The PDBbind database was originally developed by Prof. Shaomeng Wang's group at the University of Michigan and was first released to the public on May, 2004. Since 2007, this database has been maintained and further developed by our group at the Shanghai Institute of Organic Chemistry in China under a mutual agreement with the University of Michigan. Since then, the database has been released through the PDBbind-CN Web server at http://www.pdbbind-cn.org/ and http://www.pdbbind.org.cn/. Over the years, we have regularly updated the PDBbind database to keep pace with the growth of PDB itself. The methods for compiling the database have also been improved along the way. The latest release of PDBbind, i.e. version 2013, provides binding data for 410 700 molecular complexes in the PDB, making it the largest collection of its kind to date. In all, 42400 registered users from some 40 countries access this database regularly. There are also a large number of anonymous users around the world. In this article, we will describe the current methods used for compiling the PDBbind and its updated status. We will also review some typical applications of PDBbind published in the scientific literature to illustrate the significant value of this database.