Motivation: Design of protein–protein interaction (PPI) inhibitors is a key challenge in structural bioinformatics and computer-aided drug design. Peptides, which partially mimic the interface area of one of the interacting proteins, are natural candidates to form protein–peptide complexes competing with the original PPI. The prediction of such complexes is especially challenging due to the high flexibility of peptide conformations. Results: In this article, we present PepCrawler, a new tool for deriving binding peptides from protein–protein complexes and prediction of peptide–protein complexes, by performing high-resolution docking refinement and estimation of binding affinity. By using a fast path planning approach, PepCrawler rapidly generates large amounts of flexible peptide conformations, allowing backbone and side chain flexibility. A newly introduced binding energy funnel steepness score was applied for the evaluation of the protein–peptide complexes binding affinity. PepCrawler simulations predicted high binding affinity for native protein–peptide complexes benchmark and low affinity for low-energy decoy complexes. In three cases, where wet lab data are available, the PepCrawler predictions were consistent with the data. Comparing to other state of the art flexible peptide–protein structure prediction algorithms, our algorithm is very fast, and takes only minutes to run on a single PC.
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interactions (PPIs) play a major role in cellular function. Thus, development of small molecules that modulate PPIs has become a major challenge in structural bioinformatics and computer-aided drug design. In particular, it is desired to detect small molecules that will block the PPI, without harming the intrinsic catalytic activity of the target (;). The search for such inhibitors includes drug-like small molecule inhibitors and short peptide inhibitors. The interaction between two proteins is often characterized by a large interface, lacking a significant single binding pocket (). Therefore, peptides, which are relatively large inhibitors, can be potential leads in the rational design of inhibitory drugs by mimicking the interacting area (Nieddu * To whom correspondence should be addressed. and; Mochly-Rosen and). Both naturally occurring and synthetic peptides have been used, and these are emerging as promising compounds that efficiently modulate signaling pathways in vitro and in vivo. Some inhibitory peptides were designed by deriving a short linear segment from one of the proteins in a given PPI complex (). These peptides were successfully able to inhibit interactions with the partner protein. In some of the examples, a mutated peptide was used to achieve better results, and in others, the derived peptide was stapled to form a stable cyclic peptide. Generally, a derived inhibitory peptide is target specific and may bind to the target protein with good binding energy. Using computational measures, it was recently shown that linear derived peptides dominate the interaction energy of many PPIs (). Given an input proteinprotein complex, we wish to derive a suitable peptide from one of the proteins, with high affinity to bind to the other, as well as predict the structure of the resulting peptide protein complex. Simply deriving a rigid peptide with high binding energy from the input complex is not enough (). First, peptides are highly flexible molecules containing backbone rotatable bonds and movable side chains. Second, the input structure might not be of high enough resolution for an accurate prediction. Finally, it might be hard to determine whether the resulting peptideprotein complex is stable. Several flexible peptideprotein docking methods have been introduced.applied a Monte Carlo (MC)-based method for flexible peptideprotein docking, which takes into account also protein side chain flexibility. Their suggested new potential, which considers proteinpeptide atom pair interactions and atomic solvation contribution, accurately predicted binding affinity on the test set. Recently, an MC-based algorithm for subangstrom peptide docking refinement that utilizes the Rosetta energy function was introduced by. A molecular dynamics-based refinement method was suggested by Antes (2010). Some high-resolution docking algorithms were designed for specific protein receptors (most of them are also MC based)e.g. MHC, PDZ and SH3 domains (;). These previous methods for flexible peptide docking have relatively long running times, mostly due to time consuming side chain energy minimization, which is extensively applied. In this article, we present PepCrawlera new method for flexible peptide docking. Our algorithm requires as input an initial peptide