Motivation: Predicting RNA–RNA interactions is essential for determining the function of putative non-coding RNAs. Existing methods for the prediction of interactions are all based on single sequences. Since comparative methods have already been useful in RNA structure determination, we assume that conserved RNA–RNA interactions also imply conserved function. Of these, we further assume that a non-negligible amount of the existing RNA–RNA interactions have also acquired compensating base changes throughout evolution. We implement a method, PETcofold, that can take covariance information in intra-molecular and inter-molecular base pairs into account to predict interactions and secondary structures of two multiple alignments of RNA sequences. Results: PETcofolds ability to predict RNA–RNA interactions was evaluated on a carefully curated dataset of 32 bacterial small RNAs and their targets, which was manually extracted from the literature. For evaluation of both RNA–RNA interaction and structure prediction, we were able to extract only a few high-quality examples: one vertebrate small nucleolar RNA and four bacterial small RNAs. For these we show that the prediction can be improved by our comparative approach. Furthermore, PETcofold was evaluated on controlled data with phylogenetically simulated sequences enriched for covariance patterns at the interaction sites. We observed increased performance with increased amounts of covariance. Availability: The program PETcofold is available as source code and can be downloaded from http://rth.dk/resources/petcofold. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONNon-coding RNAs (ncRNAs) are receiving rapidly growing attention; they are present in large numbers as observed by The ENCODE Project Consortium (2007) and the FANTOM2 project (), and they appear in many unexpected cases (e.g.). The potential of functional ncRNAs is further supported by the observation that the amount of nonprotein-coding DNA increases with organismal complexity, whereas the amount of protein-coding DNA is relatively constant (). A substantial number of putative ncRNAs has emerged from several genomic in silico screens for RNA structure taking compensatory base pair changes into account (). Deep sequencing approaches are another growing source of ncRNAs (e.g.). One step towards assigning functions to these putative ncRNAs is to consider RNA interactions. An important class of these are RNARNA interactions; many ncRNAs base pair with other RNAs, such as the majority of characterized bacterial small regulatory RNAs (sRNAs) (). Besides the well-known examples of microRNAs (miRNAs) and small interfering RNAs (siRNAs), there are also many longer eukaryotic ncRNAs that act via RNARNA interaction. Examples are small nucleolar RNAs (snoRNAs), of which the main function is to guide the editing of ribosomal RNA (). However, there is growing evidence that other long ncRNAs might act via base pair interactions as well. For example, it is likely that certain long ncRNAs modulate the activity of miRNAs by forming RNARNA interactions (). Even though most screens for ncRNA candidates involve mammalian genomes () we predominantly found with the exception of a few snoRNA examples, bacterial examples of verified RNARNA interactions involving the structure of both RNAs. This pattern might be the reason that many of the existing methods for the prediction of RNARNA interactions have been designed to work on bacterial sRNAs
DISCUSSIONHere, we presented PETcofold, the first comparative method for the prediction of a joint secondary structure of two interacting RNAs. The method identifies evolutionary conserved structures and can exploit the information from compensating base changes in the intra-molecular structures of the two RNAs and the interactions between them. Furthermore, PETcofold allows for the prediction of pseudoknots between intra-and inter-molecular base pairs. We have shown in controlled runs on simulated data that the covariance information improves the prediction ability for RNARNA interactions. We have also shown both for a vertebrate snoRNA and for four bacterial sRNAs that the addition of evolutionary information from multiple sequence alignments improves the performance in comparison to methods based on single sequences. This implies that single sequence-based methods could perform better if the comparative information is also taken into account. As for other RNA structure prediction methods making use of sequence-based alignments, it is well-documented that these work best with an average pairwise sequence identity above 60% (). In the process of cleaning up the (already sparse) bacterial data, we took this into account by removing more distant sequences to keep the balance of accurate assignment and covariance patterns of base pairs. Many genomic screens for ncRNAs predict secondary structures with compensatory base pair changes on RNA alignments. These intra-molecular structures can be used as input of step 1 of the PETcofold pipeline to identify highly reliable substructures, which are then constrained for step 2. For example, PETcofold could be applied to predict RNARNA interactions on the CMfindergenerated structure-based alignments of de novo predicted RNA motifs in the ENCODE regions (). The sparse amount of known examples of sequences with RNARNA interactions and the paucity of covariations were the reasons why we introduced simulated data. Some of the known examples of RNARNA interactions, e.g. from bacterial sRNA mRNA and eukaryotic miRNAmRNA interactions, tend to be rather conserved. Even in cases with little or no compensating base pairs (in interaction sites or in the intra-molecular structure), any given variation will collectively contribute to the calculation of the reliabilities and thereby to the overall structure of the interaction complex. Hence, in the complete lack of covariation, PETcofold reduces to an improved energy folding approach, which also has impact on matching up the interacting base pairs. The sRNA mRNA interactions studied here exhibit only a small number of compensatory base pair changes, which might be because sRNA sequences often show poor conservation across distant bacterial species. Thus, the regulators might be recently acquired and rapidly evolving (). Nevertheless, many of the homologous ncRNAs and mRNAs have been found based on sequence similarity, which leads to highly identical sequences and thereby also to highly conserved interactions. PETcofold considers sequence conservation, but its full power is only revealed when the input data contains structural covariance. In the future, we expect that deep sequencing approaches will give rise to many more Page: 218 211219