Protein function prediction (PFP) is an automated function prediction method that predicts Gene Ontology (GO) annotations for a protein sequence using distantly related sequences and contextual associations of GO terms. Extended similarity group (ESG) is another GO prediction algorithm that makes predictions based on iterative sequence database searches. Here, we provide interactive web servers for the PFP and ESG algorithms that are equipped with an effective visualization of the GO predictions in a hierarchical topology. Availability: PFP/ESG servers are freely available at
INTRODUCTIONThe rapid growth of genomics and proteomics technologies has posed a major challenge of large-scale automatic annotations of newly sequenced data that awaits functional interpretation. Advanced algorithms can often provide more accurate annotations with a larger coverage than conventional function prediction methods that use homology as the source of information. Here we developed web servers for our two sequence-based function prediction algorithms, protein function prediction (PFP) and extended similarity group (ESG). PFP extends traditional PSI-BLAST () search by extracting and scoring Gene Ontology (GO) annotations from distantly similar sequences and by applying contextual associations of GO terms observed in the annotation database to the scoring scheme (). PFP was ranked the best in the function prediction category in the Critical Assessment of Techniques for Protein Structure Prediction (L). ESG performs an iterative sequence database search and assigns a probability score to GO terms based on its relative similarity scores to the multiple-level neighbors in a protein similarity graph (). ESG was shown to outperform conventional methods in a thorough benchmark study. In the large-scale community-based critical assessment of protein function annotation experiment, ESG was ranked fourth in predicting Molecular Function GO terms among 54 participating groups (). Thus, both PFP and ESG have been rigorously benchmarked both in the original papers and in objective assessments by the community. Predictive performance of the two methods is discussed in Supplementary Data.