Motivation: Discerning genetic contributions to diseases not only enhances our understanding of disease mechanisms, but also leads to translational opportunities for drug discovery. Recent computational approaches incorporate disease phenotypic similarities to improve the prediction power of disease gene discovery. However, most current studies used only one data source of human disease phenotype. We present an innovative and generic strategy for combining multiple different data sources of human disease phenotype and predicting disease-associated genes from integrated phenotypic and genomic data. Results: To demonstrate our approach, we explored a new phenotype database from biomedical ontologies and constructed Disease Manifestation Network (DMN). We combined DMN with mimMiner, which was a widely used phenotype database in disease gene prediction studies. Our approach achieved significantly improved performance over a baseline method, which used only one phenotype data source. In the leave-one-out cross-validation and de novo gene prediction analysis , our approach achieved the area under the curves of 90.7% and 90.3%, which are significantly higher than 84.2% (P  e À4) and 81.3% (P  e À12) for the baseline approach. We further demonstrated that our predicted genes have the translational potential in drug discovery. We used Crohns disease as an example and ranked the candidate drugs based on the rank of drug targets. Our gene prediction approach prioritized druggable genes that are likely to be associated with Crohns disease pathogenesis, and our rank of candidate drugs successfully prioritized the Food and Drug Administration-approved drugs for Crohns disease. We also found literature evidence to support a number of drugs among the top 200 candidates. In summary, we demonstrated that a novel strategy combining unique disease phenotype data with system approaches can lead to rapid drug discovery.
IntroductionIdentifying the genetic basis for human diseases plays an important role in elucidating disease mechanisms and discovering targets of drug treatments (). For computational strategies to predict disease-associated genes, integrating new data may lead to new discoveries (). Traditional approaches exploited genomic data and prioritized genes for a disease if the genes are functionally similar to the known disease genes (). Recent studies incorporated clinical phenotype data to increase the ability of identifying new diseaseassociated genes (), assuming that similar disease phenotypes reflect overlapping genetic causes (). However, most current disease gene prediction approaches (