Knowledge of pathogen–host protein interactions is required to better understand infection mechanisms. The pathogen– host interaction search tool (PHISTO) is a web-accessible platform that provides relevant information about pathogen–host interactions (PHIs). It enables access to the most up-to-date PHI data for all pathogen types for which experimentally verified protein interactions with human are available. The platform also offers integrated tools for visu-alization of PHI networks, graph–theoretical analysis of targeted human proteins, BLAST search and text mining for detecting missing experimental methods. PHISTO will facilitate PHI studies that provide potential therapeutic targets for infectious diseases.
INTRODUCTIONThe interactions between the proteins of infectious microorganisms, pathogens and their human hosts allow the microorganisms to manipulate human cellular mechanisms to their own advantage, resulting in infection in the host organism. The recent advances in high-throughput protein interaction detection methods have led to the production of large-scale interspecies protein protein interaction (PPI) data of pathogenhuman systems. Currently, there are a number of pathogenhost interaction (PHI) resources that are specific to some pathogens. The only available resource to access all PHI data in a single database () does not offer any additional functionality to analyze PHI networks. We have developed pathogen host interaction search tool (PHISTO) to serve as an up-to-date and functionally enhanced source of PHI data through a userfriendly interface. PHIs in PHISTO are imported from several PPI databases using the PSICQUIC tool (). Text mining is used to label PHIs extracted without any information on interaction detection method. Tools for visualization of small PHI networks and graphtheoretical analysis of targeted human proteins may enable users to gain crucial insights on infection mechanisms. The BLAST interface offers to search for orthologous PHIs for pathogens lacking experimental data.