Targeted enrichment of conserved and ultraconserved genomic elements allows universal collection of phylogenomic data from hundreds of species at multiple time scales (5 Ma to  300 Ma). Prior to downstream inference, data from these types of targeted enrichment studies must undergo preprocessing to assemble contigs from sequence data; identify targeted, enriched loci from the off-target background data; align enriched contigs representing conserved loci to one another; and prepare and manipulate these alignments for subsequent phylogenomic inference. PHYLUCE is an efficient and easy-to-install software package that accomplishes these tasks across hundreds of taxa and thousands of enriched loci. Availability and Implementation: PHYLUCE is written for Python 2.7. PHYLUCE is supported on OSX and Linux (RedHat/CentOS) operating systems. PHYLUCE source code is distributed under a BSD-style license from https://www.github.com/faircloth-lab/phyluce/. PHYLUCE is also available as a package (https://binstar.org/faircloth-lab/phyluce) for the Anaconda Python distribution that installs all dependencies, and users can request a PHYLUCE instance on iPlant Atmosphere (tag: phyluce). The software manual and a tutorial are available from http://phyluce.readthedocs.org/en/latest/ and test data are available from
IntroductionTarget enrichment of conserved and ultraconserved elements (hereafter 'conserved loci') allows universal phylogenomic analyses of nonmodel organisms () at multiple time scales (). The strength of the approach derives from its ability to collect sequence data from thousands of loci across hundreds of species, permitting phylogenetic comparisons across deep phylogenetic breaks such as organismal Classes (200 300 Ma) and shallower evolutionary divergences such as populations (0.55 Ma). When the goal of data collection is to infer the evolutionary history of species, the subsequent analytical tasks are generally to:(i) assemble the sequencing reads, which may span tens to hundreds of individuals; (ii) identify putative orthologs among the assembled contigs on a sample-by-sample basis while removing putative paralogs; (iii) easily generate datasets that contain different individuals, individuals included from other experiments or conserved locus data harvested from individual genome sequences; (iv) identify and export sequence data from orthologs across all individuals in the set; (v) align the data and optionally trim resulting alignments in preparation for phylogenetic inference; (vi) compute summary statistics on the aligned data and (vii) perform utility functions on the sequence or alignment data to prepare them for downstream analyses using a variety of phylogenetic inference programs. PHYLUCE (pronounced 'phy-loo-chee') is the first opensource, easy-to-install software package to perform these tasks for target enriched, conserved loci in a computationally efficient manner.