Motivation: Design of protein–protein interaction (PPI) inhibitors is a major challenge in Structural Bioinformatics. Peptides, especially short ones (5–15 amino acid long), are natural candidates for inhibition of protein–protein complexes due to several attractive features such as high structural compatibility with the protein binding site (mimicking the surface of one of the proteins), small size and the ability to form strong hotspot binding connections with the protein surface. Efficient rational peptide design is still a major challenge in computer aided drug design, due to the huge space of possible sequences, which is exponential in the length of the peptide, and the high flexibility of peptide conformations. Results: In this article we present PinaColada, a novel computational method for the design of pep-tide inhibitors for protein–protein interactions. We employ a version of the ant colony optimization heuristic, which is used to explore the exponential space (20 n) of length n peptide sequences, in combination with our fast robotics motivated PepCrawler algorithm, which explores the conform-ational space for each candidate sequence. PinaColada is being run in parallel, on a DELL PowerEdge 2.8 GHZ computer with 20 cores and 256 GB memory, and takes up to 24 h to design a peptide of 5-15 amino acids length. Availability and implementation: An online server available at: http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PinaColada/.
IntroductionProteinprotein interactions (PPIs) play a crucial role in many cellular processes and pathways. Thus, development of small molecules that affect PPIs has become an intensive research field in Structural Bioinformatics and Computer Aided Drug Design. The task is to discover small molecules that will block a specific PPI, without harming the function (e.g. catalytic activity) of the target proteins (). Some of those desired inhibitors include small-molecule inhibitors and short peptide inhibitors. An interaction between two proteins usually consists of a large interface without a well characterized binding pocket (). Peptides could be good starting points for new leads in rational design of inhibitory drugs by mimicking part of the interacting surface of one of the proteins (Mochly). Peptides, both natural and non-natural, have been used to inhibit PPIs. Some experimental studies have investigated inhibitory peptides as competitive docking partners (). Some studies found inhibitory peptides for various kinds of interactions, including membrane protein interactions (), proteinDNA binding (), signaling pathways (), etc. These studies have been conducted both in vitro and in vivo. Many biological studies that try to find potent inhibitory peptides, used screening of a random peptide library to explore the potential sequence space. Such a method could be potentially improved, by exploring a pool of peptides which have already been in-silico validated, thus significantly decreasing the search space. This emphasizes the need for a rational algorithm to design a pool of in-silico validated suggestions thus reducing significantly the search space of in-vitro peptide design. A common method to design inhibitory peptides is to extract a short linear fragment from one of the proteins in a given PPI complex (). We also use this approach for the derivation of an initial template for our design algorithm. Another validation for this approach comes from studies showing that, the interaction energy of many key processes and pathways is dominated by proteinpeptide interactions (). Moreover, the binding of intrinsically disordered proteins is partly or mainly peptide mediated (). However, many trials show that non-mutated peptides extracted from the interface do not achieve high enough binding affinity themselves. In some case studies randomly selected mutations improved the binding energy of linear derived peptides. In other cases, peptides were stapled either to make a cyclic peptide, or to ensure that the peptide keeps a helical shape (). Nevertheless, evidence suggests that linear derived peptides are a good target-specific starting point for peptide design (). In the recent years, there have been major developments in the related field of proteinpeptide docking. Promising algorithms for peptide binding site prediction, which play a significant role in peptide design have been developed. These include algorithms for peptide binding site prediction, such as PepSite2 (), algorithms for local docking and refinement such as PepCrawler (), FlexPepDock () and algorithms for ab-initio peptide docking such as FlexPepDock ab-initio (), GalaxyDock () and pepATTRACT (). There have also been several developments in knowledge based computational design of peptides. However, most of them deal with target-specific design, such as inhibitors for the well studied PDZ, SH2, SH3 domains which have simple binding sequence motifs such as PxxP, the NOTCH signaling pathway (), MHC class II molecules (), or T-cell epitopes (). A comprehensive review byencompasses a lot of the variability in this field. In this article, we present PinaColada  a novel computational method for inhibitory peptide design. Given an input proteinprotein complex, our algorithm extracts a suitable initial peptide from one of the proteins, with high affinity to bind to the other. Then, it transforms the initial peptide through a sequence of mutations which are optimized by the ant-colony method (). The goal is to find the highest affinity inhibitory peptide sequences for the given PPI. We deal with the problem of predicting the peptide conformation and free energy of the interaction with the receptor protein, by applying the PepCrawler algorithm (), which is a fast refinement (local docking) algorithm for peptideprotein interactions. We also let the user specify biological constraints for the resulting peptides. Such constraints may consider solubility, hydrophobicity, helicality and other more specific constraints. The output of the algorithm is a list of suggested peptide sequences to bind the target and inhibit the interaction. A webserver, which enables users to apply PinaColada has been set up at: http://bioinfo3d.cs.tau.ac.il/PinaColada/.