Motivation: Plasmids are stably maintained extra-chromosomal genetic elements that replicate independently from the host cells chromosomes. Although plasmids harbor biomedically important genes, (such as genes involved in virulence and antibiotics resistance), there is a shortage of specialized software tools for extracting and assembling plasmid data from whole genome sequencing projects. Results: We present the plasmidSPAdes algorithm and software tool for assembling plasmids from whole genome sequencing data and benchmark its performance on a diverse set of bacterial genomes. Availability and Implementation: PLASMIDSPADES is publicly available at
IntroductionPlasmids are common in Bacteria and Archaea, but have been detected in Eukaryotes as well (). The cells often have multiple plasmids of varying sizes existing together in different numbers of copies per cell. Plasmids are important genetic engineering tools and the vectors of horizontal gene transfer that may harbor genes involved in virulence and antibiotic resistance. Thus, studies of plasmids are important for understanding the evolution of these traits and for tracing the proliferation of drug-resistant bacteria. Since plasmids are difficult to study using Whole Genome Sequencing (WGS) data, biologists often use special biochemical methods for extracting and isolating plasmid molecules for further plasmidome sequencing (). In the case of WGS, when a genome of a bacterial species is assembled, its plasmids often remain unidentified. Obtaining information about plasmids from thousands of genome sequencing projects (without preliminary plasmid isolation) is difficult since it is not clear which contigs in the genome assembly have arisen from plasmids. Since the proliferation of plasmids carrying antimicrobial resistance and virulence genes leads to the proliferation of drug resistantbacterial strains, it is important to understand the epidemiology of plasmids and to develop plasmid typing systems.developed PlasmidFinder software for detecting and classifying variants of known plasmids based on their similarity with plasmids present in plasmid databases. However, PlasmidFinder is unable to identify novel plasmids that have no significant similarities to known plasmids.developed the plasmid constellation network (PLACNET) tool for assembling plasmids from WGS data and applied it for analyzing plasmid diversity and adaptation () PLACNET uses three types of information to identify plasmids: (i) information about scaffold links and coverage in the WGS assembly, (ii) comparison to reference plasmid sequences and (iii) plasmid-diagnostic sequence features such as replication initiator proteins. PLACNET combines these three types of data and outputs a network that needs to be further pruned by expert analysis to eliminate confounding data. While combining all three types of data for plasmid sequencing is important, the focus of this paper is only on using WGS assembly for plasmid reconstruction in a fully automatic fashion. We argue that while the analysis of scaffolds inis important, there is a wealth of additional information about plasmids encoded in the structure of the de Bruijn graph (constructed from k-mers in reads) thatdo not consider. Recently,demonstrated how to use the de Bruijn graphs constructed by the SPADES assembler () to significantly improve the plasmid assembly (focusing on data generated using plasmid isolation techniques) as well as reconstruction of plasmid sequences from metagenomics datasets. Below we describe a novel tool (PLASMIDSPADES) aimed at assembling plasmids from the WGS data. Recently, this problem was addressed in the case of long SMRT reads () but it remains open for datasets containing short Illumina reads, which represent the lion's share of bacterial sequencing projects. We show that PLASMIDSPADES has the potential to massively increase the throughput of plasmid sequencing and to provide information about plasmids in thousands of sequenced bacterial genomes by re-assembling their genomes, identifying their plasmids and supplementing the corresponding GenBank entries with the plasmid annotations. Such plasmid sequencing efforts are important since many questions about plasmid function and evolution remain unanswered. For example,recently found a striking example of a bacterium (Aureimonas sp. AU20) that harbors the rRNA operon on a plasmid rather than on the chromosome. Thus, re-sequencing 1000s of bacterial genomes with the goal to reassemble their plasmids will help to answer important questions about plasmid evolution. We illustrate how plasmidSPAdes contributes to plasmid discovery by analyzing the Citrobacter freundii CFNIH1 genome with wellannotated plasmids and identifying a new previously overlooked plasmid in this genome. We also show how PLASMIDSPADES was used to discover eight new plasmids in ten randomly chosen shotgun datasets derived from bacterial genomes and deposited in the Short Reads Archive. We further benchmark various tools for plasmid sequencing and provide the first analysis of accuracy of existing plasmid sequencing tools across diverse bacterial genomes.
DiscussionWe described a novel PLASMIDSPADES algorithm for assembling plasmids from whole genome sequencing data. Since PLASMIDSPADES does not require any specialized sample preparation to isolate plasmids, it has a potential to increase the throughput of plasmid discovery. It thus complements a recently published approach mainly aimed at analyzing plasmids after plasmid isolation (). Asillustrates, PLASMIDSPADES identifies eight plasmids in ten randomly selected SRA dataset (three of them are not similar to any previously identified plasmids). We thus expect that 1000s of new plasmids will be identified when PLASMIDSPADES runs on all bacterial and achaeal SRA genome datasets.