Current strategies for SNP and INDEL discovery incorporate sequence alignments from multiple individuals to maximize sensitivity and specificity. It is widely accepted that this approach also improves structural variant (SV) detection. However, multisample SV analysis has been sty-mied by the fundamental difficulties of SV calling, e.g. library insert size variability, SV alignment signal integration and detecting long-range genomic rearrangements involving disjoint loci. Extant tools suffer from poor scalability, which limits the number of genomes that can be co-analyzed and complicates analysis workflows. We have developed an approach that enables multisample SV analysis in hundreds to thousands of human genomes using commodity hardware. Here, we describe Hydra-Multi and measure its accuracy, speed and scalability using publicly available data-sets provided by
IntroductionWe present an extension of Hydra (), our structural variant (SV) discovery software that, like many extant tools, was designed to detect SV in a single genome using discordant paired-end alignment signals. Hydra-Multi generalizes the Hydra algorithm to multiple samples/libraries and extends its scalability to incorporate information from many genomes simultaneously. Variant discovery from multiple samples has been a staple of SNP and INDEL discovery (), and has been shown to provide substantial improvement in accuracy over the single-genome strategy. Therefore, it is logical to make use of all available data in SV detection, especially due to the ever-increasing number of datasets from large projects such as The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) andThe 1000 Genomes Project (1KGP). We previously applied multisample SV discovery in a study of genome instability in mouse-induced pluripotent stem cell lines (). However, the algorithm employed for that study was limited to a handful of samples. Hydra-Multi was therefore developed to call SVs in a large number of 'tumor-normal' pairs (). In previous studies, the standard cancer genome workflow consisted of calling SVs in a tumor and a matched normal and subsequently compared the calls in each sample to find putative somatic mutations. Such 'tumor-normal' comparisons are fraught with somatic misclassifications (i.e. predicting that a variant is somatic when it is actually in the germline) where evidence of SV is found in the tumor but not the normal. This problem is exacerbated when shallow coverage is obtained for normal samples, leading to a greater number of false somatic SV predictions in the tumor sample. In contrast, directly integrating multiple datasets can prevent somatic misclassification in cases where the supporting alignments do not exist in the matched normal but do exist in the genomes of other normal samples.Other algorithms () have employed similar strategies; however, these frameworks either scale poorly on commodity hardware or simply perform post hoc genotyping rather than directly combining all data during SV discovery. Genotyping after discovery can suffer from instances where ample coverage may not be present, and therefore SV breakpoints are missed in the discovery phase.