Motivation: Recent abundance of data from studies employing high-throughput technologies to reveal alterations in human disease on genomic, transcriptomic, proteomic and other levels, offer the possibility to integrate this information into a comprehensive picture of molecular events occurring in human disease. Diversity of data originating from these studies presents a methodological obstacle in the integration process, also due to difficulties in choosing the optimal unified denominator that would allow inclusion of variables from various types of studies. We present a novel approach for integration of such multi-origin data based on positions of genetic alterations occurring in human diseases. Parkinsons disease (PD) was chosen as a model for evaluation of our methodology. Methods: Datasets from various types of studies in PD (linkage, genome-wide association, transcriptomic and proteomic studies) were obtained from online repositories or were extracted from available research papers. Subsequently, human genome assembly was subdivided into 10 kb regions, and significant signals from aforementioned studies were arranged into their corresponding regions according to their genomic position. For each region, rank product values were calculated and significance values were estimated by permuting the original dataset. Results: Altogether, 179 regions (representing 33 contiguous genomic regions) had significant accumulation of signals when P-value cutoff was set at 0.0001. Identified regions with significant accumulation of signals contained 29 plausible candidate genes for PD. In conclusion, we present a novel approach for identification of candidate regions and genes for various human disorders, based on the positional integration of data across various types of omic studies.
INTRODUCTIONIt has been anticipated that development of highly parallel technologies would significantly improve our knowledge of several unresolved issues regarding the etiology of human disease, including details of its pathogenesis and the role of contributing risk factors. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Consequently, several attempts at discerning alterations in genomic sequence, gene expression and protein profiles leading to onset of various diseases have been performed, employing high-throughput methodologies. However, results from these studies have still not clarified disease etiology and pathophysiology satisfactorily and have provided a multiplicity of results that are complex to interpret (). In addition, the inherent difficulty of these studies is frequent occurrence of false positive results due to multiple testing issues, usually small numbers of samples investigated and generally low technical and statistical reproducibility of obtained results (). In order to facilitate discovery of biologically significant genetic alterations based on such data, an integrative analysis of publicly available datasets from studies that investigate global alterations in human disease on different biological layers genome, transcriptome, proteome and phenomeis proposed. Integrative approach is based on the assumption that genes consistently associated with a disease on different biological layers in different large-scale study types are likely to reflect biologically relevant associations with disease investigated. In biological sense, alterations in genomic sequence can be reflected in changes of gene expression and consequently in alterations of proteomic profile that ultimately lead to observed phenotypes. The probability of a selected gene being associated to a disease as a consequence of a noisy, false-positive result would therefore be reduced by using integrative approach, as it is unlikely that a same false positive gene has been discovered simultaneously in different study types, if we assume that there is no bias toward selecting a certain group of false positive genes in all these studies. Considerable difficulties may arise when combining different types of biological information (). Multiple attempts at integration of such heterogeneous data have already been reported in the literature and approaches to such prioritization of genes have been based either on candidate genes' functional similarity to a set of predefined training genes with known biological role in a disease under investigation (); or on experimental data from studies investigating specific alterations in the disease state (). In the approach proposed byand implemented in Endeavour software, the prioritization of candidate genes was performed by investigating their similarity to a training set of genes, based on multiple sources of data, including various annotation, expression, interaction, phenotype and other databases, followed by global ranking using order statistics.
DISCUSSIONIn our study, we have performed a positional integratomic search for candidate genomic regions and candidate genes, based onthe integration of data-originating studies that investigated global alterations in PD on different biological layers. From largescale studies in PD, 179 regions were selected by demonstrating significantly increased aggregation of signals across at least four different biological layers of data from large-scale studies in PD. Recent technological advances have enabled identification of molecular alterations occurring in human diseases on a global scale. However, these approaches are intrinsically burdened by the high dimensionality of data leading to multiple testing issues, usually small numbers of samples investigated and generally low technical and statistical reproducibility of obtained results (). We therefore hypothesized that an integrated approach, involving several layers of biological information interconnected by flow of information defined by central dogma of molecular biology could provide additional insight into events occurring in complex diseases. It is not uncommon that intermediate and minor alterations found in various large-scale studies are disregarded in further studies as they are interpreted as non-specific noise in the data. However, a proportion of these alterations could nevertheless represent biologically relevant information. Consistent observation of such alterations in various types of large-scale studies may suggest a biologically important signal, although they may only reach intermediate or minor significance levels in separate studies. Therefore, this additional level of complexity may provide a more complete insight into disease pathogenesis and assist in searching for optimal disease biomarkers for PD and other complex disorders. Integration of data from various sources has previously been employed to select for genes with consistently highest significance scores from various different studies (). Previous integration studies have utilized genecentric approaches, combining information from various types of studies using gene names or accessions as a common denominator. However, several issues may arise when using gene-centric approach to integration of multi-sourced data. First, difficulties may arise due to inconsistencies in gene annotation used for reporting of results in various types of large-scale studies. Results of these studies are often provided using differing