We present an operon predictor for prokaryotic operons (PPO), which can predict operons in the entire prokaryotic genome. The prediction algorithm used in PPO allows the user to select binary particle swarm optimization (BPSO), a genetic algorithm (GA) or some other methods introduced in the literature to predict operons. The operon predictor on our web server and the provided database are easy to access and use. The main features offered are: (i) selection of the prediction algorithm; (ii) adjustable parameter settings of the prediction algorithm; (iii) graphic visualization of results; (iv) integrated database queries; (v) listing of experimentally verified operons; and (vi) related tools. Availability and implementation: PPO is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONAn operon consists of one or more consecutive genes on the same DNA strand that share a common promoter and terminator and are therefore co-transcribed into a single-strand mRNA sequence. Genes belonging to the same operon tend to work together. Operon prediction can be used to infer the functions of putative proteins (), and also provides valuable information for drug design and determining a protein's functions. However, the number of operons known to date is relatively small, and experimental methods to verify operons cannot keep up with genome sequencing in price and speed. Improving the operon prediction process has thus become a very important issue. Many operon databases have been constructed and made available. RegulonDB () and DBTBS () collect experimentally validated operons on the Escherichia coli and Bacillus subtilis genome, respectively. DOOR (Database of prOkaryotic OpeRons) () and MicrobesOnline () collect and sort the predicted operons based on the method that was used to identify them. ODB (Operon DataBase) collects the operons of 203 genomes and contains both predicted and experimentally verified operons (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.In this study, we present a web server called PPO (Predictor for Prokaryotic Operons), which integrates a database with a predictor. The PPO database collects the predicted operons of 592 genomes, and provides a search function for operons and genes. Furthermore, PPO contains references to some literature methods and improves on their optimization algorithms, thus resulting in better prediction performance. Users can freely select the necessary parameters. The ease of use and the data provided make it a very useful operon platform for bioinformatics research.
CONCLUSIONA novel platform for operon prediction called PPO is proposed, which provides a highly reliable predictor and a database for bioinformatics research. In this platform, the superior BPSO and the GA method are applied to predict operons, but two other methods from the literature can also be selected. The used prediction algorithm, biological properties and related parameters can be freely selected. The database collects information related to highly likely putative operons on 592 prokaryotic genomes and provides search functions for users. Ongoing efforts are made to enhance the algorithms, properties and literature-based operon data for PPO, thus providing a perfect operon prediction platform for researchers.