Motivation: Combinatorial therapies have been under intensive research for cancer treatment. However , due to the large number of possible combinations among candidate compounds, exhaustive screening is prohibitive. Hence, it is important to develop computational tools that can predict compound combination effects, prioritize combinations and limit the search space to facilitate and accelerate the development of combinatorial therapies. Results: In this manuscript we consider the NCI-DREAM Drug Synergy Prediction Challenge dataset to identify features informative about combination effects. Through systematic exploration of differential expression profiles after single compound treatments and comparison of molecular structures of compounds, we found that synergistic levels of combinations are statistically significantly associated with compounds dissimilarity in structure and similarity in induced gene expression changes. These two types of features offer complementary information in predicting experimentally measured combination effects of compound pairs. Our findings offer insights on the mechanisms underlying different combination effects and may help prioritize promising combinations in the very large search space. Availability: The R code for the analysis is available on https://github.com/YiyiLiu1/DrugCombination.
IntroductionDesigning effective therapies for cancer treatment is an important yet challenging task. Although monotherapies are commonly used to treat cancer (), they suffer from many problems, such as acquired resistance and poor safety (). Combinatorial therapies, by utilizing compounds impacting multiple biological processes simultaneously, have great potentials to overcome these problems and are attracting growing interest in drug development (). Indeed, there are many effective combinations used in practice. For example, the combination of Lapatinib and Capecitabine can achieve improved efficacy in breast cancer treatment (). In this study we focus on two-way combinations because most studies and available data to date are on two-way combinations and yet all existing methods are still limited in their performance in predicting the effectiveness of two-way combinations. Generally, when two compounds act together, their combination effect can be categorized into three main types: additive, if the effect of combination is equivalent to the sum of the effects of two compounds acting individually; synergistic, if the combination effect is greater than additive; and antagonistic, if the combination effect is less than additive. Typically compound combination effects are inferred through cell culture experiments, where cell viabilities under treatment with compounds in combination and treatment with compounds individually are measured and compared. However, since the number of possible combinations grows rapidly with the number of compounds under consideration, exhaustive experimental screening of all these combinations is prohibitively costly. Therefore, it is very useful to develop computational methods that can prioritize different combinations in order to Associate Editor: Dr. Jonathan Wren reduce the search space for screening experiments. There are inspiring attempts made towards this goal (). However, while it is known combination effects can be cell-line specific (), most existing computational methods were trained using only the specific types of combination effects (synergistic/additive/antagonistic) collected from literature review or databases, without considering the cell lines they were tested on or other experimental contexts. Besides, many of these methods rely heavily on prior knowledge of drug combination mechanisms, which is far from complete and accurate. In this paper, we aim to identify features informative on combination effects of compound pairs using the dataset from the NCI-DREAM Drug Synergy Prediction Challenge (). This DREAM challenge measured gene expression profiles of OCL-LY3 diffuse large Bcell lymphoma cells pre-and post-14 single compound treatments, and experimentally evaluated the combination effects of 91 pairwise combinations of these 14 compounds. In the original challenge, participants proposed different methods to predict combination effects using gene expression profiles, but no unanimous conclusion could be drawn on the relation between synergistic effects and transcriptome changes induced by single compounds (). Although a few participants considered compound chemical/molecular features such as structure, the relevance of these features to combination effects was not demonstrated. In this paper, we adopt the structural similarity of compounds defined in) and consider four similarity measures for gene expression changes resulting from single compound treatments. We systematically explore whether the structural similarity and expression similarity is associated with combination effects using PC-index and resampled Spearman correlation (). Because we are interested in prioritizing compound pairs likely having synergistic effects, we also evaluate the area under the receiver operation characteristic curve (AUC) for synergistic combination prediction using structural similarity and expression similarity individually and jointly. For the NCI-DREAM challenge data set, we find that synergistic effect prediction using gene expression similarity defined with one of the four measures outperforms the best method reported in the original challenge, and that prediction using structural similarity also outperforms most of the methods proposed for the original challenge (). Moreover, combining gene expression and structure information together further improves predictive power for synergistic effects. Our findings in this paper may lead to better computational methods to prioritize compound combinations and facilitate future drug development.