Motivation: MicroRNA (miRNA) expression has been found to be deregulated in human cancer, contributing, in part, to the interest of the research community in using miRNAs as alternative therapeutic targets. Although miRNAs could be potential targets, identifying which miRNAs to target for a particular type of cancer has been difficult due to the limited knowledge on their regulatory roles in cancer. We address this challenge by integrating miRNA-target prediction, metabolic modeling and context-specific gene expression data to predict therapeutic miRNAs that could reduce the growth of cancer. Results: We developed a novel approach to simulate a condition-specific metabolic system for human hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC) wherein overexpression of each miRNA was simulated to predict their ability to reduce cancer cell growth. Our approach achieved 480% accuracy in predicting the miRNAs that could suppress metas-tasis and progression of liver cancer based on various experimental evidences in the literature. This condition-specific metabolic system provides a framework to explore the mechanisms by which miRNAs modulate metabolic functions to affect cancer growth. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first computational approach implemented to predict therapeutic miRNAs for human cancer based on their functional role in cancer metabolism. Analyzing the metabolic functions altered by the miRNA-identified metabolic genes essential for cell growth and proliferation that are targeted by the miRNAs. Availability and implementation: See supplementary protocols and
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNA (miRNA) expression has been found to be deregulated in human cancer (). Some of the first miRNAs identified to be involved in cancer were miR-15 and miR-16, which were found downregulated in most lymphocytic leukemia patients (). Others include oncogenic miR-17-92, which promotes c-Myc-induced tumorigenesis in mice (), and a tumor suppressor miRNA let-7, which inhibits expression of the oncogene RAS in lung cancer cell lines (). Further, a global decrease in miRNA levels was observed in human cancers (). Knockout of the miRNA processing enzymes, Drosha and Dicer, enhances cancer cell growth in vitro and their invasiveness in mice (), confirming that widespread reduction in miRNA expression could promote tumorigenesis. Therefore, miRNAs could have intrinsic functions in tumor suppression and be potential therapeutic targets. Synthetic miRNAs can be introduced into mammalian systems (), as was shown in a pioneering study on therapeutic miRNA delivery of miR-26 s in a HCC mice model that successfully inhibited tumor cell proliferation and induced cancer-specific apoptosis (). Although miRNAs could be potential alternative targets for cancer treatment, it has been difficult to identify which miRNAs to target for a particular type of cancer, as the underlying mechanisms of how miRNAs are involved in cancer are largely unknown. Experimental evidences of how miRNAs regulate their targets in cancer cells have been limited. The expression of individual targets, such as RAS () and E2F1 (O'), has been shown to be regulated by miRNAs and thereby used to explain the association of miRNAs with cancer. However, each miRNA could regulate many target genes, and the same miRNA could have oncogenic or anti-tumorgenic activity depending on the context or cell type in which the targets are expressed. Current computational studies focus primarily on analyzing miRNA expression profiles to identify miRNAs that are differentially expressed or signatures that can separate a particular cancer type from normal samples (). More advanced data mining approaches integrate miRNA, gene expression data and putative miRNAgene interactions to identify regulatory modules in which the miRNA expression is found to be negatively correlated with putative targets in the cancer samples (). Nevertheless, it remains unclear whether the altered miRNA expressions are the cause or consequence of the carcinogenesis processes, and which miRNAs could be good targets for treatment. Furthermore, as an miRNA could simultaneously target many genes, it has been difficult with current approaches to systematically predict the effect on perturbation of an miRNA. In this study, we propose an alternative approach to tackle this problem and integrate putative miRNAtarget-gene interactions, metabolic modeling and context-specific gene expression data. Our analysis focuses on the human metabolic system, as abnormal metabolic functions are known to be involved in supporting tumor growth and proliferation (). *To whom correspondence should be addressed. For example, most cancer cells have higher glycolytic rates, which is called 'Warburg effect' (). A recent study on breast cancer further uncovered alterations in glucose metabolism mediated by the phosphoglycerate dehydrogenase enzyme (), whose expression was found to be associated with poor prognosis (). Because metabolism plays an essential role in cell growth and proliferation, genes regulating metabolism have been used as drug targets in the treatment of cancer (). We hypothesize that miRNAs could be implicated in the metabolic regulation of cancer, and study the targets of miRNAs in the context of the human metabolic network for which detailed mechanistic information is available for systems modeling. Our approach takes advantage of current knowledge of the human metabolic network to reconstruct a context-specific metabolic system for human liver cancer (HCC). The model is used to predict miRNAs whose overexpression or delivery could inhibit cancer cell growth by downregulating its target metabolic genes. By explicitly modeling the cancer phenotype as a specific metabolic state, we are able to predict not only the miRNAs 'involved' or 'altered' in cancer but also the potential miRNA targets that could change the cancer metabolic phenotype if perturbed. These targets could be candidates in the treatment of the disease. This is in contrast to previous studies of miRNA in cancer where the 'cancer phenotype' is used as a label/annotation of samples against another label of 'normal' (). Our approach provides a computational platform to integrate knowledge from different sources, to study in silico the global effect of miRNA perturbations on the metabolic network and to generate hypotheses that could provide insights into the mechanisms underlying the regulation of miRNAs on cancer metabolism.
DISCUSSION