Motivation: Predicting trajectories of signaling networks under complex perturbations is one of the most valuable, but challenging, tasks in systems biology. Signaling networks are involved in most of the biological pathways, and modeling their dynamics has wide applications including drug design and treatment outcome prediction. Results: In this paper, we report a novel model for predicting the cell type-specific time course response of signaling proteins under unseen perturbations. This algorithm achieved the top performance in the 2013 8th Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM 8) subchallenge: time course prediction in breast cancer cell lines. We formulate the trajectory prediction problem into a standard regularization problem; the solution becomes solving this discrete ill-posed problem. This algorithm includes three steps: denoising, estimating regression coefficients and modeling trajectories under unseen perturbations. We further validated the accuracy of this method against simulation and experimental data. Furthermore, this method reduces computational time by magnitudes compared to state-of-the-art methods, allowing genome-wide modeling of signaling pathways and time course trajectories to be carried out in a practical time. Availability and implementation: Source code is available at
INTRODUCTIONProtein signaling networks, especially those involving phosphoproteins, play a critical role in diverse cellular functions and are related to almost all pathways (). Understanding these networks under defined perturbations, e.g. inhibitions or stimulations on certain gene(s), has wide applications in many medical fields, especially cancers, which are heterogeneous in their genetics (). Experimental methods that quantify the dynamics of the signaling phosphoproteins tend to be expensive and timeconsuming, making them unaffordable to be extended to the genome scale and tested under a large number of perturbations. Mass spectrometry-based methods are now the major approach used to quantify dynamic changes in phosphoproteins, i.e. trajectories of these proteins over time (). They are vitally important for inferring signaling networks, drug responses and treatment outcome (di). Knockdown coupled with phosphoproteomics can help determine the causal relationships between signaling elements (). However, these experiments are labor-intensive and unlikely to be carried out for a large number of perturbations or a large number of knockdown genes. Thus, computational modeling becomes vitally important for predicting time course signaling network dynamics under unseen situations. Generally, cell line-specific signaling network dynamics under several known perturbations are observed. The observed data are time course data describing phosphorylation levels of phosphoproteins at different time points and under several different perturbations. The task is to predict time course responses if new drugs/perturbations come in (with the knowledge of their targeted proteins). Thus, given phosphorylation-level data E px k t for a group of proteins (k in 1 to N) sampled at a series of time points under perturbations p 1 ; p 2 ;. .. , we are interested in the phosphorylation levels E pnew k t for the same group of proteins under a new, unobserved perturbation p new for the same time course. Computationally predicting the response of signaling networks under unseen perturbations remains a challenging task. First, current models for reconstructing directional signaling networks tend to be time-consuming (), preventing them to be applied to the genome scale. The algorithms that are capable of reconstructing directional networks are usually designed to search the prohibitively large space of all possible network structures through temporal models. This basic approach renders the problem to be insolvable at the genome scale, even they are explored using an efficient probabilistic algorithm. For example,) recently proposed belief propagation (BP)-based searching method, which is three orders of magnitude faster than previous standard Monte Carlo methods used in this field, but still requires minutes to solve a network with 40 proteins. However, the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. human genome contains about 500 protein kinases and an estimated 6000 proteins modified by kinases (). Because the time required to reconstruct the network is exponentially growing with the number of proteins, these methods are impossible to be applied to the genome of a typical mammalian species. Second, the performance of most established algorithms is not satisfactory. As quoted from the DREAM 3 report (), 'Overall, a handful of best-performer teams were identified, while a majority of teams made predictions that were equivalent to random.' DREAM 3 challenges focused on the same topic of the most recent DREAM 8: signaling cascade identification and signaling response prediction. It is indeed repeatedly observed from community blind assessments that the actual performance of most submitted algorithms are not far from random guesses (). Thus, a more accurate mathematical model different from what has already been established must be sought. Last but not least, even if these networks can be established at a smaller scale, it is still challenging to use these networks to accurately predict trajectories for a time course under unseen situations. Most of the previous endeavors have focused on inferring the network structures, but not predicting its changes over time. Thus, we developed a novel mathematical model to solve the above challenges in signaling network modeling. We formulate the network inference problem into a standard-form regularization problem, and the solution to this discrete ill-posed problem was found using truncated singular value decomposition (TSVD). This new method developed here has four advantages: (i) Highly accurate: In the 2013 DREAM 8 subchallenge: time course predictions, this algorithm was the top performing one when tested on experimental data; it also achieved the top performance in aggregated experimental and in silico results. Furthermore, it was identified as the most consistent performer, defined as robustly ranked first when evaluated with a subset of data. (ii) Highly computationally efficient: Both the network inference and the trajectory prediction steps of this algorithm take linear time to the number of proteins, which allow us to achieve magnitudes of improvement in speed over previous methods, making its application to the genome scale possible. (iii) Capable of de novo prediction: This algorithm is capable of inferring network structures and predicting trajectories without any prior knowledge of signaling interactions. (iv) Able to incorporate unseen perturbations: By manipulating the solution to the regularization problem (the regression coefficient matrix), the levels of phosphoproteins under unseen perturbations can be predicted.
DISCUSSIONAnalyzing time course trajectories under unseen perturbations has important application in model biology, such as predicting dynamic phosphorylation networks, drug responses and treatment outcomes. However, previous research mainly focused on recovering the relationship between phosphoproteins. In this article, we describe a novel framework to predict trajectories under unseen perturbations. We found that the noise level and the signaling network density have noticeable influence on the prediction accuracy. However, this model is able to handle all the noise levels and signaling network structures with a satisfying performance. The effectiveness of this model is also validated using experimental data on a breast cancer cell line MDA-MB-468. The experimental validation indicates that the predicting error of this model is at the similar level as the difference between experimental replicates. The effectiveness of this model was demonstrated in the 8th Dialogue for Reverse Engineering Assessments and Methods (DREAM 8: https://www.synapse.org/#!Wiki:syn1929437/ ENTITY/63075) challenge as the best performing and most consistent method (judged by RMSE, see Supplementary Materials for more details) in the subchallenge time course prediction (). In this subchallenge, both experimental