Motivation: Cancer is a complex disease, triggered by mutations in multiple genes and pathways. There is a growing interest in the application of systems biology approaches to analyze various types of cancer-related data to understand the overwhelming complexity of changes induced by the disease.
INTRODUCTIONDuring the past century, the basic strategy to decypher biological functions was essentially to concentrate efforts on a very limited set of molecules of interest. This reductive or gene-centric approach has had, and still has, an enormous success, producing immediately applicable results in all areas of molecular biology knowledge. However, it has become clear that biological function can rarely be assigned to an individual molecule but is rather the result of the interactions among a discrete set of various types of molecules (proteins, RNA, metabolites, etc.). Those functional modules are a critical level of biological organization that cannot be identified by the study of their individual components (). One of the main goals of systems biology is to determine those modules and their components, by data-mining and integrating high-throughput 'omics' data. Cancer is essentially a genetic disease, characterized by an uncontrolled proliferation and survival of damaged cells, resulting in tumor formation. Unlike other diseases, such as cystic fibrosis * To whom correspondence should be addressed. or muscular dystrophy, there is no single gene defect that directly 'causes' cancer. Cells have multiple safeguards to prevent the effects of mutations appearing in various cancer genes, and it is only when several of those genes are affected that an invasive and potentially lethal tumor develops (). The picture is further complicated by the fact that new classes of molecules like microRNAs (miRNAs) have been shown to play a crucial role in tumorigenesis, and therefore should be taken into account (Esquela). Prostate cancer is the third most common cancer in men worldwide and occurs principally in the United States, Canada and northwestern Europe, but is uncommon in Asian countries and South America (). Prostate cancer is a complex disease, and finding the genetic causes of this disease has proven to be difficult, even if genome-wide association studies have recently detected a number of genetic variants, gene fusions and expression signatures associated with this disease (). Furthermore, the progression of prostate cancer is also complex, with 'only' 10% of the patients being diagnosed with an aggressive form that can evolve to threaten their life. The determinants of this outcome are largely unknown (). There is an increasing interest in systems biology approaches for the discovery of genes associated with cancer (). Those approaches help to simplify the overwhelmingly complex picture that is often coming out of more traditional approaches by constructing more easily interpretable network representations of the underlying system and deriving concrete, experimentally verifiable hypotheses. The integration of clinical data in a robust framework that would allow the identification of modules that are pathologically altered in disease has been identified as one of the major challenges for network biology (). Here, we used the LeMoNe algorithm to reconstruct a regulatory module network linked to prostate cancer using a large dataset of lymphoblastoid cells samples for which expression levels were measured for genes as well as miRNAs. LeMoNe uses ensemblebased probabilistic optimization techniques to identify clusters of co-expressed genes and their putative regulators (). The algorithm has been validated and applied on various biological data sets (). Recently, we applied it to a set of cancer samples of various origins, for which expression data were available for both genes and a limited set of miRNAs. A couple of miRNAs were identified as high-scoring regulators for several modules of co-expressed genes, and a miRNA was validated experimentally as a regulator of a module linked to epithelial homeostasis, with a possible role in epithelial to mesenchymal transition (). So far, we used expression data measurements toPage: i639 i638i644
CONCLUSIONIn this study, we have applied a module network algorithm to a large expression data set measured on lymphoblastoid cell lines coming from patients having different forms of prostate cancer. Compared to our previous applications of the algorithm, we have further extended it to simultaneously evaluate a heterogeneous set of candidate regulators which can be continuous-valued or discrete. We predicted a module network of 43 modules of co-expressed genes with their associated high-scoring regulators. Most of the modules show enrichment for specific GO categories. Several of those categories are related to cell cycle and mitosis activities, which is consistent with previous studies on the same dataset. Almost 30% of the predicted regulators are miRNAs, and many of them have been characterized as causal in many diseases, including cancer. Our results also suggest novel miRNA candidates that could be linked to prostate cancer. This study also associate the Gleason score, a clinical parameter to modules enriched in cell growth and mitosis. Our study clearly demonstrate the interest of systems biology approaches to study cancer and its consequences, more particularly by the integration of heterogeneous sets of candidate regulators. This type of analysis can be applied to various cancer types and tissues for which relevant expression data for mRNA, miRNA and various clinical parameters are available.