Here we present PREDDIMER, a web tool for prediction of dimer structure of transmembrane (TM) helices. PREDDIMER allows (i) reconstruction of a number of dimer structures for given sequence(s) of TM protein fragments, (ii) ranking and filtering of predicted structures according to respective values of a scoring function, (iii) visual-ization of predicted 3D dimer structures and (iv) visualization of surface hydrophobicity of TM helices and their contacting (interface) regions represented as 2D maps. Results: We implemented online the original PREDDIMER algorithm and benchmarked the server on 11 TM sequences, whose 3D dimer conformations were obtained previously by nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy. In the most of tested cases backbone root-mean-square deviations of closest predicted conformations from the experimental reference are below 3 A ˚. A randomization test displays good anticorrelation (À0.82) between values of the scoring function and statistical significance of the prediction by chance. Going beyond a single dimer conformation, our web tool predicts an ensemble of possible conformations, which may be useful for explanation of a functioning of bitopic membrane proteins, e.g. receptor tyrosine kinases. Availability and implementation: PREDDIMER can be accessed for free on the web at
INTRODUCTIONTransmembrane (TM) domains of bitopic proteins comprise just a single helix. For particular class of such proteins with high biological importancereceptor tyrosine kinases (RTKs)it has been shown that TM fragments play a crucial role in dimerization and activation of these receptors by controlling orientation of their intracellular kinase domains (). The knowledge of spatial structures of dimers of TM fragments of bitopic proteins is important for understanding the functioning of these molecules upon their oligomerization in the cell membrane. Being reasonable alternative to experimental separate files or combined ZIP archive. Similar result page can be created for an existing dimer structure using analyzing mode (mode 2) of the server.