Motivation: G protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) are central to how cells respond to their environment and a major class of pharmacological targets. However, comprehensive knowledge of which pathways are activated and deactivated by these essential sensors is largely unknown. To better understand the mechanism of GPCR signaling system, we integrated five independent genome-wide expression datasets, representing 275 human tissues and cell lines, with protein-protein interactions and functional pathway data. Results: We found that tissue-specificity plays a crucial part in the function of GPCR signaling system. Only a few GPCRs are expressed in each tissue, which are coupled by different combinations of G-proteins or b-arrestins to trigger specific downstream pathways. Based on this finding, we predicted the downstream pathways of GPCR in human tissues and validated our results with L1000 knockdown data. In total, we identified 154,988 connections between 294 GPCRs and 690 pathways in 240 tissues and cell types. Availability and Implementation: The source code and results supporting the conclusions of this article are available at
IntroductionG protein-coupled receptors (GPCRs) comprise the largest family of transmembrane signaling moleculesmore than 800 distinct human proteins. Each member of this family shares in a common seven transmembrane (7TM) a-helical fold. As highly versatile membrane sensors, they regulate many physiological processes including immunization, sensation, behavioral and mood regulation, homeostasis modulation (). GPCRs also emerge as crucial players in growth and metastasis of many tumors (). Mutations in GPCRs have been linked to many human genetic diseases including retinitis pigmentosa (RP), hypo-and hyperthyroidism, nephrogenic diabetes insipidus, bleeding disorder and even carcinomas (). GPCRs are activated by a heterogeneous set of endogenous ligands. These ligands may be light-sensitive compounds, odors, pheromones, hormones and neurotransmitters. Due to their accessibility on cellular membranes, their central role in cell communication, and the wide variety of potential functions, GPCRs are the targets for nearly one third of modern small molecule therapeutics (). GPCRs are transducers of extracellular stimuli to signal intracellular changes. In their inactive state, GPCRs are bound to a heterotrimeric G protein complex including three subunits, G a , G b and G c. The binding of an extracellular ligand will initiate a conformation change in GPCR, which then activates the bound G a subunit. The activated G a subunit dissociates from the complex by an exchange from GTP to GDP. The dissociated G a and G bc subunits binds to other intracellular proteins to trigger downstream signaling or metabolic pathways separately (). Meanwhile, G-protein-coupled receptor kinases (GRKs) are recruited to the ligand-bound GPCR and phosphorylate the receptor. Once phosphorylated, GPCR binds to b-arrestins, preventing further coupling of GPCR to G proteins. b-arrestins have a dual role, however, and can also interact with intracellular proteins inducing downstream effects (). In the whole process, the signal of ligand is passed from GPCR to two types of transducer molecules: G protein and b-arrestin, contributing to G protein-dependent signaling and G protein-independent signaling, respectively. GPCRs are usually expressed at low levels, with 1% of genes in the genome only accounting for 0.0010.01% of expressed sequence tags (Fredriksson and Schi th, 2005). What's more, expression levels of GPCRs vary dramatically by tissue. Regard et al. analyzed transcript levels of 353 GPCRs in 41 adult mouse tissues and found that GPCRs that are highly expressed in a given tissue usually exhibit important function to that tissue. For example, light-detecting opsins are highly and specifically expressed in eye, and dopamine, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) receptors are highly expressed in central nervous system (). These findings suggest that GPCR signaling system consists of different expressed proteins depending on the tissue type and target different downstream pathways to fulfill tissue-specific functions. Driven largely by their utility in drug development, the study of individual GPCR function and their downstream target pathways has become a research topic of great importance. With this information, many new avenues of research are available. For example, the action of pathways without any direct drug targets can be modulated through targeting the GPCRs that trigger them. In addition, the downstream pathways in the target tissue of a drug can be connected to cellular mechanism or on-target side effects of the drug while the downstream pathways in other tissues can be connected to the off-target side effects. However, the low expression level and difficulty in crystallization have made comprehensive analyses so challenging that most GPCRs still remain the 'terra incognita', or unexplored territory, in functional genomics (). Importantly, GPCRs do not interact with intracellular proteins directly, but through the coupling of G protein or recruitment of b-arrestin. Studying the direct partners of GPCRs will not reveal their downstream effects. Research has shown that transducer isotypes can have distinct interacting partners and signaling roles. For example, G as subunit can activate cAMP-dependent pathway by stimulating the production of cAMP while G ai inhibits the production (). b-arrestin2 mediates dopaminergic synaptic transmission while b-arrestin3 actives ERK-1/2 pathway (). Exactly which b-arrestins and G proteins associate with each GPCR and if this varies by tissue type remains unknown, further complicating the systematic identification of GPCR-targeted pathways. We introduced a data-driven method GOTE, to systematically predict GPCR Downstream Pathways Signaling by Tissue Expression (). With many genome-wide expression profiling datasets of different human tissues or cell types available, we were able to identify the expressed proteins of GPCR signaling system in each tissue type, these include the GPCR proteins themselves as well as the transducer proteins (G-proteins and b-arrestins). We hypothesized that if the proteins of a pathway significantly interact with the transducer isotypes in a particular tissue, then the pathway is more likely to be the signaling outcome of the GPCRs that are highly expressed in that tissue.Based on this hypothesis, we designed a statistical test to evaluate the association between pathways and GPCRs in each tissue and applied it to five independent datasets (four from normal tissues, one from cancer cell lines). We tested the robustness of GOTE by comparing the similarity of results across the normal human tissue datasets. We found both concordance and discordance in the predicted pathways.The predicted pathways of some GPCRs such as CASR, TBXA2R, CXCR4 and GPR56 can be connected to their molecular function or cause of disease by our method. Due to the lack of true standard specifying the true relationship between GPCR and pathways, we used GPCR knockdown datasets to perform a weak validation, in which we observed whether the expression of a pathway is significantly changed after the knockdown of GPCR. We concluded with a discussion of the potential uses of these results, such as the study of complex human disease or molecular mechanism of drugs. All of our data and code are made publicly and freely available.
DiscussionIn this paper, we presented a data-driven method, GOTE, to systematically identify the downstream pathways of GPCRs in each tissue. We used gene expression datasets to find highly expressed binding proteins of G-proteins or b-arrestins in each tissue and performed pathway enrichment analysis to find enriched pathways. Then we connected the enriched pathways to specifically expressed GPCRs in the tissue as their downstream pathways. We found that the predicted pathways differ by tissue and GPCR while similar tissues have similar predicted pathways. With no true standard available, we created a 'weak' standard on our own with an independent dataset from L1000 gene knockdown experiment, to validate our GPCR-tissue-pathway predictions. In the validation, we tested the correlation between the knockdown of GPCR and the change of expression in downstream pathways. As co-expression is only a prerequisite of actual connection, this standard is less stringent and will unavoidably bring in some false positives. We controlled for this error by comparing the results to a null distribution Random and another reference method HighExp that connects highly expressed pathways to GPCRs in each tissue. GOTE outperforms both two methods in precision and specificity. GOTE has lower recall than HighExp because it chooses the tissue-specific pathways that are also enriched by the binding proteins of transducers. Thus GOTE is more stringent and is expected to have fewer predictions than HighExp. As a data-driven method, our prediction results are dependent on the expression dataset used. Unfortunately, most current expression data are derived from different platforms. We tested the robustness of GOTE among four datasets with normal human tissue, each using a different technology. The similarity of predicted pathways between datasets is in alignment with the expression similarity (Supplementary), where the results are highly consistent between two mass spectrometry datasets and less consistent between these two mass spectrometry dataset and the microarray dataset. In addition, the five datasets do not employ a standard tissue naming scheme. This may contribute to a situation where a same name of tissue can refer to different types of cells in the tissue, which adds the difficulty of comparing predicted pathways between different datasets. Another limitation of GOTE is our current strategy of mapping GPCRs to their transducers. The relationship between GPCRs and transducers has not been well studied. Therefore, we used co-expression in the same tissue to connect GPCRs to transducers in GOTE. Consequently, this may bring in some false positive pairs of GPCRs and transducers since the correlation in expression does not necessarily mean the existence of actual connection between GPCRs and transducers. To mitigate these potential false positives, we provided a parameter in GOTE that controls GPCR tissue specificity. We showed that by setting a high threshold of this parameter, users can get more confident connections between GPCR and downstream pathways at the cost of fewer predictions. We found our findings on many GPCRs agree with their molecular function, cause of disease, or the action of corresponding drug provided by other resources. For example, we found class C and D GPCRs are commonly connected to G-protein dependent pathways in nervous system. While class C GPCRs consists of calcium-sensing, GABA and glutamate receptors, which are synaptic receptors located primarily on neuronal cells, and class D GPCRs are reported to play an important role in brain development (). We also found the tissues connected to GPCR in our results correlate with the ATC classification of corresponding drug. GPCRs such as CASR, PTGIR are predicted with pathways in agreement with the molecular mechanism of their corresponding drugs (Supplementary). Some GPCRs have predicted pathways validated by other studies. For example, CXCR4, one of the co-receptors of HIV-1 in immunological cells participate in the activation of ion channels after the binding of gp120 (). We found this GPCR is connected to both HIV-related pathways (such as 'HIV Transcription Initiation') and ion channel-related pathways (such as 'Voltage gated Potassium channels') in CD8 Cells (Supplementary). Another GPCR GPR56 is regulated by Blimp-1 in NK cells (), which is a transcription factor and modulates the MHC Class I antigen-processing and peptide-loading pathway (). In our results, this GPCR is connected to the 'Class I MHC mediated antigen processing  presentation' pathway in NK cells (Supplementary). Eventually, since GPCRs participate in controlling an extraordinary variety of physiological functions, mutations in GPCR can cause many complex diseases (). The pathways we predicted for these GPCRs may help us study the mechanism of these diseases. For example, mutations in TBXA2R, a thromboxane receptor (TP), will cause a bleeding disorder in human body (). In our results, this GPCR is connected to blood clotting pathways such as 'Platelet activation, signaling and aggregation' (Pvalue  1.62*e03, ranking 3, Supplementary Table S9) in platelets. Meanwhile, we also found other interesting pathways such as. Influence of four parameters on the prediction results of GOTE. GDP: G-protein dependent pathways. GIP: G-protein independent pathways. In each of four line graphs, the x-axis indicates the threshold (or 1/threshold in B) of one parameter. The y-axis indicates how much GOTE outperforms HighExp in precision when setting the parameter to the threshold of x-axis (the other three parameters as default setting). The four parameters are: (A) t 1 : the P-value threshold for highly expressed GPCRs. (B) t 2 : the GPCR specificity score threshold. (C) t 3 : the P-value threshold for highly expressed binding proteins of transducers. (D) t 4 : the P-value threshold for enriched pathways 'Hyaluronan uptake and degradation' (P-value  3.93*e03, ranking 5, Supplementary), 'Hyaluronan metabolism' (P-value  4.93*e03, ranking 6, Supplementary). Hyaluronan plays an important role in skin wound healing events. Together with fibrin, it increases or stabilizes the volume and porosity of the clot and then serves as a physical support through which cells are trapped in the clot ().