Motivation: Using gene expression to infer changes in protein phos-phorylation levels induced in cells by various stimuli is an outstanding problem. The intra-species protein phosphorylation challenge organized by the IMPROVER consortium provided the framework to identify the best approaches to address this issue. Results: Rat lung epithelial cells were treated with 52 stimuli, and gene expression and phosphorylation levels were measured. Competing teams used gene expression data from 26 stimuli to develop protein phosphorylation prediction models and were ranked based on prediction performance for the remaining 26 stimuli. Three teams were tied in first place in this challenge achieving a balanced accuracy of about 70%, indicating that gene expression is only moderately predictive of protein phosphorylation. In spite of the similar performance, the approaches used by these three teams, described in detail in this article, were different , with the average number of predictor genes per phosphoprotein used by the teams ranging from 3 to 124. However, a significant overlap of gene signatures between teams was observed for the majority of the proteins considered, while Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) pathways were enriched in the union of the predictor genes of the three teams for multiple proteins. Availability and implementation: Gene expression and protein phos-phorylation data are available from ArrayExpress (E-MTAB-2091). Software implementation of the approach of Teams 49 and 75 are available at
INTRODUCTIONInferring biological mechanisms and pathways from high throughput in vitro and/or in vivo experimental data remains an outstanding problem. To address this issue in detail, one would need to measure messenger RNA and protein levels at multiple time points and have information on the methylation states of genes, knowledge of transcriptional regulation and histone modifications, information on copy number variation and mutational status of genes and regulatory regions. Given the difficulty and prohibitive cost of performing such experiments, such detailed knowledge and data are likely to remain unavailable for some time. The problem is further confounded by the complexity of cellular responses to variations in their environment, regulatory feedback mechanisms and varieties of organspecific time scales and tolerances. Consequently, bioinformatics studies need to develop methods and stochastic (probabilistic/Bayesian) approaches to understand biological phenomena from insufficient data and limited knowledge. One goal of such studies is to predict the likelihood that, given the data, some particular sets of proteins or pathways are activated. An even more difficult problem in this context is to assess the degree to which the results of such predictions in one species are relevant to another species. This understanding is critical if we are to accurately translate data from experiments conducted on model species, such as mice and rats, to humans. This article describes the methods and results of three teams that were tied in first place in the Systems Biology Verification IMPROVER Sub-challenge 1 (SC1): intra-species protein phosphorylation prediction. SC1 assessed the degree to which gene expression data could be predictive of changes in protein phosphorylation in rat lung epithelial cells and hence provided a baseline performance for the next challenge [Sub-challenge 2 (SC2)], which dealt with protein phosphorylation translation from rat to human for lung epithelial cells under a variety of stimuli (). Phosphorylation levels were measured at 5 and 25 min after cells were exposed to 1 of 52 stimuli, *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first three authors should be regarded as Joint First Authors and gene expression levels were measured 6 h after such exposure. Measurements in untreated cells were also available in each experimental batch. Differences in gene expression levels between treated and control cells were expected to be the result of upstream signaling events driven by active phosphorylation cascades in treated cells. Hence, the SC1 sought to determine whether changes in gene expression levels were sufficiently informative to infer the molecular modifications observed upstream, in particular the phosphorylation status of effector proteins. It was expected by the organizers of the competition that data derived from this challenge might be informative not only for the remaining sub-challenges but also provide information to understand (i) intra-species mechanisms operative when lung epithelial cells are treated to a variety of stimuli, (ii) the relationship between these two layers of signaling responses and (iii) the degree of cross-platform translatability between the two measurement technologies.
DISCUSSIONAnimal models are often used in biomedical research for testing the effect of various stimuli (e.g. drugs) before considering them for testing in humans. The general assumption is that biological processes in animals (e.g. mice or rats) are similar to biological processes in humans under analogous conditions. However, few studies have addressed the limitation on which biological events observed in rodents can be translated to humans. For instance,gene expression level changes in murine and human models were not at all correlated in peripheral blood as a response to inflammatory injuries, such as burns, blunt force trauma, as well as to endotoxin in human patients and in mice (). The Species Translation Challenge, comprising four sub-challenges, was developed to systematically assess translatability of protein phosphorylation and pathway activation in response to a range of stimuli. The aim of the first sub-challenge, the 'intra-species protein phosphorylation prediction sub-challenge', was to assess whether downstream (in time) gene expression data are sufficiently informative to infer protein phosphorylation status of some key signaling molecules, and provide a baseline performance expectation for the translation from rat to human. Three teams ranked first in this challenge, based on the fact that their performance was not distinguishable by the prespecified ranking methodology (). The performance of these three teams was also significantly better than any one of the remaining teams, as determined using a rank stability analysis. The prediction performance results of these top ranked teams suggest that a snapshot of the transcriptomic activity in rat epithelial cells contains a moderate level of information regarding protein phosphorylation levels, with the average sensitivity and specificity being about 70%. Improved performance might be obtained if the gene expression data were collected at multiple time points following treatment, to capture important time-dependent effects, non-linearity and multi-node cooperation in geneprotein interactions. In this article, we have described in detail the approaches of the three teams tied for first place in this sub-challenge. Each team used a different method to select predictor genes, namely, ranking genes by moderated t-test P-values between classes and choosing a handful of the top ones (Team 49), using MI between each gene and the outcome and performing dimensionality reduction via PCA (Team 50) and performing gene ranking by ridge regression (Team 75). A large variation in the number of predictor genes was observed for each given protein from one team to the next with the most parsimonious approach (Team 49) using on average less than four predictor genes. Moreover, the types of models used to make predictions based on the selected genes were also very different among teams. Team 49 used an LDA model. Team 50 used a voting procedure, which combined the predictions from a method based on MI with one based on an LDA model trained on principal components. Team 75 results were based on SVR with RBF kernels. However, an important aspect of the model development was common among the three teams, namely, that the optimalnumber of predictors used was automatically determined based on cross-validated model performance, even though the specific performance metrics used were different. This element was also in common among the best and third best teams in the IMPROVER Diagnostic Signature Challenge (). Despite the very different prediction approaches and gene signatures, the performance results of these three teams were very similar. The main reasons for this were (i) a redundancy in the gene signatures of Teams 50 and 75 and (ii) strong correlations between predictor genes selected by different teams (as suggested by). Although an analysis of the overlap of predictor genes found more common genes than expected by chance among the three teams, this analysis did not account for extra overlap that could have occurred simply by modeling the noise in the data, i.e. when the phosphorylation status of proteins were randomly assigned to the different training stimuli. Another common aspect among the approaches described herein is the fact that they used only information from the training data to make inference on the phosphorylation status of the 16 proteins after treatment with stimuli in the test set. Alternative approaches could have relied at least in part on prior knowledge regarding the target genes of the 16 proteins under the study. The top three teams considered that an unbiased approach, in which all genes are treated as potential candidates for being informative of the phosphorylation status of a given protein would have a better chance to maximize prediction performance than relying on the literature evidence of potential gene targets for each protein. Moreover, these data-driven methodologies can be applied to proteins for which no potential targets are available. A KEGG () pathway enrichment analysis () on the union of predictor genes from the three teams was done to determine whether biological pathways are activated for each of the phosphorylation proteins. We found that five proteins have at least one enriched pathway (false discovery rate of 10%). The results are presented in the Supplementary. This analysis found also that almost half of the predictive genes associated with FAK1 and PTN11 activity are related to metabolism pathways. This should not be surprising because metabolism is a fundamental process that the cell regulates in response to any stress. However, it suggests that genes related to metabolism may be the best predictors of phosphorylation activity. For PTN11, we also found activation of four gene sets, which are related to signaling in cancer (). Similarly, for MK14K11, two cancer-related pathways show some evidence of enrichment, although not significant after adjustment for multiple testing. This is consistent with the role of MK14K11 in cancer signaling and, in particular, P53 activation. For IKBa, we found that many enriched pathways are related either to metabolism or to the function of IKBa as a key regulator of the immune response nuclear factor kappa-light-chain-enhancer of activated B cells (NFkB) pathway. A limitation of this analysis is that the predictor genes of the most two parsimonious approaches, Teams 50 and 49, have limited or no contribution, respectively, to the pathway enrichment results, as the union of predictor genes for each protein is dominated by genes selected by Team 75. In summary: The 'intra-species protein phosphorylation prediction' sub-challenge of the IMPROVER Species Translation Challenge was designed to identify the extent to which it is possible to predict upstream protein phosphorylation effects from a snapshot of downstream transcription activity. This crowdsourcing initiative identified three approaches, described in detail herein, that were ranked best among 21 participating teams. Two of these three approaches (Teams 50 and 49) were also applied successfully in the 'inter-species protein phosphorylation prediction (SC2)', and therefore, SC1 represented a case study for the different teams to tune their approaches for SC2.