Motivation: Nucleosome positioning plays important roles in many eukaryotic intranuclear processes, such as transcriptional regulation and chromatin structure formation. The investigations of nucleosome positioning rules provide a deeper understanding of these intracellular processes. Results: Nucleosome positioning prediction was performed using a model consisting of 3 types of variables characterizing a DNA sequence—the number of 5-nucleotide sequences, the number of 3-nucleotide combinations in 1 period of a helix, and mono-and di-nucleotide distributions in DNA fragments. Using recently proposed stringent benchmark datasets with low biases for Saccharomyces cerevisiae, Homo sapiens, Caenorhabditis elegans, and Drosophila melanogaster, the present model was shown to have a better prediction performance than the recently proposed predictors. This model was able to display the common and organism-dependent factors that affect nucleosome forming and inhibiting sequences as well. Therefore, the predictors developed here can accurately predict nucleosome positioning and help determine the key factors influencing this process.
IntroductionNucleosomes are the basic units of eukaryotic chromatin, and each one is formed by 147 DNA base pair (bp) sequences wrapped tightly around a histone octamer. The precise nucleosome formation and its inhibitory effects on promoters (), enhancers (), and insulators () play crucial roles in the precise regulation of transcription (). The precise nucleosome positioning facilitates DNA replication, DNA repair, and RNA splicing (). Therefore, the elucidation of nucleosome positioning steps may allow an in-depth understanding of various biological processes. Recently, high-resolution genome-wide nucleosome maps were obtained for several model organisms (). In contrast to this, the determinant factors of the nucleosome positioning remained unclear. However, with the increase in the availability of high-quality experimental datasets, various computational methods and tools for the prediction of nucleosome positioning were proposed (reviewed in), providing valuable insights and allowing the mechanisms determining nucleosome positioning to be unveiled. Furthermore, the construction of the accurate predictors can lead to the possibility of the analysis of single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) and gene mutation effects on this process. Many of these predictors were constructed based on the information about the frequencies and distributions of the combinations of polynucleotide sequences as feature vectors (). Sequence-dependent mechanical properties, such as sequence-dependent geometry and DNA fragment flexibility, were also considered for the characterization of nucleosome forming and inhibiting sequences (). Furthermore, a powerful web-server called Psein-One () was developed, where all existing feature vectors for DNA/RNA and protein/peptide sequences can be generated (see references cited in), together with the generation of the feature vectors for the sequences defined by users themselves. For human (Homo sapiens), worm (Caenorhabditis elegans), and fly (Drosophila melanogaster) genomes,) constructed the stringent benchmark datasets of nucleosome forming and inhibiting sequences with low similarities, in order to examine the performance of nucleosome position predictors. Additionally, predictors iNuc-PseKNC and iNuc-PseSTNC (we call iNuc-Pse predictors) were proposed, and they were shown to have better success rates in the prediction of nucleosome positioning than any of the previously developed predictors (). Furthermore, for yeast (Saccharomyces cerevisiae) genomes,) constructed a stringent benchmark dataset using the same methodology as), and predicted the nucleosome positioning in yeast genome based on the deformation energies of DNA fragments. In order for iNuc-Pse predictors to show the best prediction performance for nucleosome positioning in different organisms, different sets of parameter values must be used (). The sequence predicted as the nucleosome forming sequence in one organism may be predicted as the nucleosome inhibiting sequence in another organism. This shows that the function of any given DNA sequence in assisting or inhibiting nucleosome formation depends on the investigated organism. However, no key factors and criteria affecting this process could be elucidated using this predictor, because iNuc-Pse predictors are based on Support Vector Machine (SVM). Additionally, based on these datasets, some common short motif nucleosome forming and inhibiting sequences were found (). However, the nucleosome positioning cannot be predicted sufficiently well using only these motives. In this study, a novel nucleosome positioning predictor was developed based on the linear regression model, consisting of 3 types of variables with different fragment length scalesthe number of 5-nucleotide sequences, the number of 3-nucleotide combinations in 1 period of helix, and mono-and di-nucleotides distributions in whole DNA fragments. This predictor exhibited better prediction performance than the recently developed iNuc-Pse predictors for the same benchmark datasets of human and fly genomes and displayed common and organism-dependent key factors of nucleosome positioning explicitly. A series of recent publications () demonstrated, in compliance with Chou's 5-step rule (), that, in order to establish a useful sequence-based statistical predictor for a biological system, the following five guidelines should be observed: (a) how to construct or select a valid benchmark dataset to train and test the predictor; (b) how to represent the biological sequence samples by catching their key features associated with the target to be predicted; (c) how to introduce or develop a powerful algorithm to operate the prediction; (d) how to properly perform crossvalidation tests to objectively evaluate the anticipated accuracy; and (e) how to establish a user-friendly web-server for the predictor that is accessible to the public. Below, these steps are further explained.
DISCUSSION3LS model-based predictor can predict nucleosome positioning in human and fly genomes more accurately than the recently proposed nucleosome position predictors can. Additionally, the predictor defined here can display the details of organism-dependent key factors for the determination of nucleosome forming and inhibiting sequences. The chosen S 1 seq( ), S 2 seq( ), S 3 seq( ), and S 5 seq( ) in 3LS model differed greatly between human, worm, and fly genomes (Supplementary). This indicates there are many organism-dependent differences in the features contributing to the nucleosome formation. The coefficients of these variables, M( ), D( ), T( ), and P( ), and constant value Q0, obtained by multiple regression analysis, clearly showed organismdependent specificities (Supplementary). These differences are presented in the following examples: I) In 3LS models of these genomes that contained common variables, their coefficients' signs often differed between the organisms. II) There were only 6 variables with the same signs of their coefficients between these organisms, and these were: T(0, 1, 6, = CTT or 0, 5, 6, = AAG)  0, T(0, 1, 10, = TTG or 0, 9, 10, = CAA)  0, P(TTTTT or AAAAA)  0, P(GCTTC or GAAGC)  0, P(GTGTC or GACAC)  0, and P(GGATC or GATCC) 0 Poly(dA-dT) sequences, such as AAAAA sequence, are known as physically rigid sequences (). Therefore, the sequences containing these motives inhibit the nucleosome formation in the genomes of several organisms, which was confirmed by experimental evidence and the use of different nucleosome positioning predictors (), which is consistent with the results presented here. The sequences with high GC content were reported to have a nucleosome-forming tendency (). However, considering the results of the recent studies, 30-50% nucleotides found in the nucleosome forming sequences are A or T nucleotides located at the appropriate positions (), which seems to agree with the results obtained in this study. III) When only the 6 variables described above were chosen in 3LS model based predictor, ACCs for human, worm, and fly genomes were ACC  0.7525,  0.7716, and 0.6438, respectively, which is much lower than the values obtained using the model with suitable variables. However, even when these variables were removed from the 3LS model based predictor with suitable variables, the decrease in ACCs for human, worm, and fly genomes was not considerable, and the obtained ACC values were  0.8974,  0.8730, and  0.8290, respectively. This indicates that the organism-specific sequence patterns dominantly contribute to the determination of nucleosome forming abilities. IV) The weight of the contribution of the set S 3 seq (0, j, k, = 3-nuc or 0, kj, k, = 3-nuc * ) for each k is defined as Wk= [Number of chosen S 3 seq (0, j, k, = 3-nuc or 0, k-j, k,). The obtained Wk values were different for different organisms, for example W5 ~ 0.074, 0.112, 0.080 (k = 5 as the smallest k) and W10 ~ 0.159, 0.115, 0.151 (k = 10 as the largest k) were obtained for human, worm, and fly genomes, respectively. This indicates that the length scale of nucleotide combinations required for the characterization of nucleosome forming sequences depends on the organism analyzed. V) The weight of the contribution of the set S 2 seq (i' | Di-seq or Di-seq * ) near and far from the center of sequence (dyad position) was defined as Wnear =). Wnear values were similar values in the datasets for the 3 investigated organisms. The values of Wfar,  0.027, 0.015, and 0.006, were obtained for human, worm, and fly genomes, respectively, where Wfar for fly was shown to be ~1/2 of that for worm and ~1/4 for human. This suggests that the contribution of the sequences far from the dyad position to the nucleosome formation depends on the organism type. Using the TNS model-based predictor, the obtained ACC values of nucleosome position predictions for human, worm, and fly genomes were much lower than those obtained using 3LS model-based predictor. while ACC = 1 was obtained for yeast genome. This clearly demonstrates organism-dependent characteristics of nucleosome forming and inhibiting sequences, showing that the nucleosome positioning is much more easily predicted in yeast than in higher organisms.. Weights of the contributions of S 3 seq (0, j, k, = 3-nuc or 0, k-j, k,The predictors developed here can predict nucleosome positioning in human, fly, and yeast genomes with higher accuracy than the recently proposed predictors and can determine the key factors influencing this positioning in human, worm, fly, and yeast genomes. In contrast to the recently proposed iNuc-Pse predictors, 3LS model-based predictor developed in this study is based on the following sequence properties as well: i) Combinations of nucleotides located further away than those considered by iNuc-Pse predictors; ii) More detailed distributions of A, T, and dinucleotide sequences in a DNA fragment than those in iNuc-Pse predictors. These properties most likely contribute to the exhibited improved performance of the predictor proposed here in comparison with the iNuc-Pse predictors. However, the variable selections and the formalization of the model can be improved, and further modifications are needed for this predictor to perform better than the recent ones. Recent studies suggested that sequence-dependent geometry and flexibility of each DNA fragment may play important roles in the determination of its nucleosome forming ability (). Furthermore, the nucleosome forming ability of each sequence may change with intracellular and environmental conditions (). Because of this, the predictors should be modified in the future by considering these physical and chemical influences. Additionally, as demonstrated in a series of recent publications (e.g.,), during the development of new prediction methods, user-friendly and publicly accessible web-servers can significantly enhance the impacts of these tools (). Therefore, the future efforts will include providing a web-server for the use of the prediction method presented here.