Motivation: In silico prediction of drug-target interactions plays an important role toward identifying and developing new uses of existing or abandoned drugs. Network-based approaches have recently become a popular tool for discovering new drug-target interactions (DTIs). Unfortunately, most of these network-based approaches can only predict binary interactions between drugs and targets, and information about different types of interactions has not been well exploited for DTI prediction in previous studies. On the other hand, incorporating additional information about drug-target relationships or drug modes of action can improve prediction of DTIs. Furthermore, the predicted types of DTIs can broaden our understanding about the molecular basis of drug action. Results: We propose a first machine learning approach to integrate multiple types of DTIs and predict unknown drug-target relationships or drug modes of action. We cast the new DTI prediction problem into a two-layer graphical model, called restricted Boltzmann machine, and apply a practical learning algorithm to train our model and make predictions. Tests on two public databases show that our restricted Boltzmann machine model can effectively capture the latent features of a DTI network and achieve excellent performance on predicting different types of DTIs, with the area under precision-recall curve up to 89.6. In addition, we demonstrate that integrating multiple types of DTIs can significantly outperform other predictions either by simply mixing multiple types of interactions without distinction or using only a single interaction type. Further tests show that our approach can infer a high fraction of novel DTIs that has been validated by known experiments in the literature or other databases. These results indicate that our approach can have highly practical relevance to DTI prediction and drug repositioning, and hence advance the drug discovery process. Availability: Software and datasets are available on request.
INTRODUCTIONDrug development currently remains an expensive and time-consuming process with extremely low success rate: it typically takes 1015 years and $800 million1 billion to bring a new drug to market (). In recent decades, the rate of the number of new drugs approved by the US Food and Drug Administration versus the amount of money invested in pharmaceutical research and development has significantly declined (). This productivity problem has urged drug developers to seek new uses for existing or abandoned drugs (). Such a new strategy is also called drug repositioning or drug repurposing. A strong support for the possibility of drug repositioning is the increasingly accepted concept of 'polypharmacology', i.e. individual drugs can interact with multiple targets rather than a single target (). For example, serotonin and serotonergic drugs can interact with both 5-HT G protein-coupled receptors and 59HT 3A ion channel proteins, even though these two target proteins are not related in sequence or structure (). This polypharmacological property of a drug enables us to identify more than one target that it can act on and hence develop its new uses. In silico prediction of interactions between drugs and target proteins provides an important tool for drug repositioning, as it can significantly reduce wet-laboratory work and lower the cost of the experimental determination of new drug-target interactions (DTIs). Various methods have been proposed for in silico DTI prediction. When 3D structures are available, molecular docking is commonly used to virtually screen a large number of compounds against a target protein (). When 3D structures of molecules are absent, a number of different approaches have been developed to address the in silico DTI prediction problem. Most of these structure-free methods can be grouped into two classes, namely, ligand-based and network-based approaches. A representative ligand-based approach is the similarity ensemble approach (), which predicts new DTIs using 2D structure similarity of ligands. Although ligand-based approaches are able to discover a number of DTIs that have been validated experimentally, they have difficulty in identifying drugs with novel scaffolds that differ from those of reference compounds (). Numerous network-based approaches have been proposed to exploit latent features of DTI profiles and have recently become a popular tool for DTI prediction and drug repositioning (). Although these network-based approaches have achieved promising results, most of them can only predict binary DTIs, that is, they can only determine whether a drug interacts with a target protein, but cannot tell how they interact with each other. However, individual DTIs generally have different meanings. For example, drug-target pairs can be described by different relationships, such as direct and indirect interactions (). A direct interaction is usually caused by protein-ligand binding, whereas an indirect interaction can be induced by the changed expression *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com level of a protein or active metabolites produced by a drug. In addition, DTIs can be annotated with different drug modes of action, e.g. activation and inhibition (). Here, 'drug modes of action' may be slightly different from the term used in the literature, e.g. (). In this article, we mainly use this term to represent the following three specific types of interactions: binding, activation and inhibition. Hereinafter, we will use 'types of DTIs' to represent both drugtarget relationships and drug modes of action. A network in which links are associated with different meanings is called the multidimensional network (Lund Zhou, 2011). In our context, we call a DTI network where links are annotated with different types of interactions the multidimensional DTI network. On the one hand, types of DTIs provide additional useful information, which can be incorporated into a multidimensional network to improve DTI prediction. On the other hand, the predicted types of DTIs can extend our understanding about the molecular basis of drug action. Despite these positive aspects, current rich information about types of DTIs () has not been well exploited for DTI prediction, and how to incorporate such information into a multidimensional network to predict different types of DTIs still remains an open question. In this article, we propose an effective machine-learning approach to accurately predict different types of DTIs on a multidimensional network. Unlike previous network-based approaches (), which only predict binary DTIs, our approach not only identifies new DTIs but also infers their corresponding types of interactions, such as drug-target relationships or drug modes of action. Our approach uses a generalized version of a two-layer undirected graphical model, called restricted Boltzmann machine (RBM) (), to represent a multidimensional DTI network, which encodes different types of DTIs. In addition, we apply a practical learning algorithm, called Contrastive Divergence (CD) (), to train our RBM model and predict unknown types of DTIs. To our knowledge, our work is the first approach to predict different types of DTIs on a multidimensional network, which not only describes binary DTIs but also encodes their corresponding types of interactions. We have tested our algorithm on two public databases, namely, MATADOR (Gunther) and STITCH (), which contain information about drug-target relationships and drug modes of action, respectively. Our tests demonstrate that our RBM model can be used as a highly powerful tool for integrating different types of DTIs into a multidimensional network and predicting different types of interactions with high accuracy. In particular, our results show that integrating different types of DTIs into prediction with distinction can achieve the area under precision-recall curve (AUPR) up to 89.6, which can significantly outperform other predictions either by simply mixing multiple types of interactions without distinction or using only a single interaction type. Further tests show that our approach can predict a high percentage of novel DTIs that has been validated by known experiments in the literature or other databases. These results indicate that our approach can have potential applications in drug repositioning and hence advance the drug discovery process.
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we proposed a first machine-learning approach to predict different types of DTIs on a multidimensional network. Our approach uses an RBM model to effectively encode multiple sources of information about DTIs and accurately predict different types of DTIs, such as drug-target relationships or drug modes of action. Tests on two public databases showed that our algorithm can achieve excellent prediction performance with high AUPR scores. Further tests indicated that our approach can infer a list of novel DTIs, which is practically useful for drug repositioning. Although our algorithm has been tested only on direct and indirect drug-target relationships, and three drug modes of action, it is general and can be easily extended to integrate other types of DTIs (e.g. phenotypic effects). Current version of our prediction algorithm only considers connections between drugs and targets. In the future, we will extend our approach to exploit the connections within target proteins or drugs. For example, the sequence similarity scores between target proteins, the substructure similarity scores between drugs or drugdrug interactions () can be also incorporated into our prediction model. As the conventional version of an RBM does not allow the connections within the same layer, such an extension will require careful thought. Currently, our algorithm has been tested only on two databases (i.e. MATADOR and STITCH). We will test it on more data in the future. For example, it will have more significance if we can predict DTIs based on human proteins and all molecules in PubChem () or a similar database. Finally, we are also seeking wet-laboratory collaborators to experimentally verify the highest scoring DTIs predicted by our algorithm.DTIs that are observed in ChEMBL, DrugBank and STITCH are marked with 'C', 'D' and 'S', respectively.