Motivation: Transient S-sulfenylation of cysteine thiols mediated by reactive oxygen species plays a critical role in pathology, physiology and cell signaling. Therefore, discovery of new S-sulfeny-lated sites in proteins is of great importance towards understanding how protein function is regulated upon redox conditions. Results: We developed PRESS (PRotEin S-Sulfenylation) web server, a server which can effectively predict the cysteine thiols of a protein that could undergo S-sulfenylation under redox conditions. We envisage that this server will boost and facilitate the discovery of new and currently unknown functions of proteins triggered upon redox conditions, signal regulation and transduction, thus uncovering the role of S-sulfenylation in human health and disease. Availability and implementation: The PRESS web server is freely available at http://press-sulfenyla
IntroductionProtein S-sulfenylation is a transient post-translational modification through which cysteine (CYS) thiols of proteins are reversibly oxidized to cysteine sulfenic acids (CSO), an event that modulates their function and activity. It has been shown that reactive oxygen species (ROS) mediated S-sulfenylation of cysteine thiols is a crucial intermediate state in a variety of cysteine modifications and acts as a regulatory mechanism in pathology, physiology and cell signaling (). The discovery, therefore, of new S-sulfenylated sites in proteins is of great importance towards understanding how protein function is regulated upon redox conditions. Experimental discovery and identification of new CSO in proteins is an expensive, intensive and time-consuming process. Although numerous servers exist for the prediction of cysteine modifications such as S-Nitrosylation, S-Glutathionylation, etc., structure-based prediction of transient S-sulfenylation is still elusive. Herein, we developed PRotEin S-Sulfenylation (PRESS), a server that predicts, rapidly and efficiently, CSO sites in proteins. This is a structure-based methodology that relies on the observation of a high conservation in the spatial environment of CSO sites. (Supplementary Section 1, Tables S1, S2 and Figs S1S5). To build PRESS, we took advantage of the under-utilized information of high resolution X-ray structures bearing CSO sites. protein sequence (lying within a window size of W  11, centered at the cysteine) are extracted. Second, the spatial amino acid neighbors surrounding each cysteine in 3D space, lying within a user defined radius, are extracted. The distance between a cysteine and a neighboring amino acid corresponds to the shortest distance between any pair of their atoms, based on their atom coordinates. Third, water molecules and/or metal ions surrounding each cysteine in 3D space (lying within a user defined radius) are also extracted. Moreover, complementary statistical information, concerning all the available cysteines in the uploaded protein structures, is provided in each of the above three cases in the form of sequence logos or bar charts (Supplementary Figs S6S11). (ii) Automatic prediction of cysteines in proteins that are prone to undergo transient S-sulfenylation via an SVM-based predictive algorithm (Supplementary Section 3). Usage instructions for PRESS can be found in Supplementary Section 5.