PRIMUS is a pedigree reconstruction algorithm that uses estimates of genome-wide identity by descent to reconstruct pedigrees consistent with observed genetic data. However, when genetic data for individuals within a pedigree are missing, often multiple pedigrees can be reconstructed that fit the data. We report a major expansion of PRIMUS that uses mitochondrial (mtDNA) and non-recombining Y chromosome (NRY) haplotypes to eliminate many pedigree structures that are inconsistent with the genetic data. We demonstrate that discordances in mtDNA and NRY haplotypes substantially reduce the number of potential pedigrees, and often lead to the identification of the correct pedigree. Availability and Implementation: We have implemented PRIMUS updates in PERL and it is available at primus.
IntroductionCorrectly determining pedigree structures is key to identifying the causes of genetic disorders (). In some cases, reported pedigree structures are inconsistent with observed genetic sharing (), which may result in a loss of power and failure to find the disease causing variant(s) (). Cryptic relatedness within datasets and sample swaps are frequently observed. Pedigree reconstruction can find cryptic relationships and correctly fit them into a pedigree structure (). Early methods for checking pedigrees applied pairwise relationship prediction approaches that use co-dominant genetic markers (); however, pedigree reconstruction can more accurately predict relationships, find the correct pedigree, and identify cryptic pedigrees (). Pedigree Reconstruction and Identification of a Maximum Unrelated Set (PRIMUS;) uses estimates of genome-wide identity by descent (IBD) to reconstruct pedigree structures that fit the IBD estimates. Missing genetic data for a set of people in a family often leads to the identification of multiple pedigrees that fit the data. We show that by using inconsistencies in the inheritance patterns of the human mitochondria (mtDNA) and non-recombining Y chromosome (NRY) haplotypes captured by genotyping arrays or by highthroughput sequencing (), improves the accuracy of pedigree reconstruction. We describe the utilization of mtDNA and NRY data for pedigree reconstruction in PRIMUS (v1.8.0) to reduce the number of generated pedigrees and improve the chance of identifying the correct pedigree structure. V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com