Motivation: Systems biology attempts to describe complex systems behaviors in terms of dynamic operations of biological networks. However, there is lack of tools that can effectively decode complex network dynamics over multiple conditions. Results: We present principal network analysis (PNA) that can automatically capture major dynamic activation patterns over multiple conditions and then generate protein and metabolic subnetworks for the captured patterns. We first demonstrated the utility of this method by applying it to a synthetic dataset. The results showed that PNA correctly captured the subnetworks representing dynamics in the data. We further applied PNA to two time-course gene expression profiles collected from (i) MCF7 cells after treatments of HRG at multiple doses and (ii) brain samples of four strains of mice infected with two prion strains. The resulting subnetworks and their interactions revealed network dynamics associated with HRG dose-dependent regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation and early PrP Sc accumulation during prion infection. Availability: The web-based software is available at:
INTRODUCTIONSystems biology attempts to describe systems behaviors in terms of dynamic operations of biological networks (). A number of gene expression studies have been performed to understand network dynamics over multiple conditions (). However, it is challenging to decode network dynamics from the multi-conditional gene expression data due to (i) diverse activation patterns of nodes over multiple conditions; (ii) dense interactions (edges) among the nodes; and (iii) the large size of the global network. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.To understand complex network dynamics, it is common in systems approaches to extract major subnetworks (). The common tasks for generation of such subnetworks include: (i) identification of differentially expressed genes (DEGs) between various conditions, (ii) clustering of the DEGs based on their differential expression patterns and (iii) reconstruction of subnetworks using the genes belonging to major clusters and their interaction partners from the global interactome. However, as the numbers of both time points and conditions increase, the generation of major subnetworks using this approach often becomes intractable due to the complexity in the above tasks. There have been several methods for automatically generating active subnetworks (ASs) that are composed of (i) active nodes showing significant changes over conditions (node-based methods) or (ii) active edges having the interacting nodes whose gene expression levels were co-varied over conditions (edge-based methods). Most of node-based methods () generate ASs by identifying subnetworks including mainly the active nodes, but they do not consider the correlation between activation patterns of the interacting nodes. An edge-based method () results in a subnetwork composed of the active edges for which the interacting nodes are co-varied in their gene expression levels. However, both node-and edge-based methods generate the subnetworks with a mixture of different activation patterns, which makes it inefficient to sort out complex network dynamics in terms of the resulting subnetworks. We propose a new concept of 'principal subnetwork' for analyzing complex network dynamics. We define a principal subnetwork (PS) by an AS including both nodes and edges that share a particular major (or principal) activation pattern. Several PSs showing a number of major activation patterns can be generated from a single dataset. Thus, analyzing the individual PSs and their interactions can allow us to efficiently sort out complex network dynamics. In this study, we developed principal network analysis (PNA) that can automatically (i) capture principal activation patterns over multiple conditions and (ii) generate the corresponding protein and metabolic subnetworks (PSs) to the captured patterns based on the orthogonal non-negative matrix factorization (ONMF). We demonstrated the utility of PNA by applying it to three datasets. The results showed that the collective analysis of PSs and their interactions can effectively generate network-driven hypotheses for given problems.Page: 392 391398