PRINCIPLE is a Java application implemented as a Cytoscape plug-in, based on a previously published algorithm, PRINCE. Given a query disease, it prioritizes disease-related genes based on their closeness in a protein–protein interaction network to genes causing phenotypically similar disorders to the query disease. Availability: Implemented in Java, PRINCIPLE runs over Cytoscape 2.7 or newer versions. Binaries, default input files and documentation are freely available at
INTRODUCTIONAssociating diseases with their causal genes is a fundamental challenge in medical research with applications to diagnosis and therapy. Recently, we introduced a novel method for prioritizing candidate disease-causing genes, named PRINCE (PRIoritizatioN and Complex Elucidation) (). PRINCE is motivated by the observation that genes causing similar diseases often lie close to one another in a proteinprotein interaction (PPI) network (). Given a query disease, PRINCE: (i) identifies a set of phenotypically similar diseases (van); (ii) retrieves the known causal genes of these diseases to form a ranked prior vector Y based on their similarity to the query and (iii) propagates the scores of the prior set of genes over a human PPI network to provide association scores for all genes. The final score assigned to each protein in the network combines the prior information with a network-based component. The latter ensures that the resulting scores are smooth over the network. Formally, the score F(v) of a node v with a set of network neighbors N(v) is:Where w is a normalized matrix representing the weighted PPI network and Y (v) is the prior weight of the node. Here  is parameter * To whom correspondence should be addressed. weighting the relative importance of the prior-based versus the network-based components of the score. PRINCE leverages on a comprehensive set of weighted PPIs compiled from multiple sources (), the disease disease similarity measures computed by van, and on the diseasegene associations presented in the Online Mendelian Inheritance in Man (OMIM) knowledgebase (). Here we introduce PRINCIPLE (PRINCe ImPLEmentation) a Cytoscape plug-in () implementation of the PRINCE algorithm. Given a query disease, it provides a list of top ranking genes associated with it and an additional visualization of the subnetworks formed by these top ranking genes and their direct interacting neighbors.