The ability to integrate and visualize experimental proteomic evidence in the context of rich protein feature annotations represents an unmet need of the proteomics community. Here we present Protter, a web-based tool that supports interactive protein data analysis and hypothesis generation by visualizing both annotated sequence features and experimental proteomic data in the context of protein topology. Protter supports numerous proteomic file formats and automatically integrates a variety of reference protein annotation sources, which can be readily extended via modular plug-ins. A built-in export function produces publication-quality customized protein illustrations, also for large datasets. Visualizations of surfa-ceome datasets show the specific utility of Protter for the integrated visual analysis of membrane proteins and peptide selection for targeted proteomics. Availability and implementation: The Protter web application is available at
INTRODUCTIONVisualization of features within biological sequences is essential for integrated analysis and interpretation of experimental sequencing data. Software solutions to visualize nucleic acid sequences such as genomic DNA in the context of rich feature annotations (e.g. genes, promoters) and experimental evidence (e.g. RNA-Seq reads) have become indispensable research tools for interactive data analysis and hypothesis generation. Prominent examples include the UCSC genome browser () and IGV (). In contrast, only few tools support the visualization of protein features such as post-translational modifications (PTMs) or protein domains within the context of a protein's topology andlike the examples abovedown to single residue resolution. These include RbDe (), TMRPres2D () and TOPO2 (http://www.sacs.ucsf.edu/TOPO2). Importantly, none of these tools integrates experimental proteomic data in an automated fashion (see Supplementary Table S1 andfor a detailed comparison). To exploit the unique insights into protein structure and function that experimental proteomic data provide, tools are needed that would allow for their integrated visualization, interactive analysis and hypothesis generation (). For membrane proteins, which carry out many essential cellular functions and represent more than half of all current drug targets (), taking into account the topology is particularly important. Protter is an interactive and customizable web-based application that enables the integration and visualization of both annotated and predicted protein sequence features together with experimental proteomic evidence for peptides and PTMs, onto the transmembrane topology of a protein. It allows users to choose from numerous annotation sources, integrate own proteomics data files, select best-suited peptides for targeted quantitative proteomics applications and export publication-quality illustrations.