Background: With more and more genomes being sequenced, detecting synteny between gen-omes becomes more and more important. However, for microorganisms the genomic divergence quickly becomes large, resulting in different codon usage and shuffling of gene order and gene elements such as exons. Results: We present Proteny, a methodology to detect synteny between diverged genomes. It operates on the amino acid sequence level to be insensitive to codon usage adaptations and clusters groups of exons disregarding order to handle diversity in genomic ordering between genomes. Furthermore, Proteny assigns significance levels to the syntenic clusters such that they can be selected on statistical grounds. Finally, Proteny provides novel ways to visualize results at different scales, facilitating the exploration and interpretation of syntenic regions. We test the performance of Proteny on a standard ground truth dataset, and we illustrate the use of Proteny on two closely related genomes (two different strains of Aspergillus niger) and on two distant genomes (two species of Basidiomycota). In comparison to other tools, we find that Proteny finds clusters with more true homologies in fewer clusters that contain more genes, i.e. Proteny is able to identify a more consistent synteny. Further, we show how genome rearrangements, assembly errors, gene duplications and the conservation of specific genes can be easily studied with Proteny. Availability and implementation: Proteny is freely available at the Delft Bioinformatics Lab website http://bioinformatics.tudelft.nl/dbl/software.
IntroductionA synteny analysis is a useful way to compare organisms that allows us to study the evolution between genomes, make claims about functional conservation (), identify genome rearrangements (), aide genome annotation () and even predict genome assembly errors. Numerous tools are already available to detect synteny. Tools like Mugsy (), Mauve (), Multiz () and Sibelia (), focus only on highly related genomes. OrthoCluster () and SyMAP () operate at the DNA level and discover groups of genes with their gene order being conserved. These assumptions are too strict when considering more distant genomes (see Supplementary Material S1). i-ADHoRe () works at the protein level and builds a homologous gene matrix based on proteinprotein alignments, detecting clusters of genes by identifying diagonal groups of genes,
DiscussionWe presented Proteny, a methodology which identifies significant conserved syntenic clusters of exons between two genomes through a novel method for cutting dendrograms and a new dynamic multiple testing correction algorithm. Knowledge of the discovered clusters allow us to uncover genome rearrangement events (as shown for both the A.niger strains and the Basidiomycota), make more motivated statements about functional conservation (as for S.commune), identify possible errors in the assembly of related genomes (like in A.niger) and study the evolution between species (as in looking at the cytochrome P450 monooxygenases in A.bisporus and S.commune). When comparing with i-ADHoRe, the most competitive tool, on a ground truth dataset, we find Proteny outperforms i-ADHoRe. Qualitatively, we observe that i-ADHoRe finds more clusters, covering fewer genes than Proteny clusters. Proteny finds gene-dense clusters of high quality, as verified by the cluster scores achieved by Proteny on the YGOB dataset. This can be attributed to the statistical testing procedure and the conservation ratio we enforce in Proteny. One practical advantage of Proteny over other synteny tools is that, besides the BLASTp settings (for which we used default values in our experiments), it only requires specifying a significance threshold (which can be set by statistical reasoning) and a conservation ratio parameter s. It should be noted that Proteny could work with other aligners also and that BLASTp could be replaced by other protein sequence aligner. On the other hand, i-ADHoRe and many other tools are able to perform an analysis on more than two genomes at a time. Proteny could be generalized towards any number of species by a progressive heuristic similar to the star multiple alignment heuristic (), which uses a central sequence with pairwise sequence alignments to guide the multiple alignment. It is important to note that the cluster score of Proteny does not account for the conservation of the order of the exons within the cluster. This can most prominently be seen in the synteny between scaffold 2 of S.commune and scaffold 2 of A.bisporus (and b), where the order of the hits is scrambled. Although the ordering of the exons does play a role when constructing the dendrogram (nearby hits are merged first), we chose that the ordering should not play a role when scoring the clusters. This was a deliberate choice since Proteny was designed to find synteny between relatively divergent organisms in a microbiology context where evolution is fast; insertions, inversions, strand changes and gene shuffling occur frequently. Clearly, in other problem settings, the order may be important, in which case the cluster score in Proteny should be adjusted. However, one should be careful when designing a corresponding permutation scheme, e.g. a circular permutation of hit scores to preserve the order of hits in that set, as this might result in computational difficulties, as (e.g.) the CLT approximation will not hold anymore. By searching for synteny at the exon level, we exclude the influence of noncoding regions of the genome, which are typically not well conserved between divergent genomes. While an analysis at the gene level is interesting, we reasoned that it makes more sense to look at the conservation of individual exons within the gene. The region-level visualizations indeed show that conservation is higher at the exon level than at the gene level, i.e. some exons may be missing, making the gene less conserved, while individual exons are conserved. The ability to give each cluster a P value is an important contribution. However, the null distribution assumes that there is a completely random relationship between the organisms, which is not true. Currently, the s parameter, representing a lower bound on their conservation ratio (in terms of the ratio of conserved and non-conserved exons) is used to regulate the clusters. Future contributions could develop a null model which takes into account evolution between two species. For example, a better permutation may shuffle groups of exons (genes), rather than individual exons. Yet as indicated earlier, this will give rise to computational difficulties. Another important consideration is that exons which do not have a hit with the other organism increase the distance between hits when constructing the dendrogram, but they do not penalize the cluster score. Again, this was a deliberate choice to be less sensitive to evolutionary insertions and deletions but could be changed by using a different distance measure. Altogether, Proteny is a powerful tool which can detect synteny between relatively divergent genomes at the amino acid sequence level. It detects clusters of exons based on a significance test and provides a rich visualization which supports the interpretation of the detected syntenic regions.