Motivation: Identification of protein–ligand binding sites is critical to protein function annotation and drug discovery. However, there is no method that could generate optimal binding site prediction for different protein types. Combination of complementary predictions is probably the most reliable solution to the problem. Results: We develop two new methods, one based on binding-specific substructure comparison (TM-SITE) and another on sequence profile alignment (S-SITE), for complementary binding site predictions. The methods are tested on a set of 500 non-redundant proteins harboring 814 natural, drug-like and metal ion molecules. Starting from low-resolution protein structure predictions, the methods successfully recognize 451% of binding residues with average Matthews correlation coefficient (MCC) significantly higher (with P-value 510 –9 in student t-test) than other state-of-the-art methods, including COFACTOR, FINDSITE and ConCavity. When combining TM-SITE and S-SITE with other structure-based programs, a consensus approach (COACH) can increase MCC by 15% over the best individual predictions. COACH was examined in the recent community-wide COMEO experiment and consistently ranked as the best method in last 22 individual datasets with the Area Under the Curve score 22.5% higher than the second best method. These data demonstrate a new robust approach to protein–ligand binding site recognition, which is ready for genome-wide structure-based function annotations.
INTRODUCTIONProteins perform the biological functions through interactions with other molecules (called ligands). The identification of specific ligand-binding site (LBS) on proteins is often the first important step toward understanding the function of protein molecules, or for rational design of new therapeutic compounds to modulate the protein functions (). Due to the technical difficulties and high cost associated with experimental determination, however, the structural details for proteinligand interactions are unknown for most proteins. Even for the proteins with experimentally solved 3D structure, there are nearly 40% of proteins (i.e. 35 633 out of 90 424) in the PDB which lack biologically relevant ligand-binding information, as shown in BioLiP (). Accurate prediction of ligandprotein binding is therefore required for both biological and therapeutic studies. A variety of methods have been developed for computational prediction of protein LBSs; these methods can be generally categorized into two groups, i.e. sequence-based () or 3D structure-based () methods. Most of the sequence-based methods rely on the residue conservation analyses under the assumption that the ligand-binding residues are functionally important and therefore conserved in evolutionary process (). This approach has the advantage of generating prediction from sequence alone but the precision of predictions is low (typically around 35% at 20% recall) because many non-binding residues can also be of high degree of conservation due to the diverse roles (e.g. to keep the fold stable). For the structure-based methods, two different approaches prevail. In the first approach, the ligand-binding pocket is identified by recognizing the surface cavities on the 3D structural model of the target protein (). It has the advantages of ab initio modeling of the LBSs as predictions are made without using templates, but the false positive rate can be high, especially for the low-resolution models generated from protein structure predictions. The second structure-based approach is to infer ligand-binding information from the known template proteins, which have similar global and/or local structure to the query (). As shown in the recent community-wide CASP experiments (), this type of template-based approaches represent by far the most accurate methods, especially for targets which have close homologs in the ligandprotein complex structure databases. Nevertheless, no individual methods can generate sufficiently accurate predictions for different targets. For instance, the template-based methods do not outperform ab initio pocket identification methods for distant-homologous targets; and the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. performance of pocket-based methods can be significantly degraded in the targets without high-resolution models, where sequence-based methods may have their advantage. In this work, we aim to develop a reliable approach which could generate highly accurate ligand-binding predictions for different categories of protein targets. We first design a new structure-based algorithm (TM-SITE) which derives LBSs from structure-related templates with the alignments built on binding-specific substructures matches. Second, a new binding-specific sequence profile alignment method (S-SITE) is developed for evolution-based LBS recognition. Finally, we design COACH to combine the prediction results of TM-SITE and SSITE with other available LBS tools by the support vector machine (SVM) training. Because one of the major objectives in this work is for genome-wide function annotation following the sequence-to-structure-to-function paradigm, we will examine and test our methods on low-resolution structure models generated by the state-of-the-art protein structure predictions (). All the algorithms and data developed in this work are freely accessible at our website.