Motivation: Experimental reproducibility is fundamental to the progress of science. Irreproducible research decreases the efficiency of basic biological research and drug discovery and impedes experimental data reuse. A major contributing factor to irreproducibility is difficulty in interpreting complex experimental methodologies and designs from written text and in assessing variations among different experiments. Current bioinformatics initiatives either are focused on computational research reproducibility (i.e. data analysis) or laboratory information management systems. Here, we present a software tool, ProtocolNavigator, which addresses the largely overlooked challenges of interpretation and assessment. It provides a biologist-friendly open-source emulation-based tool for designing, documenting and reproducing biological experiments. Availability and implementation: ProtocolNavigator was implemented in Python 2.7, using the wx module to build the graphical user interface. It is a platform-independent software and freely available from http://protocolnavigator.org/index.html under the GPL v2 license.
CONCLUSIONAlthough ProtocolNavigator has been primarily developed for basic cell-based research, new instruments or materials can be added as per prospective users' demand. Importantly, the emulation-based documentation and automatic design depiction concept introduced here is applicable across many research environments where practice, design and interdisciplinary communication are serious concerns (e.g. clinical trials or animal studies). By linking practice variation with experimental data, ProtocolNavigator not only introduces an intuitive mechanism for identifying key factors for reproducibility but also the foundation to convey best practices in quantitative terms.Here, cells were seeded in all eight vessels at time 0 h and then labelled with nanoparticles (four vessels; 23.59 h later) again with corresponding unlabelled control (four vessels). Thereafter, data acquisition was performed on vessels (one from fluorescently labelled and one from control) 48, 72, 96 and 120 h post seeding. For both scenarios 'A' and 'B', eight flow cytometer FCS files were acquired of cells exposed to nanoparticles and control for varying numbers of days. Experiments are available in Supplementary Information for download and navigation through ProtocolNavigator