Motivation: Protein contact prediction is important for protein structure and functional study. Both evolutionary coupling (EC) analysis and supervised machine learning methods have been developed , making use of different information sources. However, contact prediction is still challenging especially for proteins without a large number of sequence homologs. Results: This article presents a group graphical lasso (GGL) method for contact prediction that integrates joint multi-family EC analysis and supervised learning to improve accuracy on proteins without many sequence homologs. Different from existing single-family EC analysis that uses residue coevolution information in only the target protein family, our joint EC analysis uses residue coevo-lution in both the target family and its related families, which may have divergent sequences but similar folds. To implement this, we model a set of related protein families using Gaussian graph-ical models and then coestimate their parameters by maximum-likelihood, subject to the constraint that these parameters shall be similar to some degree. Our GGL method can also integrate supervised learning methods to further improve accuracy. Experiments show that our method outper-forms existing methods on proteins without thousands of sequence homologs, and that our method performs better on both conserved and family-specific contacts. Availability and implementation: See http://raptorx.uchicago.edu/ContactMap/ for a web server implementing the method.
IntroductionProtein contacts contain important information for protein folding and recent works indicate that one correct long-range contact for every 12 residues may allow accurate topology-level modeling (). Thanks to high-throughput sequencing and better statistical and optimization techniques, evolutionary coupling (EC) analysis for contact prediction has made good progress, which makes de novo prediction of some large proteins possible (). For example, the Baker group successfully predicted the fold of a CASP11 target T0806 with 256 amino acids using predicted contacts. Nevertheless, contact prediction accuracy is still low even if only the top L/10 (L is the sequence length) predicted contacts are evaluated. Existing contact prediction methods belong to roughly two categories: (i) EC analysis methods, such as (), that make use of multiple sequence alignment; and (ii) supervised machine learning methods, such as SVMSEQ (), NNcon (), SVMcon (), CMAPpro (), that predict contacts from a variety of informationincluding mutual information and sequence profiles. In addition, a couple of methods also use physical constraints, such as PhyCMAP () and Astro-Fold (). MetaPSICOV () is a recent supervised learning method that predicts contacts by integrating four EC analysis methods and lots of non-coevolutionary information. Residue EC analysis is a pure sequence-based, unsupervised method that predicts contacts by detecting coevolved residues from the multiple sequence alignment (MSA) of a single protein family. This is based upon an observation that a pair of coevolved residues is often found to be spatially close in the three-dimensional structure. Mutual information (MI) is a local statistical method used to measure residue coevolution strength, but it cannot tell apart direct and indirect residue interaction and thus, has low prediction accuracy. Along with many more sequences are available, global statistical methods such as maximum entropy and probabilistic graphical models are developed to infer residue coevolution from MSA (). These global methods can differentiate direct from indirect residue couplings and thus, are more accurate than MI. See () for an excellent review of EC analysis. Representative tools of EC analysis include Evfold (), PSICOV (), GREMLIN (), and plmDCA (). Supervised machine learning methods (;;) make use of MI, sequence profile and other protein features, as opposed to EC analysis that makes use of only residue co-evolution. Experiments show that due to use of more information, supervised learning may outperform EC methods for proteins with few sequence homologs (). Recently, a few groups such as DNcon (), CMAPpro () and PConsC2 () have applied deep learning to contact prediction and reported performance improvement. In this article, we present a new method CoinDCA (coestimation of inverse matrices for direct-coupling analysis) for contact prediction that conducts joint multifamily EC analysis through group graphical lasso (GGL) (), which is an extension of the graphical lasso formulation employed by PSICOV (). The underlying intuition for joint EC analysis is that distantly related families with divergent sequences may share similar contact maps and we can leverage this by enforcing contact map consistency to improve accuracy. Supervised learning uses different information sources than EC analysis, so their combination should also lead to better prediction accuracy. The experiments presented here show that our method outperforms existing EC or supervised machine learning methods regardless of the number of non-redundant sequence homologs available for a target protein under prediction, and that our method not only performs better on conserved contacts, but also on family-specific contacts. We also find out that contact prediction may be worsened by merging multiple related families into a single one followed by single-family EC analysis, or by consensus of single-family EC analysis results.
DiscussionThis article has presented a GGL method to predict contacts by exploring joint multi-family EC analysis and supervised machine learning. EC analysis and supervised learning are currently two major methods for contact prediction, but they use different information sources. Our joint EC analysis predicts contacts in a target family by analyzing residue co-evolution information in a set of related protein families which may share similar contact maps. In order to effectively integrate information across multiple families, we use GGL to estimate the joint probability distribution of multiple related families by a set of correlated Gaussian models. Experiments show that the combination of joint EC analysis with supervised machine learning can significantly improve contact prediction, and that our method even outperforms single-family EC analysis on protein families with a large number of sequence homologs. We have also shown that contact prediction cannot be improved by a simple method, such as family merging and majority voting of single-family EC analysis results. These simple methods may improve prediction for highly conserved contacts at the cost of family-specific contacts.Our method can be further improved. For example, similar to GREMLIN and plmDCA, we may relax the Gaussian assumption to improve prediction accuracy. This article uses an entry-wise L 2 norm to penalize contact map inconsistency among related protein families. There may be other penalty functions that can more accurately quantify contact map similarity between two families as a function of sequence similarity and thus, further improve contact prediction. It may further improve contact prediction by integrating other supervised learning methods such as CMAPpro, NNcon and DNcon or even other EC methods into our GGL framework. In this paper we use Pfam to define a protein family because it is manually curated and very accurate. There are also other criteria to define a protein family. For example, SCOP defines a protein family based upon structure information and thus, classifies protein domains into much fewer families than Pfam. In our experiment, the average structure similarity, measured by TMscore (), between a target (Pfam) family and its auxiliary (Pfam) families is only around 0.7. That is, many auxiliary families are not highly similar to its target families even by the SCOP definition. Indeed, some auxiliary families are only similar to the target family at the SCOP fold level. That is, even a remotely-related protein family may provide information useful for contact prediction. We can further extend our method to predict contacts of all the protein families simultaneously, instead of one-by-one, by joint EC analysis across the whole protein family universe. First we can use a graph to model the whole Pfam database, each vertex representing one Pfam family and an edge indicating that two families may be related. Then we can use a graph of correlated GGMs to model the whole Pfam graph, each GGM for one vertex. The GGMs of two vertices in an edge are correlated together through the alignment of their respective protein families. By this way, the residue co-evolution information in one family can be passed onto any family that is connected through a path. As such, we may predict the contacts of one family by making use of information in all the path-connected families. By enforcing this global consistency, we should be able to further improve EC analysis for contact prediction. However, to simultaneously estimate the parameters of all the GGMs, a large amount of computational power will be needed. Such an idea is similar (in spirit) to the global trace graph method described by ().