Motivation: Mutations in homologous proteins affect changes in the backbone conformation that involve a complex interplay of forces which are difficult to predict. Protein design algorithms need to anticipate these backbone changes in order to accurately calculate the energy of the structure given an amino acid sequence, without knowledge of the final, designed sequence. This is related to the problem of predicting small changes in the backbone between highly similar sequences. Results: We explored the ability of the Rosetta suite of protein design tools to move the backbone from its position in one structure (template) to its position in a close homologous structure (target) as a function of the diversity of a backbone ensemble constructed using the template structure, the percent sequence identity between the template and target, and the size of local zone being considered in the ensemble. We describe a pareto front in the likelihood of moving the backbone toward the target as a function of ensemble diversity and zone size. The equations and protocols presented here will be useful for protein design.
IntroductionComputational protein design has been increasingly employed in novel protein engineering applications and has been met with considerable success for a number of applications. Protein design is typically defined as the problem of identifying amino acid sequences that are compatible with a given, input target protein structure. Some of the most notable successes of computational protein design involve enhancing the thermal stability of natural proteins (), designing novel binding sites on natural proteins (), and de novo design of novel proteins () and enzymes (). From a computational point of view, the most important considerations for developing a robust protein design workflow to best enable experimental success are the selection of a suitable energetic function to distinguish favorable conformations from unfavorable ones, and an efficient algorithm to search the conformational space. One major limitation with traditional computational protein design is its reliance on the assumption that the protein backbone remains fixed. Computationally speaking, holding the backbone fixed simplifies the design process considerably by limiting the number of degrees of freedom in the system, but unfortunately the fixed backbone assumption has been shown to fail for a significant number of design applications (). Many natural proteins are structurally optimized for the wildtype sequence and hence introducing sequence mutations V C The Author 2016. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com leads to the necessity of modeling backbone flexibility to achieve reliable design success (). One early approach to implicitly modeling backbone flexibility involves simply dampening the van der Waals repulsive energetic term to allow for small steric clashes (), but this approach can lead to overpacking of the protein core. Many flexible backbone design approaches have moved towards paradigms that explicitly model discrete backbone conformations as ensembles of related backbone structures (). The major advantage of an ensemble composed of discrete states is that it can be easily incorporated into a traditional fixed backbone protein design algorithm with ease. The ensemble can be generated in a variety of different ways, many of which have been successfully used to design novel protein functions. For instance, one study generated ensembles simply by randomly perturbing the u/w backbone dihedral angles and found that the profiles of sequences explored on these ensembles tended to reproduce the natural sequence profile for the original input structure and its homologs (). Another group utilized normal mode analysis to generate an ensemble of helical peptides and successfully designed novel peptides to inhibit the anti-apoptotic receptor Bcl-xL (). Molecular dynamics (MD) is also another accessible method for diversifying an initial structure and in one case was able to produce an ensemble that was able to explore sequence space in a couple of common folds similar to the sequence space explored by the corresponding homologous families (). Recently, methods that explicitly model specific, naturally occurring protein motions have been used to generate biophysically relevant ensembles. One such method models so-called 'backrub motions' () which was inspired by the local motions observed within tripeptide segments of sub-Angstrom resolution crystal structures (). Backrub has generated ensembles that have successfully been employed to better recapitulate the side chain order parameters of NMR-determined structures (), model the structural and sequence diversity observed experimentally in ubiquitin (), and recapitulate the phage display-determined sequence library of the Herceptin-HER2 interface (). Another potential application for modeling backbone motions is kinematic closure (KIC), a protocol for sampling protein loop motions inspired by inverse kinematics developments in robotics (). KIC has also been demonstrated to be able to produce ensembles that recapitulate the experimental library of the Herceptin-HER2 interface (). Backrub and KIC are both implemented within the Rosetta software package giving them access to well-characterized energy functions (). In this manuscript, we investigate the degree to which random ensemble generation using backrub, kinematic closure, and molecular dynamics, performed without using knowledge of any target homolog structure, samples backbone conformations that are similar to ones observed in close target homologs or in identical sequences solved under different experimental conditions. In this paper, ensembles that produce backbone conformations that are locally more similar to a given homolog are considered 'improved.' We consider how improvement scales with increased sampling of backbone conformational space, both in terms of increased ensemble size and backbone diversity sampled among the members of the ensemble. Furthermore, we will characterize improvement as a function of local radius, which defines the size of local zones or substructures of a protein. We comment on how these insights into ensemble generation can be utilized to improve current ensemble-dependent protein design algorithms.
DiscussionIn this manuscript, we explored the effectiveness of using knowledgefree backbone ensembles for protein structure prediction applications using template-target close homologs as benchmarks. Generation of the ensembles was performed using a gradient-based approach whose behavior and characteristics were studied as a function of number of members of the ensemble and maximum ensemble diversity. Consequently, our results suggest that increasing the number of structures in the ensemble increases the likelihood of finding locally improved substructures. This probability is increased if the ensemble diversity extends to a certain optimal level, which may be adequately estimated based on the number of designable positions. These results are not surprising, however the analysis of the ensemble's ability to generate improved local substructures randomly as a function of the radius of the local substructure is more interesting. A pareto relationship is observed between the intuitively known local radius, the number of ensemble members, and the desired percentage of local improvement. This relationship establishes how many template conformations should be sampled in order to generate a reasonable number of improved backbone structures, given a local radius. The method of ensemble generation can have impacts on the biophysical relevance of the resulting ensemble. KIC clearly outperforms BR and MD in the task of finding the unseen target for 8 A  local regions. MD ensembles suffer from high x values, presumably because the structure is being perturbed from ideal backbone geometry. The nature of BR and KIC moves prevents large perturbations of x. Interestingly, KIC samples more diversity in u and w than BR, even as the two methods produce ensembles with the same RMSD. BR move rotates all atoms between two randomly determined pivot Ca atoms as a group, whereas a KIC move modifies all of the backbone dihedrals. Since BR moves do not modify the internal structure of the loop spanning the two pivot atoms, it is probably comparatively more difficult for BR to sample diversity in well-packed regions of the protein, due to steric collisions. KIC can collapse and modify whole loops, which would increase the structural diversity explored in well-packed regions. KIC probably outperforms MD due to the fact that the heating step of the MD simulation imparts quick atomic accelerations at the beginning of the simulation, distorting ideal geometry. Diversity is generated very quickly in MD, requiring a sampling time of 0.01 ps to capture the small RMSD ensemble members. It should be noted that in some cases, diversity was generated so quickly that the lower end of the RMSD gradients had lower resolution, which probably contributed to the lower average performance of MD. It appears that KIC ensemble generation is superior to BR and MD, at least as carried out here, because of its greater backbone diversity and minimal distortion. One important caveat is that our results do not imply that the scoring function is able to discriminate between optimal substructures. All that our results establish is that energy-guided but otherwise random backbone perturbations can and do sample the conformational shifts of unseen homologs. The challenge remains to develop and implement an energy function that can correctly identify the optimal de novo template substructure.