Motivation: Template-based modeling, including homology modeling and protein threading, is the most reliable method for protein 3D structure prediction. However, alignment errors and template selection are still the main bottleneck for current template-base modeling methods, especially when proteins under consideration are distantly related. Results: We present a novel context-specific alignment potential for protein threading, including alignment and template selection. Our alignment potential measures the log-odds ratio of one alignment being generated from two related proteins to being generated from two unrelated proteins, by integrating both local and global context-specific information. The local alignment potential quantifies how well one sequence residue can be aligned to one template residue based on context-specific information of the residues. The global alignment potential quantifies how well two sequence residues can be placed into two template positions at a given distance, again based on context specific information. By accounting for correlation among a variety of protein features and making use of context-specific information, our alignment potential is much more sensitive than the widely used context-independent or profile-based scoring function. Experimental results confirm that our method generates significantly better alignments and threading results than the best profile-based methods on several large benchmarks. Our method works particularly well for distantly related proteins or proteins with sparse sequence profiles because of the effective integration of context-specific, structure and global information.
INTRODUCTIONProtein structure is essential for the understanding of protein functions. Predicting the 3D structure of a protein from its sequence remains one of the grand challenges confronting computational biologists. Template-based modeling (TBM), such as homology modeling and protein threading, is the most reliable method and can produce reasonable 3D models for about twothird of the proteins without solved structures. TBM is based on the observation that protein structures are much more conserved than sequences. That is, given a target protein sequence, we can predict its 3D structure by aligning it to structurally similar protein structures in PDB. The model quality of TBM depends on sequence-template alignment and template selection, both of which are challenging when only distantly related templates are available for a protein sequence under prediction. The threading accuracy critically depends on the choice of a threading scoring function (). Most of current methods make heavy use of position-specific information, such as sequence profile, which is usually represented as a positionspecific scoring matrix or a profile HMM (). Although sequence profile is effective on homolog detection, it is only position specific, but not context specific. Further, it is also lack of structure information (e.g. secondary structure and solvent accessibility). Context-specific information refers to the information in the sequential neighborhood of one residue. The neighboring residues of a given residue play an important role in shaping the mutation pattern of the residue. Few alignment methods, such as CS-BLAST (Biegert and SodingSoding, 2009) are developed to make use of context-specific information. Even CS-BLAST makes use of only sequence, but not context-specific structure information. To the best of our knowledge, no protein threading method has integrated well both context-specific sequence and structure information. Although many protein alignment methods use only local information, a few protein threading methods () were developed to use global information, such as pairwise contact potential, which quantifies how well two sequence residues can be placed into two template positions in a contact. However, the gain from pairwise contact potential is not significant as compared with the impact of sequence profile on protein alignments. The underlying reason may be that the contact-based pairwise potentials used in these threading methods do not carry too much extra signal. To significantly improve the effectiveness of global information especially pairwise potential in protein threading, this article studies a context-specific distance-based pairwise potential. Our pairwise potential is built on context-specific information and much more sensitive than the context-independent contact-based pairwise potentials and, thus, greatly helps improve protein threading. This article presents a novel context-specific alignment potential for protein threading, including both alignment and template selection. Our alignment potential measures the log-odds ratio of one alignment being generated from two related proteins to being generated from two unrelated proteins, by integrating context-specific local and global information. An alignment is assumed to be optimal if it maximizes the alignment potential. The local alignment potential quantifies how well one sequence residue can be aligned to one template residue based on contextspecific information of these two residues. The global alignment potential quantifies how well two sequence residues can be placed into two template positions at a given distance, again based on residue context-specific information. In this article, the context of one residue includes a variety of correlated protein features, such as sequence (profile) information, (predicted) secondary structure and solvent accessibility, amino acid physic-chemical properties in a local window centered at the residue. We integrate these correlated protein features into an accurate alignment potential using advanced statistical learning methods, including conditional neural fields *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/ by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com (). Experimental results show that our contextspecific alignment potential is much more sensitive than the widely used context-independent or profile-based (which is position specific) scoring function, generating significantly better alignments and threading results than the best profile-based methods on several large benchmarks. Our method works particularly well for distantly related proteins or proteins with sparse sequence profiles because of the effective integration of contextspecific, structure and global information.
CONCLUSIONThis article has presented a novel protein threading method using a context-specific alignment potential, which measures the. Two alignments between 3qnrA and 2gffA generated by our method and HHalign. The blue and red colors demonstrate correctly aligned regions judged by the reference alignment. To save space, only one of the domains of 3qnrA is shownof the distance-based pairwise alignment potential to Set 1000  6000. Each point represents the quality, measured by TMscore, of two models: one is generated using the local alignment potential only (x-axis), and the other using both the local and global alignment potentials (y-axis). Contribution of the distance-based pairwise alignment potential to the CASP10 set. Each point represents the quality, measured by TMscore, of two models: one is generated using the local alignment potential only (x-axis), and the other using both the local and global alignment potentials (y-axis). The relationship between P-value and the model quality on the 123 CASP10 targets. The x-axis is the model quality measured by max(GDT, uGDT) and the y-axis is log (P-value)Note: Reference-independent alignment accuracy is measured by TM-score.