We present a graphical user interface (PyCorrFit) for the fitting of theoretical model functions to experimental data obtained by fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS). The program supports many data file formats and features a set of tools specialized in FCS data evaluation. Availability and implementation: The Python source code is freely available for download from the PyCorrFit web page at http://pycorrfit. craban.de. We offer binaries for Ubuntu Linux, Mac OS X and Microsoft Windows.
INTRODUCTIONFluorescence imaging applications provide a wealth of information about the spatiotemporal distribution of fluorescent molecules in tissues or cells. However, time-lapsed imaging and related protocols, e.g. fluorescence recovery after photobleaching (FRAP), operate with a temporal resolution of sub-seconds, which is not fast enough to access free diffusion of mid-sized proteins. About a decade ago it was demonstrated that a confocal imaging setup can be extended by a fluorescence correlation spectroscopy (FCS) unit (). Such a fluorescence fluctuation microscope can be used to measure binding and diffusion at specific positions with a sub-microsecond resolution (). Since then, most of the major microscope companies developed FCS extensions for their products, and fluorescence fluctuation analysis became an integral part of the analytical repertoire in biomedical research. FCS is based on the temporal correlation analysis of a fluctuating fluorescence signal (). Using microscopes with multiple detection channels, a measurement generates a set of autoand cross-correlation curves, which contains information about dynamic molecular processes associated with the fluorescence emission from a femtoliter-sized detection volume (). Correlation curves are interpreted by means of theoretical model functions describing the underlying physical processes. For example, diffusion-driven fluctuations must be evaluated for a particular geometry of the detection volume. In addition, molecular behavior like reversible binding at sites within the detection volume, the population of photophysical dark states due to triplet or blinking phenomena and photobleaching simultaneously affect the measured shape of the correlation curves and must therefore be theoretically treated. In practice, experimental correlation data are evaluated by fitting appropriate model functions, thereby extracting parameters that describe the spatial and dynamical properties of the system. Custom-made evaluation scripts for a particular FCS instrument are usually designed for its specific optics (confocal, total internal reflection, etc.,) and often contain only a limited set of model functions. The underlying rationale for defining parameters and models may not be well-described, leaving the user with uncertainties for interpretation. Furthermore, the revision and parameter tweaking of correlation data from different sources can be a time-consuming procedure, raising the demand for a framework that is capable of dealing with any conceivable scenario in which correlation curves need to be processed. PyCorrFit offers such a framework, focusing on four major notions: (i) the use of established fitting algorithms; (ii) the possibility to implement customized model functions and data file formats; (iii) a comprehensive annotation of the evaluation dataset; and (iv) a user-friendly environment.