Motivation: Using simulation studies for quantitative trait loci (QTL), we evaluate the prediction quality of regression models that include as covariates single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genetic markers which did not achieve genome-wide significance in the original genome-wide association study, but were among the SNPs with the smallest P-value for the selected association test. We compare the results of such regression models to the standard approach which is to include only SNPs that achieve genome-wide significance. Using mean square prediction error as the model metric, our simulation results suggest that by using the coefficient of determination (R 2) value as a guideline to increase or reduce the number of SNPs included in the regression model, we can achieve better prediction quality than the standard approach. However, important parameters such as trait heritability, the approximate number of QTLs, etc. have to be determined from previous studies or have to be estimated accurately.
INTRODUCTIONHeight is one of the classic human traits studied by many statisticians. It is easy to measure and data are readily available. Galton and Fisher studied the problem extensively. Using a model of polygenesa large number of independently segregating genes, each contributes a small, equal and direct effect on the observed continuous phenotype, Fisher illustrated that Mendelian approach and the Biometric approach to population genetics can be bridged using height as an example (). There are many subsequent studies on the genetic variations of height in different population. Height is found to be highly heritable. Its heritability is 0.8 for European populations and 0.65 for Asian populations (). With the advent of genome-wide SNP-chip technology, it is now feasible to search for genetic associations with height at a genome-wide level. Several genome-wide association studies (GWASs) for height have been conducted by) and have been combined using meta-analysis approaches. Based on a total sample size of * To whom correspondence should be addressed.
DISCUSSIONAs we have demonstrated by the simple linear regression technique, it is very difficult to determine the optimal number of markers that should be used for prediction. The minimum MSPE (and probably other metrics as well) depends on other model parameters. The standard model, which uses only the significant SNPs, was compared Page: 748 745748