Protein microarrays are well-established as sensitive tools for proteomics. Particularly, the microspot immunoassay (MIA) platform enables a quantitative analysis of (phospho-) proteins in complex solutions (e.g. cell lysates or blood plasma) and with low consumption of samples and reagents. Despite numerous biological and clinical applications of MIAs there is currently no user-friendly open source data analysis software available with versatile options for data analysis and data visualization. Here, we introduce the open source software QuantProReloaded that is specifically designed for the analysis of data from MIA experiments. Availability and implementation: QuantProReloaded is written in R and Java and is open for download under the BSB license at
INTRODUCTIONA robust experimental platform to assess the abundance and activity of many proteins in parallel, in biological and clinical samples is a prerequisite to obtain a better understanding of signaling networks. Thus, a careful and systematic analysis of samples from healthy and diseased patients promises to facilitate also the detection of new biomarkers for diagnosis and prognosis. Microspot immunoassays (MIAs) () can determine the abundance as well as the activity of different proteins and other analytes in parallel. The MIA technology is comparable to the enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) approach, but is superior in terms of its lower sample and reagent consumption and a vastly improved dynamic range (). Capture antibodies that are specific for a particular analyte or posttranslational modification (e.g. phosphorylation) are immobilized on a solid surface subdivided into several sub-arrays (blocks). Each block is incubated with a different biological sample so that the immobilized antibodies capture their specific analytes. In the detection step, suitable antibodies directed against a different epitope of the respective target are utilized contributing to the highThe accuracy analysis determines the accuracy of the calibration by crossvalidation of the calibrator data points. Thus, 60% of the calibrator data points of each concentration are used to fit a calibrator curve and the remaining data points are used to re-estimate the protein concentration. The overall accuracy is one minus the normalized distance between the real protein concentration and the estimated protein concentration. Thus, a result of '1' indicates that there is no difference between the real protein concentration and the estimated protein concentration. Several robust linear and non-linear functions are included as option to fit a calibrator curve and other functions can easily be integrated. The resulting accuracy plot visualizes how accurately the analyte concentration can be re-estimated using a certain algorithm to fit the calibrator curve. In addition, the calibrator curve displaying the single calibrator data points is shown. The measurement analysis is designed to estimate the target protein concentration of the samples and can be used independently of the accuracy analysis. A calibrator curve is calculated using all calibrator data points and serves as basis for the calculation of the analyte concentration in each sample. Spots can be excluded from the analysis by marking them in the image analysis software (e.g. Spotfinder and GenePix) and setting the 'Remove marked spots' option to 'Yes'. The measurement analysis produces two tables as output, the first one contains the estimated analyte concentrations for all samples and the second one lists the median as well as the median absolute deviation for all analyte concentrations of all technical and biological replicates. Furthermore, a calibrator plot displaying the calibrator curve, the calibrator data points, a confidence interval as well as the data points of measurement samples is generated as well. For further information about the displayed confidence intervals can be found in Supplementary Material. In case of dynamic measurements, a time-course plot is returned to facilitate a fast comparison between the median concentration levels of a particular protein at different time points. Data from the time-course example inresult from dose-dependent measurements of receptor tyrosine kinase signaling. In particular, the human breast cancer cell line (MCF7) was exposed to different concentrations of epidermal growth factor (EGF) and the formation of phosphorylated ERK was monitored. Six slides with 16 blocks were used to analyze the measurements and scanned with an Odyssey Infrared Imaging System at a resolution of 21 m at 700 nm. Spot signal intensities were quantified using the GenePix Pro 5 software and the results were saved as .gpr files (see Supplementary Material for further details on the protocol).