Motivation: Inter-residue contacts in proteins dictate the topology of protein structures. They are crucial for protein folding and structural stability. Accurate prediction of residue contacts especially for long-range contacts is important to the quality of ab inito structure modeling since they can enforce strong restraints to structure assembly. Results: In this paper, we present a new Residue-Residue Contact predictor called R 2 C that combines machine learning-based and correlated mutation analysis-based methods, together with a two-dimensional Gaussian noise filter to enhance the long-range residue contact prediction. Our results show that the outputs from the machine learning-based method are concentrated with better performance on short-range contacts; while for correlated mutation analysis-based approach, the predictions are widespread with higher accuracy on long-range contacts. An effective query-driven dynamic fusion strategy proposed here takes full advantages of the two different methods, resulting in an impressive overall accuracy improvement. We also show that the contact map directly from the prediction model contains the interesting Gaussian noise, which has not been discovered before. Different from recent studies that tried to further enhance the quality of contact map by removing its transitive noise, we designed a new two-dimensional Gaussian noise filter, which was especially helpful for reinforcing the long-range residue contact prediction. Tested on recent CASP10/11 datasets, the overall top L/5 accuracy of our final R 2 C predictor is 17.6%/15.5% higher than the pure machine learning-based method and 7.8%/8.3% higher than the correlated mutation analysis-based approach for the long-range residue contact prediction.
IntroductionResidue contact map is a two-dimensional (2D) representation of a protein's three-dimensional (3D) structure. It constrains the conformation of protein structures, as a result, accurate prediction of contact map can facilitate ab initio structure modeling (). The contact map can be viewed as a symmetrical matrix, where each element indicates whether the two residues are close enough in its 3D space to form an interaction or not. It has been shown that even very sparse true contact information can also help to generate correct modeling at the fold level (). Furthermore, contact maps have been widely used for model assessment () and structure alignment ().Improving residue contact prediction has been of interest for many years due to its critical importance in structure bioinformatics (), with either sequence or structure template information. The existing ab initio sequence-based prediction methods can be generally classified into two categories: supervised learning and unsupervised learning. From the perspective of supervised learning, contact prediction is typically treated as a 2-class classification problem (contact versus non-contact). This type of contact predictors like PROFcon (), SVMcon (), SVMSEQ (), DNCON () and PhyCMAP (), which were constructed with supervised machine learning (ML) algorithms such as neural network (NN), support vector machine (SVM) and random forest (RF) etc. For the unsupervised learning group, co-evolution information from multiple sequence alignment (MSA) is analyzed to identify residue pairs that are in contact spatially. To the best of our knowledge, G bel et al. firstly utilized correlated mutations to infer residue contacts in proteins by calculating the Pearson correlation coefficient between every two columns in MSA (). Following this work, several mutual information-based local algorithms were proposed to improve the prediction accuracy, such as, MI (), MIp () and MIc () etc. One recent methodology development effort in this regard is to construct a consensus prediction model with ML-based and correlation mutation analysis (CMA)-based methods, which has been shown to be capable of achieving better performance than any single type of prediction model (). The inferred co-evolution information indicates the potential of each residue pair to form a contact, and it can be used either as input feature to ML algorithms or as another prediction score at the decision level (). The reason for the better performance of fusing ML-based and CMAbased methods is that they are highly complementary to each other. Generally, for the ML-based predictions, the performance is the best on short-range contacts because the population of short-range training samples is much larger than that of the long-range contacts, therefore leading to more learned rules. Hence, the corresponding top outputs are concentrated together on the predicted contact map. But the CMA-based engines do not need the training step and are not affected by the training distributions. Their top outputs are widespread on the whole contact map, making long-range contact predictions more accurate. The prediction coverages of the two methods strongly complement each other, resulting in an overall performance improvement of the final consensus system. Another method is to construct multi-layer or deep learning predictors. Based on the observation that residue contacts are densely distributed in native structures, deep learning framework was applied to mine implicit contact patterns (), which takes the neighboring contact information as temporal features. In this iterative way, a contact predictor can usually give better results than the one-layer model. The third track of efforts for improving residue contact prediction is adding an additional noise filtering post-processing step to optimize the raw contact map from the prediction models (). For the CMAbased approaches, indirect coupling effect is a widely observed factor that restricts the prediction performance. It is caused by two direct coupling pairs that share a common residue, which results in the so-called transitive dependencies (residues AB and BC are in contact which induces a contact prediction pair of AC). Sometimes, the interaction strength of the indirect coupling pair is larger even than the direct coupling pairs (). This transitive noise can be removed through recently proposed global algorithms via maximum entropy (), sparse inverse covariance estimation (), pseudo-likelihood maximization (), or matrix eigenvalue transformation methods (). Some typical transitivenoise-filtering algorithms include mfDCA (), PSICOV (), plmDCA (), GREMLIN (), ND (network deconvolution) () and BND (balanced network deconvolution) (). In this study, we aim to derive better contact map predictions in two aspects: (i) When we try to combine ML-based and CMA-based methods, how do we derive a better fusion strategy making the consensus system more efficient despite different conditions for each query protein? (ii) Besides the well-known transitive noise, is there another non-discovered noise mode in the raw contact map? For the first aspect, we have designed a problem-feature-driven fusion strategy in the proposed R 2 C (ResidueResidue Contact predictor) system. First, the prediction performance of the CMA-based approaches highly depends on the number of effective sequences in MSA (), i.e. the more effective homologous sequences it has, the better the performance that will be achieved. In light of this conclusion, a reliable weight will be calculated to associate with the CMA-based predictions according to the number of effective sequences in the query sequence's MSA. Second, we consider the different types of contacts with different fusion strategies since the ML-based and CMA-based predictors perform differently on short-range and long-range contacts. For shortrange contacts, we will assign a small weight to the CMA-based engine. In other words, a large weight will be assigned to the ML-based part. Similarly, when we make predictions for long-range contacts, we will assign a large weight to the CMA-based engine. This will ensure that each engine's output will carry more weight for sequences in which they historically perform better. For the second aspect, besides the transitive noise, we found that the Gaussian noise also commonly exists in the contact map from the CMA-based predictions. A two-dimensional noise filter is designed to remove the Gaussian noise, which can effectively improve the prediction of long-range residue contacts. As far as we know, this is the first time a different noise mode was found in the residue contact map, and its elimination will enhance the predicted contact map.