Motivation: Accurate identification of genetic variants such as single-nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs) or RNA editing sites from RNA-Seq reads is important, yet challenging, because it necessitates a very low false-positive rate in read mapping. Although many read aligners are available, no single aligner was specifically developed or tested as an effective tool for SNP and RNA editing prediction. Results: We present RASER, an accurate read aligner with novel mapping schemes and index tree structure that aims to reduce false-positive mappings due to existence of highly similar regions. We demonstrate that RASER shows the best mapping accuracy compared with other popular algorithms and highest sensitivity in identifying multiply mapped reads. As a result, RASER displays superb efficacy in unbiased mapping of the alternative alleles of SNPs and in identification of RNA editing sites.
IntroductionHigh-throughput RNA-sequencing (RNA-Seq) data are now indispensable in a wide range of biological and medical research areas, such as gene expression, gene regulation and functional studies of genetic abnormalities. As a result, accurate read alignment tools are highly desirable. Although many short read aligners exist, detection of single-nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small insertions or deletions (indels) harbored in the short RNA-Seq reads remains a very challenging task. Such applications require very low false-positive rate in read mapping to avoid calling spurious variants in the reads. In addition, different from studies of genetic variants using wholegenome sequencing data, a challenge specific to RNA-Seq is to accurately quantify the expression levels of alternative alleles of the variants based on RNA-Seq reads. For example, in studies of allelespecific expression (ASE) of single-nucleotide polymorphisms(SNPs), the expression levels of the two alleles of each SNP are quantified based on the number of mapped reads to determine whether a significant allelic bias (i.e. ASE) exists. A well-known issue is the mapping bias that favors reads harboring the reference allele (identical to the reference genome used for read alignment) of heterozygous SNPs (). This problem is only partially alleviated if the reference genome is modified to encompass alternative SNP alleles that are known to exist in the specific dataset, making expensive wholegenome sequencing a necessity (). In general, read alignment accuracy remains a fundamental limiting factor for quantification of ASEs. A similar problem exists in studies of RNA editing. Recently, an increasing number of reports focused on identification of RNA editing sites using RNA-Seq data (reviewed in). It isnow well established that read mapping inaccuracy can lead to many false-positive predictions (). To increase editing prediction efficacy, strategies to combine multiple read aligners and apply a series of artifact filtering steps were utilized (). Although many short read aligners are available () (http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/List_of_ sequence_alignment_software), no single aligner was specifically developed or tested as an effective tool for SNP and RNA editing prediction. In our previous studies of ASE and RNA editing (), we developed a read mapping pipeline that makes use of multiple read alignment tools and applies stringent requirements on the allowed mismatches of mapped reads. Specifically, it combines the alignment results of Bowtie (), BLAT () and TopHat () and applies two types of filters to retain reads that map uniquely with n 1 mismatches and do not mapped to any other genomic loci with n 2 mismatches (n 1  n 2 ). We showed that this 'double-filtering' scheme is effective in reducing potential mapping bias or artifacts related to the presence of alternative sequence variants or homologous regions in the genome (). However, this pipeline demands long CPU time and large hard drive space due to the usage of multiple read aligners and stringent mismatch filters. Here, we present RASER (reads aligner for SNPs and editing sites of RNA) that is specifically designed for applications of RNASeq in studies involving SNPs, RNA editing or other types of SNVs. Since RASER is a standalone application, processing time and hard drive demand are greatly reduced compared with our previous read mapping strategy. A distinctive feature of RASER is its interrogation of a large number of mapping positions for each read using a novel tree structure that reduces ambiguity in mapping repeated subsequences, thus increasing mapping accuracy. The comprehensive search of many possible mapping positions of each read enables a comparative analysis of these alignments and elimination of ambiguous results likely due to existence of homologous regions in the genome. Built upon this strength, RASER further adopts a novel mismatch filtering scheme named 'obviously best' which aims to maximize mapping rate while maintaining high mapping accuracy. Using both simulated and actual RNA-Seq datasets, we demonstrate that RASER shows the best mapping precision compared with other popular read mapping algorithms. The performance of RASER remains high for both short and long reads, which is also robust to mismatches and indels in the reads. Importantly, RASER shows superb efficacy in unbiased mapping of the alternative alleles of SNPs and in identification of RNA editing sites.