Motivation: Genome-scale metabolic networks are widely used in systems biology. However, to date no freely available tool exists that ensures quality control during the reconstruction process. Results: Here, we present a COBRA toolbox extension, rBioNet, enabling the construction of publication-level biochemical networks while enforcing necessary quality control measures. rBioNet has an intuitive user interface facilitating the reconstruction process for novices and experts. Availability: The rBioNet is freely available from http://opencobra .sourceforge.net.
INTRODUCTIONGenome-scale metabolic reconstructions play an important role in molecular systems biology as they provide a structured format for genomic, genetic and biochemical information available for a target organism (). A reconstruction often has detailed gene information, literature references and reaction/metabolite information associated in addition to an organism-specific reaction list (). The reconstruction process is well established for metabolic networks and has been applied to 45 organisms on a genome scale. While this approach is widely used, no comprehensive, easy-to-use and free-of-charge software package exists that ensures quality of the mostly manually curated reconstruction content. Existing tools for metabolic reconstructions include MetAnnoGen () and MEMOSys (). However, many researchers still use spreadsheets for the reconstruction process to assemble and monitor the reconstruction content, which have the disadvantage of missing quality control modules. A quality check-as-you-go would make the reconstruction effort more efficient and traceable. Here, we present a freely available software package that implements important quality control and assurance measures (QC/QA), which are crucial for the construction of high-quality genome-scale biochemical networks (). rBioNet is embedded in the Matlab programming environment relying on many QC/QA measures already present in the COBRA toolbox (). Biochemical reconstructions, assembled with rBioNet, can be * To whom correspondence should be addressed.readily converted into mathematical models, and they can then be interrogated using constraint-based methods ().
DISCUSSIONrBioNet is freely available permitting the reconstruction of high-quality, genome-scale biochemical networks consistent with established standard procedures (). In particular, it ensures QC/QA measures required for publicationlevel reconstructions. rBioNet is embeded within the COBRA toolbox enabling iterative approach of reconstruction, validation and debugging. In particular, we put emphasis on an intuitive interface that allows novices to Matlab to perform high-quality metabolic reconstructions. The database allows customized inclusion of metabolites and reactions in the corresponding databases but thanks to its import function, online databases, e.g. KEGG ligand database (), may be incorporated into MetDB and RxnDB. A current shortcoming of rBioNet includes missing database binding for the metabolite, reaction and reconstruction creator. Nevertheless, the current setup enables simultaneous use and modification by multiple users. Future extensions may include the availability of a globally available and accessible database for metabolites and reactions, which could be directly used by any rBioNet user and thus, would permit ultimatively compability between biochemical models. The creation of such database would require significant work and would need to be coordinated with the existing biochemical databases and efforts.