We present rCGH, a comprehensive array-based comparative genomic hybridization analysis workflow, integrating computational improvements and functionalities specifically designed for precision medicine. rCGH supports the major microarray platforms, ensures a full trace-ability and facilitates profiles interpretation and decision-making through sharable interactive visualizations. Availability and implementation: The rCGH R package is available on bioconductor (under Artistic-2.0). The aCGH-viewer is available at https://fredcommo.shinyapps.io/aCGH_viewer, and the application implementation is freely available for installation at https://github.com/fredcommo/
IntroductionPrecision medicine aims at identifying individual cancer patients' molecular alterationssuch as copy number alterations (CNAs), gene mutations or fusions and protein expressionsand matching these to targeted therapies (). While next-generation sequencing is now widely used for identifying mutations, array-based comparative genomic hybridization (aCGH) is a common platform for detecting CNAs (): the advantages of aCGH over nextgeneration sequencing technologies include lower cost, rapid turnaround time and lower computational overhead. In the context of precision medicine, CNA analysisalongside somatic mutation analysisis critical for identifying clinically actionable genomic aberrations. However, significant technical challenges remain in the processing of aCGH data. Addressing these challenges requires new state-of-the-art tools for coordinating analysis and interpreting results.The segmentation step aims at identifying breakpoints in the LRRs continuity, each delimiting potentially gained or lost DNA segments. The rCGH segmentation relies on the circular binary segmentation (CBS) (), implemented in the DNAcopy R package. Although this algorithm is widely used (), it suffers from several parameters to be specified a priori. In particular, the 'sdundo' segmentation method mainly relies on two parameters: (i) a significance level a for the statistical test to accept points as breakpoints and (ii) the allowed difference between two consecutive segment means to keep them distinct (expressed in DNAcopy as a number of standard deviations,undo.SD). Instead of using arbitrary values, rCGH introduces a data-driven parameterization: given a fixed a, the corresponding optimal 'undo.SD' value is estimated from the median absolute deviation, a widely used noise estimator (Supplementary Methods). This optimization greatly facilitates the use of this algorithm for routine practice and standardizes the parameterization through a data-driven rule. In precision medicine, the decision-making regarding a therapeutic orientation relies on the actionable gene's status, defined with respect to gain/loss thresholds and alteration lengths. Defining such thresholds is often arbitrary: (i) there is no consensus on which LRR values correspond to biologically relevant CNAs, (ii) focal alterations, possibly referring to significantly recurrent alterations within a cohort (), are not clearly defined when transposed to the interpretation of unique profiles. rCGH provides an interactive visualization tool that allows the user to visualize and manipulate genomic profiles from within a web interface (). Two primary perspectives are provided: visualization of CNAs along DNA strands or a gene-centric table. The latter includes genespecific LRR values and corresponding segment lengths. When available on microarrays, loss of heterozygosity expressed as the A/B allelic difference is also provided. A command window provides control over display parameters including re-centering, merging short segments and gain or loss thresholds (see Supplementary Methods for a full description). Finally, both the genomic profile and the genes table can be re-exported, in ready-to-publish quality and xls format, respectively, including the changes applied on the profile.