RNA molecules play important roles in key biological processes in the cell and are becoming attractive for developing therapeutic applications. Since the function of RNA depends on its structure and dynamics, comparing and classifying the RNA 3D structures is of crucial importance to molecular biology. In this study, we have developed Rclick, a web server that is capable of superimposing RNA 3D structures by using clique matching and 3D least-squares fitting. Our ser-ver Rclick has been benchmarked and compared with other popular servers and methods for RNA structural alignments. In most cases, Rclick alignments were better in terms of structure overlap. Our server also recognizes conformational changes between structures. For this purpose, the ser-ver produces complementary alignments to maximize the extent of detectable similarity. Various examples showcase the utility of our web server for comparison of RNA, RNA–protein complexes and RNA-ligand structures. Availability and implementation: The Rclick web server is freely accessible at
IntroductionComparing RNA 3D structures gives us unique insights into their evolution and function. While there are numerous methods for comparing and classifying protein 3D structures (), there have been very few such methods for RNA 3D structures (). Given the rapid pace with which new RNA structures are deposited in the PDB (), it is crucial to have tools to classify and categorize these structures and investigate them for similarities at different levels. Here, the Rclick web server is designed to provide a user-friendly interface to compare RNA 3D structures and produces accurate alignments when the structures are similar. The performance of Rclick was compared to other popular servers and methods that align RNA 3D structures, including ARTS (), SARA (), CLICK (), SETTER (), and R3D Align () on different benchmark RNA datasets (Supplementary Figs. S4S6 and Supplementary Tables S1S4). The structure overlaps of Rclick in these comparisons were better.and Supplementary S1 and S2A and B in show the utilities of Rclick for comparison of large ribosomal subunit, RNA-protein complexes and RNA-ligand structures. While Rclick produced accurate alignments of RNAprotein interactions between two Ribonuclease III (PDB codes 2LUP and 1RC7,), when compared to other web servers such as SETTER () and ARTS () which could not align correctly RNA-binding sites. Supplementaryand B show two thiamine pyrophosphate (TPP) riboswitches (PDB codes 2CKY chain A and 2GDI chain X)aligned with one another, and the similarities of conformation of the bound TPP ligands in both RNA structures. These examples highlight the capabilities of our web server that produces accurate alignments of RNA structures and additionally aids in the general area of prediction of RNAprotein and RNA-ligand interactions. In addition, to the best of our knowledge, this is the first RNA structure comparison server that shows conformational changes in the RNA structures being compared (Supplementaryand B).