Motivation: DNA sequencing of multiple samples from the same tumor provides data to analyze the process of clonal evolution in the population of cells that give rise to a tumor. Results: We formalize the problem of reconstructing the clonal evolution of a tumor using single-nucleotide mutations as the variant allele frequency (VAF) factorization problem. We derive a combinatorial characterization of the solutions to this problem and show that the problem is NP-complete. We derive an integer linear programming solution to the VAF factorization problem in the case of error-free data and extend this solution to real data with a probabilistic model for errors. The resulting AncesTree algorithm is better able to identify ancestral relationships between individual mutations than existing approaches, particularly in ultra-deep sequencing data when high read counts for mutations yield high confidence VAFs.
IntroductionCancer is a disease resulting from somatic mutations that accumulate during an individual's lifetime and lead to uncontrolled growth of a collection of cells into a tumor. The clonal theory of cancer () predicts that all cells within a tumor have descended from a single founder cell and that subsequent clonal expansions occur from additional advantageous mutations. As a result, the cells within a tumor may differ in their complement of somatic mutations, with each cell being a descendant of a clone from a clonal expansion (). High-coverage sequencing of tumor genomes allows one to study this intra-tumor heterogeneity by measuring the frequencies of mutations within a tumor (). Characterization of intra-tumor heterogeneity and inference of the clonal evolutionary history of somatic mutations within a tumor provide useful insight in the tumor's development and may help inform treatment. Somatic mutations are typically measured in human solid tumors only at a single time point, when the patient undergoes surgery. Therefore, clonal evolution is not directly observed and one is faced with the problem of inferring the ancestral relationships between cells in a tumor from measurements at one time point. This is the problem of phylogenetic tree reconstruction, a well-studied problem. The direct application of phylogenetic methods requires that we measure mutations in individual cancer cells that correspond to the leaves (species) of the phylogenetic tree. However, because of technical limitations and financial considerations, single-cell sequencing of tumors remains uncommon () with nearly all cancer sequencing studiesincluding studies such as TCGA and ICGCsequencing a small number of samples from a bulk tumor, each containing potentially millions of cells. Thus, the data one obtains represent the mutations in a mixture of cells with potentially distinct evolutionary histories. Given sequencing data from a single sample, a number of methods have been developed to determine the set of clones and their frequencies in a tumor. Some methods analyze changes in the variant allele frequencies (VAFs) of single-nucleotide mutations; i.e. the fraction of tumor cells that contain each mutation (). Other approaches analyze differences in read depth due
DiscussionReconstructing the evolutionary history of a tumor given VAFs measured in multiple sequenced samples for a single tumor is a A B C. Analysis of CLL patient 077 shows AncesTree's ability to infer successive clonal expansions. (A) The clonal tree output by AncesTree is indicated by the black solid edges whose weights correspond to the posterior probability of the ancestral relationship. Dashed edges are used to indicate ancestral clones which exist at the time of sequencing. The blocks labeled 'a' through 'e' each represent a sequenced sample, with colored edges indicating the inferred composition of clones and their fraction in each sample (only edges with usage at least 0.05 are shown). (B) The 1  10 6 confidence intervals of VAF for the sample with the weakest ancestral evidence for each of the edges connecting gene GPR158 to LRRC16A. (C) The tree reported by PhyloSub, which is identical to the tree reported by CITUP except for the addition of SAMHD1. Mutations indicated in blue are those present in part A. Mutations indicated in red likely occur in regions affected by copy number aberrationsReconstruction of clonal trees and tumor composition i69 challenging task. In this work, we formalize this problem as the VAFFP. We derive a combinatorial characterization of the solutions to this problem and prove the problem is NP-complete. We present the AncesTree algorithm for solving an approximate version of the problem which allows errors and demonstrate the advantages of AncesTree relative to existing approaches. There are a number of avenues for further investigation. First, we have ignored the effect of copy number aberrations on VAFs, meaning that AncesTree may not currently be applicable to some datasets. Second, AncesTree only outputs the single largest rooted subtree of the approximate ancestry graph that satisfies the sum condition. The algorithm may be applied iteratively by removing the clonal tree found at each step from the ancestry graph and rerunning, thus returning a forest. However, it is unclear how the trees in this forest relate to each other or if there is an approach for joining them. Third, the theoretical results may be strengthened. For example, as the number m of samples is much smaller than the number n of mutations, it would be interesting to see if the problem is fixedparameter tractable. Finally, our use of the binomial distribution to model read counts may underestimate the variance; e.g. due to factors such as PCR artifacts. More realistic models of read counts may improve the performance of AncesTree. Finally, we note that the kidney and lung datasets analyzed here contain multiple sections of a solid tumor obtained at a single time point, whereas the CLL datasets contain samples obtained at different times. Future work will include handling multi-section samples and multi-time-point samples separately to account for time related dependencies.. Analysis of renal patient EV006 reveals distinctive sample composition. The clonal tree output by AncesTree. Some sequenced sections (R6, R7) are mixtures of clones appearing only in those sections. In contrast, other sequenced sections (LN1a, LN1b and R3) are mixtures of clones that each appear in more than one section. In particular, both lymph node samples (LN1a and LN1b) are mixtures of the same two clones but in different proportions