The reliable detection of RNA editing sites from massive sequencing data remains challenging and, although several methodol-ogies have been proposed, no computational tools have been released to date. Here, we introduce REDItools a suite of python scripts to perform high-throughput investigation of RNA editing using next-generation sequencing data. Availability and implementation: REDItools are in python programming language and freely available at
INTRODUCTIONRNA editing is an important post-transcriptional mechanism that alters primary RNAs through the insertion/deletion or modification of specific nucleotides (). It occurs in a wide range of organisms and, concurrently with alternative splicing, increases the diversity of eukaryotic transcriptomes and proteomes (). In humans, RNA editing affects both coding and non-coding transcripts by the deamination of cytosine to uridine (C-to-U) or, more commonly, through the conversion of adenosine to inosine (A-to-I) by members of adenosine deaminase (ADAR) family of enzymes, which act on double-stranded RNA (dsRNA) (). Editing events can lead to a variety of biological effects depending on the RNA type (mRNA or ncRNA) or region (5 0-UTR, 3 0-UTR, CDS, intron) involved in the RNA editing modification (). For example, changes in UTRs can lead to altered expression, preventing efficient ribosome binding or recognition by small regulatory RNAs whereas alterations in coding protein regions can induce amino acid replacements with variable functional consequences. In addition, RNA editing can influence the activity of ncRNAs such as siRNAs, miRNAs and potentially of piwiRNAs by affecting base-pairing interactions within RNA secondary structures (). The importance of RNA editing is underlined by the fact that its deregulation in humans is associated with a variety of neurological or neurodegenerative disorders and cancer (). Although the identification of sites subject to RNA editing is simple, in principle, requiring the direct comparison between transcripts and their corresponding genomic loci of origin, accurate genome-wide implementation remains a challenging task (). Few years ago, we published the first attempt to use massive transcriptome sequencing (RNA-Seq) for exploring the RNA editing landscape in mitochondria of grapevine (). Since then, RNA-Seq has become the de facto standard approach to study RNA editing potential in whole eukaryotic genomes, with sometimes questionable results (). The major challenge in identifying RNA editing changes by RNA-Seq data is the discrimination of true RNA editing sites from genome-encoded SNPs and technical artefacts caused by sequencing or read-mapping errors (). The use of DNASeq data from single individuals, annotations in dbSNPs and several stringent filters can minimize the detection of false RNA editing sites (). Although several methodologies to reveal the RNA editing potential in eukaryotic transcriptomes have been proposed, no comprehensive software devoted to this aim has been released. In the meantime, massive transcriptome sequencing data are routinely produced worldwide and a large number of experiments from different organisms and conditions are freely available through specialized databases such as the Short Read Archive at NCBI. To promote the investigation of RNA editing at large scale in the next-generation sequencing era, we developed the package REDItoolscomprising of a suite of scripts written in the portable python language. REDItools are available under the MIT license at http://code.google.com/p/reditools/, are not organism oriented and work with RNA-Seq and DNA-Seq data from any sequencing platform.