Motivation: Increasingly, cost-effective high-throughput DNA sequencing technologies are being utilized to sequence human pedigrees to elucidate the genetic cause of a wide variety of human diseases. While numerous tools exist for variant prioritization within a single genome, the ability to concurrently analyze variants within pedigrees remains a challenge, especially should there be no prior indication of the underlying genetic cause of the disease. Here, we present a tool, variant analysis of sequenced pedigrees (VASP), a flexible data integration environment capable of producing a summary of pedigree variation, providing relevant information such as compound heterozygos-ity, genome phasing and disease inheritance patterns. Designed to aggregate data across a sequenced pedigree, VASP allows both powerful filtering and custom prioritization of both single nucleotide variants (SNVs) and small indels. Hence, clinical and research users with prior knowledge of a disease are able to dramatically reduce the variant search space based on a wide variety of custom prioritization criteria. Availability and implementation: Source code available for academic non-commercial research purposes at https://github.com/mattmattmattmatt/VASP.
IntroductionWhile exome sequencing has been successfully utilized in the discovery of causal variation using small numbers of unrelated individuals () it is becoming clear that this approach is insufficient to reliably identify the genetic causes in many cases (). Increasingly, genetic variation information from related individuals is being employed to reduce the search space for causal variants, by both the prioritization of variants common to affected individuals and the exclusion of benign variants shared between affected and unaffected individuals. The effective analysis of sequenced pedigrees requires new tools capable of combining variant specific and pedigree wide annotations with powerful filtering options to dramatically reduce the causal variation search space. Current tools focus on either progressively removing variants based V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press.