Motivation: Pathway analysis tools are a powerful strategy to analyze omics data in the field of systems biology. From a metabolic perspective , several pathway definitions can be found in the literature, each one appropriate for a particular study. Recently, a novel pathway concept termed carbon flux paths (CFPs) was introduced and bench-marked against existing approaches, showing a clear advantage for finding linear pathways from a given source to target metabolite. CFPs are simple paths in a metabolite–metabolite graph that satisfy typical constraints in stoichiometric models: mass balancing and thermodynamics (irreversibility). In addition, CFPs guarantee carbon exchange in each of their intermediate steps, but not between the source and the target metabolites and consequently false positive solutions may arise. These pathways often lack biological interest, particularly when studying biosynthetic or degradation routes of a me-tabolite. To overcome this issue, we amend the formulation in CFP, so as to account for atomic fate information. This approach is termed atomic CFP (aCFP). Results: By means of a side-by-side comparison in a medium scale metabolic network in Escherichia Coli, we show that aCFP provides more biologically relevant pathways than CFP, because canonical pathways are more easily recovered, which reflects the benefits of removing false positives. In addition, we demonstrate that aCFP can be successfully applied to genome-scale metabolic networks. As the quality of genome-scale atomic reconstruction is improved, methods such as the one presented here will undoubtedly be of value to interpret omics data.
INTRODUCTIONSystems biology aims at modeling a wide assortment of biological phenomena from a holistic molecular perspective (). Analysis of high-throughput 'omics' data is typically intricate and requires sophisticated techniques assisting their interpretation and understanding. For this purpose, pathway analysis tools constitute a powerful strategy, as there is strong experimental evidence supporting the view that many cellular processes are organized into pathways (). In particular, biochemistry textbooks detail a wide list of well-known (canonical) metabolic pathways, which can now be computationally accessed from different databases and analyzed in different scenarios (). The outbreak of genome-scale metabolic networks has evidenced that it is not possible to represent all the metabolic phenotypes using a small set of canonical pathways. Intending to increase the number and diversity of pathways, a number of mathematical pathway definitions can be found in the literature (). For each scenario under study, selecting the appropriate definition is crucial so as to obtain relevant insights (). Defining a pathway concept representing too many biological mechanisms may be counterproductive due to the underlying computational demand. In this light, two sides of the same coin are the pathway definitions based on graph theory () and elementary flux modes (EFMs) (). Although the former is calculated based on classical graph theory (), the latter requires less efficient algebraic techniques (). However, EFMs fulfill additional biological constraints, e.g. mass balance, leading to more biologically relevant results. It is worth mentioning that, in addition to EFMs, we can find in the literature similar pathway definitions, such as generating flux modes () or extreme pathways (). Furthermore, additional examples of metabolic pathway definitions based on graph theory can also be found (). Recently, carbon flux paths (CFPs) () were introduced so as to account for the advantages of both definitions. This approach searches for paths in a graph of metabolites, where arcs represent an effective carbon exchange in at least one enzyme-catalyzed reaction. In addition, as in the case of EFMs, additional biophysical constraints are imposed, namely mass balance and thermodynamic restrictions. CFPs approach is an effective tool to determine linear pathways from a given source to a target metabolite, as it overcomes combinatorial issues found in EFMs approach. CFPs also take advantage of the inherent versatility of Integer Linear Programming (ILP) to integrate gene expression and protein abundance data as well as metabolomics data (). Despite the potential and versatility of CFPs, there is still room for improvement. In particular, while the underlying graph of metabolites guarantees carbon exchange in each step of the path, this is not always achieved between the source and target metabolites and false-positive solutions may arise. As discussed in, these solutions lack biological significance, especially when studying biosynthetic or degradation mechanisms. *To whom correspondence should be addressed.In order to overcome this issue, the CFP formulation is here extended to ensure that a fixed number of carbon atoms from the source reach the target metabolite, in line with Pitkanen. To do so, we integrate atomic tracing data for reactions into the model. In other words, for a biochemical reaction we require precise information indicating in which position in a product each carbon atom from a substrate ends. This information is growing day by day and is currently available in different reconstructions. These reconstructions can be manually curated () or computed by automatic methods (). The use of in silico (automatically) generated databases entails sacrificing accuracy, but increases the number of reactions that can be considered. Based on this information, we show that the atomic extension of CFP presented here (aCFP) provides more biologically relevant pathways than the original CFP definition.
DISCUSSIONPathway analysis tools are a powerful strategy to study metabolic processes in the context of 'omics' data. We recently introduced a novel pathway concept termed CFPs, which was benchmarked with existing approaches, finding a clear progress over the state of the art (). CFPs approach has been shown to be particularly effective to determine linear pathways from a given source to a target metabolite. In other works, we illustrate the versatility of CFPs approach for different applications. In the first work we extract key pathways based on gene and protein expression data that underlies the acetate overflow issue in E. coli cell cultures. In the second work, based on CFPs, we interpret metabolomics data in different neurological disorders (). Despite the potential of CFPs, improvements are still possible. In particular, while the underlying graph of metabolites guarantees carbon exchange in each intermediate step of the path, this is not always achieved between the source and target metabolites and false-positive solutions may arise. These pathways often lack biological interest, particularly when studying biosynthetic or degradation routes of a metabolite. To overcome this issue, we amend the formulation in, so as to account for atomic fate information. This approach was termed aCFP. In Section 3, by means of a side-by-side comparison in a medium scale metabolic network, we show that aCFP provides more biologically relevant pathways than CFP, because canonical pathways are more easily recovered, which reflects the removal of false positives. Note here that CFP represents a state-of-the-art approach and it is challenging to obtain a notable improvement over a high-quality approach. In particular, in our 18 canonical pathway analysis, CFP (and aCFP) recovered the solution in 12 cases. Consequently for these 12 pathways CFP cannot be outperformed by any other approach. Nevertheless, in those six cases in which CFP did not recover the canonical pathway in the first solution, aCFP improved the results obtained by CFP in four out of the six cases, some of them significantly (e.g. arginine biosynthesis pathway). The limited size of the metabolic network considered in Section 3.1 makes it difficult to obtain large differences between aCFP and CFP. However, in Section 3.2 we used a large-sized genome-scale metabolic network and found remarkable differences between aCFP and CFP in finding pathways between glucose and pyruvate, as observed in. Results in Section 3.2 also demonstrate that aCFP can be successfully applied to genome-scale metabolic networks. However, the performance of aCFP is intimately tied to the quality of the atomic reconstruction under consideration. Although there are high-quality manually curated mediumscale atomic reconstructions, genome-scale atomic models generated by means of in silico methods still require further research so as to provide atomic reconstructions free from errors. Thiswork will be also valuable for those conducting and modeling isotope labeling experiments, the most quantitative technology to infer reaction fluxes (). There are other biological mechanisms demanding pathways assuring exchange of different atoms, e.g. reactive oxygen species (ROS) in different applications in health (); nitrogen assimilation in bacteria (). aCFP can be easily adapted so as to guarantee any atom exchange, simply by introducing the atomic reconstructions into the model presented here. Overall, combining CFP with high-quality atomic reconstructions further improves the accuracy of predicted pathways. Therefore, as high-quality atomic reconstructions become available, aCFP substitutes the CFP approach, as 'omics' experimental information can be integrated in a similar manner and we expect to obtain more reliable results. With the increasing amount of 'omics' data, tools such as the one presented here will be essential to obtain relevant insights from them.