Motivation: Statistically assessing the relation between a set of genomic regions and other gen-omic features is a common challenging task in genomic and epigenomic analyses. Randomization based approaches implicitly take into account the complexity of the genome without the need of assuming an underlying statistical model. Summary: regioneR is an R package that implements a permutation test framework specifically designed to work with genomic regions. In addition to the predefined randomization and evaluation strategies, regioneR is fully customizable allowing the use of custom strategies to adapt it to specific questions. Finally, it also implements a novel function to evaluate the local specificity of the detected association. Availability and implementation: regioneR is an R package released under Artistic-2.0 License. The source code and documents are freely available through Bioconductor (http://www.bioconductor. org/packages/regioneR).
IntroductionSets of genomic regions are the output of many different genomic and epigenomic analyses like ChIP-seq peaks, regions with copy number alterations or differentially methylated regions. The identification of meaningful associations between a set of genomic regions and other genomic features is an important part of downstream analysis. The genomic features can be of different types: other region sets, intrinsic properties of the genomee.g. GC contentor functions defined over the genomee.g. DNA methylation levels, phylogenetic conservation. In addition, different metrics can be used to evaluate the associations. Thus, while counting the number of overlaps between two region sets is a widely used evaluation strategy, with regioneR it is possible to answer a wider range of biological questions beyond region overlapping with the use of other combinations of metrics and genomic features. Computing any of these evaluations can be straightforward but assigning a statistical significance to the association levels is far from trivial. Due to the complexity of the genome, statistical models relying on strict assumptions can only be used in certain circumstances. Empirical approaches such as permutation tests might overcome these limitations but they require the use of the appropriate strategies to generate meaningful results and usually have higher computational costs. Existing software tools to evaluate the association of region sets and other genomic features such as Geometricorr () or GAT () are either based on statistical modelling or only applicable to a limited number of situations.
ConclusionregioneR provides a permutation test based framework to statistically assess the association between a set of regions and any other genomic features or annotations. It implements a number of randomization and evaluation strategies addressing the most common use cases. In addition it can also be easily adapted to specific questions by using custom functions. The package also contains a set of helper functions to simplify the management of sets of genomic regions. regioneR is a new and customizable tool to manage and analyze sets of regions, and a useful addition to the NGS and genome wide analysis toolbox.), using a per chromosome randomization of CTCF peaks, the number of overlaps as the evaluation function and 5000 permutations. The association is highly significant with the observed value far from the limit of significance of the random distribution. (B) Plot of the local z-score of the permutation test in A. The association is strongly related to the exact position of the CTCF peaks since the z-score drops sharply as soon as the regions are shifted a few hundreds of bases