Motivation: The reverse-phase protein lysate arrays have been used to quantify the relative expression levels of a protein in a number of cellular samples simultaneously. To avoid quantification bias due to mis-specification of commonly used parametric models, a nonparametric approach based on monotone response curves may be used. The existing methods, however, aggregate the protein concentration levels of replicates of each sample, and therefore fail to account for within-sample variability. Results: We propose a method of regularization on protein concentration estimation at the level of individual dilution series to account for within-sample or within-group variability. We use an efficient algorithm to optimize an approximate objective function, with a data-adaptive approach to choose the level of shrinkage. Simulation results show that the proposed method quantifies protein concentration levels well. We show through the analysis of protein lysate array data from cell lines of different cancer groups that accounting for within-sample variability leads to better statistical analysis.
INTRODUCTIONProtein microarray technologies [e.g.;; MacBeath and] have been developed to measure protein concentrations in a high-throughput fashion. Extensive reviews of this technology can be found in. A single nitrocellulose-coated array slide can measure concentrations of a common protein in hundreds of samples in the form of dilution series. The samples are hybridized and label-attached with primary and biotinylated secondary antibodies and the protein concentrations are then measured using streptavadin-linked labels that bind to the biotin. The final product of each array is an image file in which * To whom correspondence should be addressed. quantified spots represent the observed protein expression levels at various dilutions steps. Protein lysate array technology has shown its promise in a number of clinical studies [e.g.;. In particular, its applications to various cancer studies have been documented extensively; see, for example,;;;;. Various procedures to improve the analysis of protein lysate arrays have been proposed recently. For example,proposed antibody-mediated signal amplification to increase the sensitivity of this technology.introduced a variable slope normalization among arrays to help reduce loading bias and recover true correlation structures among proteins. In this article, we focus on the protein quantification problem of estimating the relative protein concentrations in the arrayed samples. In this area, the commercial analysis package MicroVigene (http://www.vigenetech.com/products.htm) estimates the protein expression level by fitting a four-parameter logistic model to each dilution series.used a linear model between the observed protein expressions (or at logarithmic scale) and the underlying concentration levels.modeled the mean of the observed expression level as a sigmoidal curve and estimated the model parameters via the non-linear least squares. Alternatively,modeled the serial dilution curve based on the Sips model (similar to the logistic model) to characterize the relationship between signals in successive dilution steps. These methods can be considered as parametric. On the contrary,proposed a non-parametric approach by assuming that the median of the observed protein expression is equal to a monotonically increasing function without a parametric form. This non-parametric method, contained in a recently developed statistical tool RPPanalyzer for analyzing protein lysate array data (), is highly dataadaptive without bias due to mis-specification of g. Simulation studies and real experiments have shown the advantage of the nonparametric approach in producing robust results in a variety of scenarios. However, the existing methods of estimation deteriorate in performance as the noise to signal ratio increases in the data. In addition, the non-parametric estimates, if used to estimate protein concentration at the level of individual dilution series, tend to be unstable due to data sparsity. Our work aims at improving the accuracy of protein level quantification over the non-parametric procedure described in Hu, by incorporating a method of regularization on estimates within each sample. We start with a general description of the problem. Let y ijl be the observed expression level for the j-th replicate of the i-th sample at the l-th dilution step (i = 1,...,m, j = 1, ,n i , and l = 1,...,t). Each replicate is a dilution series of t steps. The relationship between y ijl and the unobserved protein concentration level x ij (at the log 2 scale) can be modeled aswhere g is the protein-specific response curve, d l defines the corresponding dilution index at the l-thfor some smoothing parameter , subject to the constraint that g is a non-decreasing function. Note that x ij are identifiable only up to a constant, and the relative differences between x ij 's are of interest in protein concentration. As pointed out by Yang and He (2011), the complexity of this quantification problem comes from the dimension of x ij , which increases with the sample size. One assumption made in earlier work is that x ij are constant within the i-th sample. This assumption is practically useful because it reduces the dimensionality of the problem and ensures stable estimates. However, it could lead to bias in estimation, and more importantly, could mask or distort variability across replicates. We propose to allow x ij to vary with j but regularize the estimation problem by using a penalty term on within-sample variabilities. As a result, we shrink some of the replicate-level estimates to common values but allow within-sample variabilities to be retained in other samples as needed. As with other regularization methods in statistics, our proposed method aims to balance the bias-variance trade-off in a data-adaptive way. The rest of the article is organized as follows. We describe the new method, Regularized Nonparametric (Reno) analysis of lysate arrays, in Section 2. We demonstrate the performance of the new estimator through simulation studies in Section 3, and show how the proposed method leads to better significance testing in a real data example in Section 4. Some concluding remarks are given in Section 5.
DISCUSSIONIn this article, we propose a regularized estimation procedure in non-parametric analysis of the protein lysate array quantification, which enables us to consider replicate-specific quantities when the within-sample variability is significant. We use a simple approximation to the loss function so that the optimization can be carried out by linear programs. We propose a specialized CV method to select the tuning parameter that regulates the withinsample variability. Earlier methods of lysate array quantification have to aggregate the replicates in each sample to avoid unstable estimates, and in doing so, important information may get lost in the aggregation. We demonstrate through simulated and real data that the proposed method is helpful in providing additional information about within-sample variabilities, which has important implications in the subsequent statistical analysis of the lysate array data. Note that the estimated calibration curves from different methods are essentially the same, and the differences are in the concentration estimates of individual samples. Funding: National Institute of Health Grants R21CA129671, R01GM080503, R01CA158113 and NCI CA97007, and the National Science Foundation Awards DMS-0706818, DMS0800631 and DMS-1007396. Conflict of Interest: none declared.