Motivation: Repeat proteins, which contain multiple repeats of short sequence motifs, form a large but seldom-studied group of proteins. Methods focusing on the analysis of 3D structures of such proteins identified many subtle effects in length distribution of individual motifs that are important for their functions. However, similar analysis was yet not applied to the vast majority of repeat proteins with unknown 3D structures, mostly because of the extreme diversity of the underlying motifs and the resulting difficulty to detect those. Results: We developed FAIT, a sequence-based algorithm for the precise assignment of individual repeats in repeat proteins and introduced a framework to classify and compare aperiodicity patterns for large protein families. FAIT extracts repeat positions by post-processing FFAS alignment matrices with image processing methods. On examples of proteins with Leucine Rich Repeat (LRR) domains and other solenoids like proteins, we show that the automated analysis with FAIT correctly identifies exact lengths of individual repeats based entirely on sequence information.
IntroductionAlmost 20%, of all plant and animal, including human, proteins are entirely built from or contain large domains that consist of multiple repeats of short sequence motifs (). These repeated motifs typically contain between 3 and 40 amino acids and cannot form independent structures by themselves (). A subset of repeat proteins that folds into solenoid-like structures have motif lengths typically in the range of 2040 amino acids. Since all repeats in any given protein are homologous, it is often assumed that their lengths would be constant and, even if not, the small differences in the length of individual motifs are usually treated as noise. However, when a few available 3D structures of solenoid proteins were analyzed, it was shown that small length variations of 15 amino acids between individual motifs can modify structure in subtle but functionally important ways. For instance, structures of the Leucine Rich Repeat (LRR) family are all known to fold into curved solenoid (), horseshoe-like structures and small motif length variations affect their local curvature () and, hence, the specific shape of the binding cavity and their binding specificity. This feature of LRR proteins is being explored in in silico design of artificial solenoid-like proteins with desired shapes and curvatures (). The interest in detecting and analyzing repeat proteins grew over the last decade as more functionally important groups of such proteins were discovered. This led to the development of many methods for their recognition and analysis based, among others, on self-alignmentRADAR (), HMMsHHRepID (), self-comparison approaches based on tiling () or predefined databases and Fourier transformation Repetita (). Results of such structure analysis now available in dedicated resources such as the RepeatDB database (), as analyzed with Raphael (). However, nearly all methods focused on the first step of the analysisdetecting the motifsand not on identifying exact lengths and variations thereof. At the same time, detecting variations in periodic signals in other fields, such as cardiographic signals or intense sunspot activities that oscillate with an approximate period of 11 years, but with significant variations, created a large repertoire of mathematical frameworks that can be applied to detect length variability in solenoidlike proteins (). Here, we present a novel approach called FFAS-based Aperiodicity detection using Image-processing Techniques (FAIT) for the in detail analysis of solenoid like proteins. FAIT is an adaptation of image-processing algorithms to the post-processing the graphic representation of results of the sensitive profileprofile alignment method FFAS developed previously in our group (). We analyze FAIT's performance comparing FAIT to annotations from our structure-based tool, ConSole (), since no standard benchmark exists that contains information about positions and lengths of individual repeat units for sufficiently large sets of proteins. Finally, we use FAIT to analyze variability of several large families of solenoid proteins.
ConclusionFAIT is a novel method developed to analyze variations in length of individual repeats in solenoid-like proteins, and it is the first method developed specifically to detect it only from sequences. It can, therefore, be used to analyze proteins from newly sequenced genomes and/or large families that were never structurally characterized. It uses information from the profileprofile alignment scoring matrix calculated with FFAS and extracts subtle variations of individual repeats with image-processing algorithms. FAIT was benchmarked against an established structure-based method and shown to give results closely correlated with those obtained using structural data. This allows it to be used on much larger groups of proteins, as 3D structures of only a very small percentage of all repeat proteins are known. HHRepID is probably the sequence-based method with the most similar annotation detail, but as nearly all existing methods it was developed to detect repeat domains and not to specifically provide exact positions of individual units as FAIT. Hence, the major difference between existing methods and FAIT is the analysis of individual units, not the detection of repetitive domains in sequence. Using a previously annotated protein as reference in FFAS comparison is the key feature of our approach, as it allows us to precisely detect individual repeats. Our results indicate that while varying references for cross-family experiments yields valuable results, to get the best results possible it is preferable to use a familyspecific reference. Hence, using annotated reference protein seems to be a required step to increase the resolution in analyzing repeat sequences. We mainly demonstrate the proof of concept of our algorithm on the large LRR protein family, using a previously annotated, long and extremely periodic sequence. However, results on other solenoid-like protein families such as Ankyrin and Armadillo repeats indicate that the FAIT procedure can be readily adapted to other protein families with one previously annotated sequence and known length of repeat motifs. In FAIT, we also introduce a novel framework using the A score and aperiodicity profiles to analyze large groups of solenoid-like proteins and group them by their variability, allowing us to investigate structural and sequence flexibility in more detail than currently possible on the PDBFlex.org webserver (). We performed such analysis to visualize aperiodicity in subfamilies of LRRs. These results also provided additional validation of our method since we compared clustering according to FAIT with structure-based clustering and showed that they are highly correlated. We are currently conducting a larger study in which we use FAIT to analyze the evolution of aperiodicity in NLR and TLR families. As all of our previous methods, FAIT is currently available as an open-source package, and will be extended in a future web-server implementation that automatically distinguishes between multiple solenoid families.