A top scoring pair (TSP) classifier consists of a pair of variables whose relative ordering can be used for accurately predicting the class label of a sample. This classification rule has the advantage of being easily interpretable and more robust against technical variations in data, as those due to different microarray platforms. Here we describe a parallel implementation of this classifier which significantly reduces the training time, and a number of extensions, including a multi-class approach, which has the potential of improving the classification performance. Availability and Implementation: Full C++ source code and R package Rgtsp are freely available from http://lausanne.isb-sib.ch/~vpopovic/research/. The implementation relies on existing OpenMP
INTRODUCTIONTop scoring pairs () are simple twovariables binary classifiers, in which the prediction of the class label is based solely on the relative ranking of the expression levels of the two genes. The rank-based approach to classification ensures a higher degree of robustness to technical variations and makes the rule easily portable across platforms. Also, the direct comparison of the expression level of the genes is easily interpretable in the clinical context, making the TSPs attractive for medical tests.,...,m  R m be a vector of measurements (e.g. gene expression) representing a sample and let the corresponding class label be y, with two classes denoted by 0 and 1. Then, for all pairs of variables i and j, a score is computed,where P are conditional probabilities estimated from the data, and the corresponding decision rule is: if sign(s i,j )x i  sign(s i,j )x j then predict y = 1, otherwise y = 0. The pairs are ordered by the absolute values of their scores and the top t pairs (t  1) are then considered for the final model (). Remarkably, training a TSP does not require the optimization of any parameter and does not depend on any threshold. Selecting a suitable value for t should be done following the usual machine learning * To whom correspondence should be addressed.paradigm for optimizing meta-parameters (see, for example,).shows an example of a TSP predicting the estrogen receptor status. The decision boundary (in grey) is always a line with a slope of 1.