Incorporating secondary structure information into the alignment process improves the quality of RNA sequence alignments. Instead of using fixed weighting parameters, sequence and structure components can be treated as different objectives and optimized simultaneously. The result is not a single, but a Pareto-set of equally optimal solutions, which all represent different possible weighting parameters. We now provide the interactive graphical software tool RNA-Pareto, which allows a direct inspection of all feasible results to the pairwise RNA sequence-structure alignment problem and greatly facilitates the exploration of the optimal solution set. Availability and implementation: The software is written in Java 6 (graphical user interface) and Cþþ (dynamic programming algorithms). The source code and binaries for Linux, Windows and Mac OS are freely available at
INTRODUCTIONNoncoding RNAs play important roles in translation or gene regulation (). Many families of noncoding RNA show little sequence similarity, but a conserved secondary structure. Furthermore, the function of RNA molecules, besides their sequence, is mainly defined by their secondary structure (cf.). If the sequence identity is too low, standard sequence alignment tools fail to produce reliable alignments (). Consequently, both sequence and secondary structure need to be taken into account. Sankoff's algorithm () solves this by a dynamic programming algorithm, which does not only compute a sequence alignment, but solves the consensus folding problem simultaneously. The result is a sequence-structure alignment that is optimal with respect to some fixed objective function, which is the weighted sum of a sequence and a structure component. This algorithm has triggered the development of many tools, which try to improve the original performance by restricting the solution space or by introducing heuristics (). The fixed weighting between sequence and structure objectives, which has to be estimated or optimized in advance, is one of the limitations of all of these approaches. This problem is not new, and approaches using Paretooptimality are also found in other domains such as economics and classification (). In sequence alignment, e.g.constructs a set of Pareto-optimal solutions by using the number of gaps and (mis-)matches as separate objectives.) describes an evolutionary algorithm and accompanying web-tool for pairwise RNA sequence alignment and uses a structure score derived from the alignment as a second objective for the approximation of a predefined number of Pareto-optimal solutions. Here, we now calculate an exact set of Pareto-optimal sequence-structure alignments using distinct objectives for sequence and structure (). Based on this method, we present an interactive tool, which allows the user to investigate and explore these Pareto-optimal solutions.