Motivation: RNA-Seq is a method for profiling transcription using high-throughput sequencing and is an important component of many research projects that wish to study transcript isoforms, condition specific expression and transcriptional structure. The methods, tools and technologies used to perform RNA-Seq analysis continue to change, creating a bioinformatics challenge for researchers who wish to exploit these data. Resources that bring together genomic data, analysis tools, educational material and computational infrastructure can minimize the overhead required of life science researchers. Results: RNA-Rocket is a free service that provides access to RNA-Seq and ChIP-Seq analysis tools for studying infectious diseases. The site makes available thousands of pre-indexed genomes, their annotations and the ability to stream results to the bioinformatics resources VectorBase, EuPathDB and PATRIC. The site also provides a combination of experimental data and metadata, examples of pre-computed analysis, step-by-step guides and a user interface designed to enable both novice and experienced users of RNA-Seq data. Availability and implementation: RNA-Rocket is available at rnaseq.pathogenportal.org. Source code for this project can be found at github.com/cidvbi/PathogenPortal.
IntroductionTranscriptomic analysis using high-throughput sequencing continues to increase in popularity due to low sequencing costs, its sensitivity, reproducibility and its ability to sample the entire transcriptome (). As an active area of research, there are many variations of RNA-Seq protocols, data types and tools that continue to evolve. As a result, there is no 'one size fits all' solution for doing RNA-Seq analysis. The range of considerations facing life scientists who want to leverage this technology can demand significant investment of time and resources. For this reason, we have created RNA-Rocket, an RNA-Seq analysis service that enables infectious disease research for prokaryotic and eukaryotic pathogens as well as vectors and host genomes. RNA-Rocket is built on Galaxy (), with modifications to help simplify the process for routine use and provide a guided user experience. RNA-Rocket integrates data from the PATRIC, EuPathDB and VectorBase Bioinformatics Resource Centers (BRCs) and is provided by Pathogen Portal (pathogenportal.org), a resource linking all BRCs funded by the National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases (NIAID). The RNA-Rocket service leverages multiple open source software tools to provide a free resource where users can upload their RNA-Seq data, align them against a genome and generate quantitative transcript profiles. This service also provides streaming of alignment and annotation results back to the appropriate BRC so that users can view results in the relevant BRC, using annotations and tools provided in support of transcriptomic analysis. The Pathosystems Resource Integration Center (PATRIC) is the all-bacteria Bioinformatics Resource Center (patricbrc.org) (). PATRIC provides researchers with an online resource that stores and integrates a variety of data types (e.g. genomics, transcriptomics, protein-protein interactions, 3-D protein structures and sequence typing data) along with any associated metadata. The eukaryotic pathogen databases (EuPathDB: eupathdb.org) provide access to a variety of data types from important human and veterinary parasites such as Plasmodium (malaria), Cryptosporidium (cryptosporidiosis) and kinetoplastida (i.e. Trypanosoma brucei and Leishmania species.) (). VectorBase (vectorbase.org) is a bioinformatics resource for invertebrate vectors of human parasites and pathogens (). It currently hosts the genomes of 35 organisms including mosquitoes (20 of which are Anopheles species), tsetse flies, ticks, lice, kissing bugs and sandflies.