Gene targeting is a protocol for introducing a mutation to a specific gene in an organism. Because of the importance of in vivo assessment of gene function and modeling of human diseases, this technique has been widely adopted to generate a large number of mutant mouse models. Due to the recent breakthroughs in high-throughput sequencing technologies, RNA-Seq experiments have been performed on many of these mouse models, leading to hundreds of publicly available datasets. To facilitate the reuse of these datasets, we collected the associated metadata and organized them in a database called RNASeqMetaDB. The metadata were manually curated to ensure annotation consistency. We developed a web server to allow easy database navigation and data querying. Users can search the database using multiple parameters like genes, diseases, tissue types, keywords and associated publications in order to find datasets that match their interests. Summary statistics of the metadata are also presented on the web server showing interesting global patterns of RNA-Seq studies. Availability and implementation: Freely available on the web at http://rnaseqmetadb.
IntroductionGene targeting (), a powerful technique used to manipulate a specific locus in the genome of an organism, is an indispensable tool for assessing in vivo functions of specific gene products. This technique provides great flexibility in manipulating the genome of an organism as it can be used to delete a gene or an exon, to introduce an exogenous gene, or to create point mutations. Moreover, gene targeting not only can introduce permanent mutations, but can also conditionally change targeted genes. Thousands of genetically engineered mice have been generated using this technique. They provide valuble models for studying mechanisms of human diseases. RNA-Seq (), a high-throughput sequencing (HTS) method for transcriptome analysis, has been successfully used on many of these mouse models, enabling global analyses of specific genomic alterations at a high sequencing depth with a resonable accuracy. As RNA-Seq becomes increasingly popular, hundreds of RNA-Seq datasets have been generated and have been released to the public. These data are currently available from online repositories, such asGene Expression Omnibus (GEO) (), ArrayExpress (), Sequence Read Archive () and European Nucleotide Archive (ENA) (), whose primary purposes are to store raw and processed HTS data from a wide variety of organisms. However, a data submitter typically provides only limited metadata for each dataset sufficient to get the dataset accepted into the public repository. There is currently no stringent and uniform quality check of submitted metadata. This results in inconsistency and ambiguity in dataset annotation. For example, non-official gene symbols are used in some of the datasets. Other public databases such as InSilico DB () also suffer from the same problems, making searching for datasets in these databases inefficient. The recent HTS data explosion has motivated researchers to create several metadata databases. However, these databases, e.g. CistromeMap (), focus primarily on ChIP-Seq data. To fill the gap for RNA-Seq data, we collected RNA-Seq metadata from all the publicly available datasets that were generated using mouse models mostly with targeted mutations and curated a database called RNASeqMetaDB.recently suggested that measuring transcription factor binding might not be the best way to decipher transcriptional regulatory networks. Instead, their work showed that gene expression data could be of greater value in revealing functional gene regulatory relations. Therefore, RNASeqMetaDB may be a helpful resource for researchers trying to build gene regulatory networks. We developed a web server to provide a user-friendly query interface for locating relevant RNA-Seq datasets based on targeted gene names, disease names, tissue types, keywords, publications and accession IDs, etc. An ontological search function is also offered that allows users to find the datasets related to, but not necessarily annotated to, the exact search term. This helps ensure search sensitivity (e.g. see the help page on the website). This database can help biomedical scientists navigate the complex landscape of mouse genetic experiments and can provide rich contexts for these datasets. Using this database, users will be able to find related datasets for further analyses easily. For example, RNA-Seq data can be used to infer splicing isoform functions () and information extracted from existing RNA-Seq data can be used as prior knowledge for causal reasoning on biological networks (). Moreover, RNA-Seq data can be integrated with sequence-and structure-binding preferences of RNAbinding proteins learned with computational methods such as GraphProt (), which can increase our understanding of the mechanisms of post-transcriptional regulation.