Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) is a powerful yet cost-efficient method for studying DNA methylation on a genomic scale. RRBS involves restriction-enzyme digestion, bisulfite conversion and size selection, resulting in DNA sequencing data that require special bioinformatic handling. Here, we describe RRBSMAP, a short-read alignment tool that is designed for handling RRBS data in a user-friendly and scalable way. RRBSMAP uses wildcard alignment, and avoids the need for any preprocessing or post-processing steps. We benchmarked RRBSMAP against a well-validated MAQ-based pipeline for RRBS read alignment and observed similar accuracy but much improved runtime performance, easier handling and better scaling to large sample sets. In summary, RRBSMAP removes bioinformatic hurdles and reduces the computational burden of large-scale epigenome association studies performed with RRBS. Availability: http://rrbsmap.computational-epigenetics.org/
INTRODUCTIONDNA methylation is an important mechanism of epigenetic regulation in development and disease. Many methods for DNA methylation profiling have been developed, but only bisulfite sequencing gives rise to comprehensive DNA methylation maps at single-base pair resolution (). Bisulfite treatment converts unmethylated cytosines (Cs) into uracils, which gives rise to C-to-T polymorphisms after subsequent Polymerase Chain Reaction amplification, while leaving methylated cytosines unchanged. By aligning and comparing bisulfite sequencing reads to the genomic DNA sequence, it is thus possible to infer base pair-resolution DNA methylation patterns. Bisulfite-converted DNA can be subjected to whole-genome resequencing, giving rise to comprehensive methylomes (). However, this procedure requires deep sequencing of entire genomes, rendering it expensive in terms of sequencing cost as well as the required amount of input DNA. Reduced representation bisulfite sequencing (RRBS) addresses these limitations () and provides a complementary technology to whole-genome bisulfite sequencing. In RRBS, DNA is first digested with a restriction enzyme that includes a CpG in its recognition site and cuts DNA independent of the methylation status of this CpG. Subsequently, small DNA fragments are size selected to enrich for CpG-rich genomic regions (which are often associated with epigenetic regulation) and subjected to high-throughput bisulfite sequencing. By concentrating on a small but informative portion of the genome, RRBS provides high-sequencing depth at affordable cost, making RRBS well suited for detecting subtle differences in large patient cohorts. Furthermore, RRBS is readily applicable to small amounts of DNA and formal-fixed, paraffin-embedded samples (). RRBS is actively used by a number of groups (). To our knowledge, no alignment tools have been published that are tailored to RRBS data. Although some existing tools for bisulfite sequencing data () can also be applied to RRBS, doing so requires custom pre-and post-processing, thus limiting the accessibility of RRBS for researchers with limited bioinformatic support. Here we describe RRBSMAP, a short-read alignment tool that is specifically tailored to RRBS. We show that RRBSMAP provides a major advance in terms of runtime performance and usability compared to a well-validated MAQ-based pipeline, while maintaining high mapping accuracy.