Protein interaction networks are widely used to depict the relationships between proteins. These networks often lack the information on physical binary interactions, and they do not inform whether there is incompatibility of structure between binding partners. Here, we introduce SAPIN, a framework dedicated to the structural analysis of protein interaction networks. SAPIN first identifies the protein parts that could be involved in the interaction and provides template structures. Next, SAPIN performs structural superimpositions to identify compatible and mutually exclusive interactions. Finally, the results are displayed using Cytoscape Web. Availability: The SAPIN server is available at http://
INTRODUCTIONProteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks are used to describe cellular functions in normal and disease perturbed states (). However, they often lack the information on physical binary interactions, e.g. if non-binary interaction methods, such as co-immunoprecipitation (co-IP) or tandem affinity purification (TAP)-tag, were used (reviewed in). At the moment, only statistical approximations, such as the socio-affinity index, are used to decide which of the putative interactions detected in a co-IP or TAP-tag experiments are direct (). Further, PPI networks do not always inform whether several proteins binding to the same protein 'hub' are compatible ('AND') or mutually exclusive ('XOR') structurally (). Integration of structural information with PPI networks can partially solve these limitations: first, information from 3D structures of protein/domain complexes can be used to distinguish 'AND' from 'XOR' binding sites. Adding 'AND'/'XOR' structural information into protein interaction networks is important to identify competing interactions where changes in concentration of one component could result in different pathways being active (). Also, it can help understanding different functional effects of mutations taking place in the same protein but at different interaction surfaces (). Limitations in the availability of structures of protein complexes to decide whether interactions are of 'AND' or 'XOR' type can be partly circumvented by using structures of homologous proteins, as homologous pairs of binding proteins tend to have a similar interaction topology (). In part, the structural knowledge in the aforementioned structural interaction network (SIN) was increased by compiling the information of homologous sequences, as homologous pairs of binding proteins tend to have a similar interaction topology (). Second, we propose that 3D information of homologous structures, when combined with experimental information, can be extremely valuable for predicting physical binary interactions among proteins that were found together in a complex in a co-immunoprecipitation experiment. Here, we introduce SAPIN, a framework dedicated to the Structural Analysis of Protein Interaction Networks. It encompasses features allowing (i) a full analysis of the protein sequence for the identification of the parts potentially involved in an interaction; (ii) a mapping of the available structural data involving the previously identified parts; and (iii) the identification of compatible and mutually exclusive interactions at the network level.