Motivation: Selenoproteins are a group of proteins that contain selenocysteine (Sec), a rare amino acid inserted co-translationally into the protein chain. The Sec codon is UGA, which is normally a stop codon. In selenoproteins, UGA is recoded to Sec in presence of specific features on selenoprotein gene transcripts. Due to the dual role of the UGA codon, selenoprotein prediction and annotation are difficult tasks, and even known selenoproteins are often misannotated in genome databases. Results: We present an homology-based in silico method to scan genomes for members of the known eukaryotic selenoprotein families: selenoprofiles. The core of the method is a set of manually curated highly reliable multiple sequence alignments of selenoprotein families, which are used as queries to scan genomic sequences. Results of the scan are processed through a number of steps, to produce highly accurate predictions of selenoprotein genes with little or no human intervention. Selenoprofiles is a valuable tool for bioinformatic characterization of eukaryotic selenoproteomes, and can complement genome annotation pipelines. Availability and Implementation: Selenoprofiles is a python-built pipeline that internally runs psitblastn, exonerate, genewise, SECISearch and a number of custom-made scripts and programs. The program is available at
INTRODUCTIONSelenoproteins are a rare class of proteins containing selenocysteine (Sec), an unusual amino acid which is a cysteine analog with selenium replacing sulfur. Specific machinery is needed for the recoding of the UGA codon (usually a stop codon) to Sec (). The main signal for UGA recoding is a RNA secondary structure element called SECIS (from SElenoCysteine Insertion Sequence) present in the 3 UTR of eukaryotic selenoprotein gene transcripts * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). Selenoprotein homologs (not containing Sec) have been found both as orthologs and paralogs. In most of them, a cysteine residue is aligned to Sec. There are currently 21 known families of selenoproteins in higher eukaryotes: Glutathione Peroxidases (GPx), Iodothyronine Deiodinase (DI), Selenoprotein 15 (Sel15 or 15kDa), Fish selenoprotein 15 (Fep15), SelM, SelH, SelI, SelJ, SelK, SelL, SelN, SelO, SelP, SelR, SelS, SelT, SelU, SelV, SelW, Thioredoxin Reductases (TR), SelenoPhosphate Synthetase (SPS). Some of these families may contain more than one member in a given genome (e.g. Homo sapiens contains 25 selenoproteins belonging to 17 families). All known selenoproteins contain just one Sec, with a few exceptions: SelP, SelN, some DI isoforms (), SelL (). In protists, selenoproteomes are variable, and recently some selenoprotein families limited to protistspecific lineages were identified (). Some lineage-specific selenoprotein families have been identified in algae as well (). Selenoproteins' function is wide ranging, and still unknown for many families (). During the last decade, several computational methods have been developed and used to identify novel selenoproteins (see Driscoll and Chavatte 2004 for a review;). Most of these methods rely on the prediction of SECIS elements. A limitation of methods based on predicted SECISes is that they cannot identify selenoproteins with non-canonical SECIS elements, and they can be applied only to the species or taxonomic groups for which they were developed, since bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic SECISes differ in their structure and also in their localization within the transcript (). Also, SECIS prediction is problematic: while there is conservation of the secondary structure, the sequence is poorly conserved. Thus, genomic search for potential SECISes often lead to a large number of false positives (as well as, occasionally, some false negatives). Other strategies, not based on SECIS prediction, scan the target nucleotide sequence searching for ORFs with a conserved in frame UGA (). These strategies also produces a large number of selenoprotein candidates in eukaryotic genomes. Like those based in SECIS searches, they require substantial manual curation. As a result, selenoprotein prediction is usually ignored in the standard genome annotation pipelines and selenoprotein genes are generally mispredicted, either by truncation of 3 end of the gene (the UGA codon assumed to be Selenoprofiles the stop codon of the coding region), or by truncation of the 5 end (the coding region assumed to start at the first AUG downstream of the UGA Sec codon), or by exclusion of the exon or the region containing the UGA/Sec codon. As the number of genome sequences available grows exponentially, automatic tools that produce highquality genome annotations with minimal human intervention are essential. Here, we present a computational pipeline, which we name selenoprofiles, capable of producing reliable gene predictions for known eukaryotic selenoprotein families. Selenoprofiles can be used in conjunction with automatic gene annotation methods to predict otherwise misannotated selenoprotein genes in eukaryotic genomes. Importantly, selenoprofiles does not rely on the prediction of SECIS elements. Also, selenoprofiles does not rely on individual selenoprotein sequences to be used as initial queries, but on sequence profiles characteristic of each eukaryotic selenoprotein family. For each eukaryotic selenoprotein family, we have thus built an high-quality, manually curated multiple amino acid sequence alignment including all known orthologous and paralogous members of the family, and we derived a position-specific scoring matrix (PSSM) from it. Profiles derived from multiple sequence alignments implemented as PSSM, Markov models or other structures, capture more precisely the intrinsic variation within a protein family, and often lead to searches that are both more sensitive (thus allowing for the identification of distant relatives) and more specific (easing the identification of spurious hits) (). We show that selenoprofiles can be used with little or no human intervention to accurately identify known selenoproteins in eukaryotic genomes. Application of selenoprofiles to the publicly available reference annotation of metazoan genomes reveals hundreds of misannotated selenoprotein genes.