Assembling and/or producing integrated knowledge of sequence features continues to be an onerous and redundant task despite a large number of existing resources. We have developed SeqDepot—a novel database that focuses solely on two primary goals: (i) assimilating known primary sequences with predicted feature data and (ii) providing the most simple and straightforward means to procure and readily use this information. Access to 428.5 million sequences and 300 million features is provided through a well-documented and flexible RESTful interface that supports fetching specific data subsets, bulk queries, visualization and searching by MD5 digests or external database identifiers. We have also developed an HTML5/JavaScript web application exemplifying how to interact with SeqDepot and Perl/Python scripts for use with local processing pipelines. Availability: Freely available on the web at http://seqdepot.net/. REST access via http://seqdepot.net/api/v1. Database files and scripts may be downloaded from http://seqdepot.net/download.
INTRODUCTIONPrimary sequences and their associated features are vital to all bioinformatics research. Invariably, determining gene and protein function begins with sequence similarity searches () followed by identifying intrinsic features that strictly depend on the sequence itself. Many computational tools and libraries exist for elucidating intrinsic features such as signal peptides (), transmembrane regions (), protein domains (), motifs (), subcellular location () and structural elements (). When considered together and in context, these higher level details synergistically improve the understanding of macromolecular function. Obtaining such functional details requires building a computational pipeline that analyzes sequences with the desired toolset and/or fetching results from external servers. Developing a custom pipeline is computationally expensive. Moreover, predicting intrinsic features produces the same results for identical sequences, and recomputing this information wastes valuable resources (). Many public resources such as Pfam (), SMART () and Gene3D () provide precomputed results; however, significant effort must be exercised to properly map sequence identifiers, handle coverage discrepancies and integrate results from independent resources. SeqDepot addresses the aforementioned issues by consolidating a wide array of precomputed features across known protein space in a single database. SeqDepot enables users to rapidly retrieve and process with minimal effort both primary and intrinsic feature data for existing sequences, which makes it different from other tools (e.g. InterPro) that dynamically compute this information for novel sequences. InterPro () and Similarity Matrix of Proteins (SIMAP;) aggregate large masses of precomputed data for classifying all proteins in UniProt () into families and calculating all-versus-all sequence similarity analyses, respectively; however, simply obtaining and consuming features for a given set of sequences is neither straightforward nor streamlined. InterPro's web interface permits querying a single sequence per request or up to 25 per request via web services. If precomputed matches do not exist, then the sequences are queued for analysis with InterProScan (), which may take 30 minutes per sequence to complete. SIMAP provides several avenues for data access including the web browser, database flat files and most notably via a powerful SOAP-based web service. Sequence searches with the web browser are limited to a single sequence with a maximum of 500 hits, and effectively using SOAP interfaces requires nontrivial programming. Exported results (e.g. flat files) from both InterPro and SIMAP for all predictive tools are merged into a fixed number of fields and necessitate additional parsing logic to disentangle and properly structure the data of interest. As high-throughput sequencing projects exponentially reveal additional sequences, researchers are required to analyze larger amounts of sequence data. Even with the vast number of databases and web services available today, one must expend considerable time and effort fetching sequences and features, installing diverse software packages, generating results, restructuring data and even building local databases. There remains a compelling need for a single resource that both maps raw sequences to precomputed feature data at scale and is easily queried and *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2013. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com processed by both humans and computers. SeqDepot fills this gap with the overarching goals of being both comprehensive and extremely simple to use.