Motivation: Quantitative shape analysis is required by a wide range of biological studies across diverse scales, ranging from molecules to cells and organisms. In particular, high-throughput and systems-level studies of biological structures and functions have started to produce large volumes of complex high-dimensional shape data. Analysis and understanding of high-dimensional biological shape data require dimension-reduction techniques. Results: We have developed a technique for non-linear dimension reduction of 2D and 3D biological shape representations on their Riemannian spaces. A key feature of this technique is that it preserves distances between different shapes in an embedded low-dimensional shape space. We demonstrate an application of this technique by combining it with non-linear mean-shift clustering on the Riemannian spaces for unsupervised clustering of shapes of cellular organelles and proteins. Availability and implementation: Source code and data for reproducing results of this article are freely available at https://github.com/ccdlcmu/shape_component_analysis_Matlab. The implementation was made in MATLAB and supported on MS Windows, Linux and Mac OS.
IntroductionGeometrical shapes are a fundamental property of biological structures. Quantitative shape analysis is required by many biological studies across diverse scales. For example, at the molecular scale, quantitative analysis of shapes of proteins is essential for understanding their functions and interactions (). As another example, at the cellular scale, quantitative analysis of shapes of cells is essential for understanding their morphogenesis and migration (). Recently, high-throughput and systems-level biological studies have started to produce large volumes of complex biological shape data from structural analysis () or image analysis (D'). The biological shape data produced often have high dimensions, which pose a significant challenge for their analysis and understanding. Dimension reduction is an essential tool for analyzing and understanding high-dimensional data. A wide range of related techniques have been developed (). However, for effective dimension reduction of biological shape representations, it is crucial to take into account their specific structures and properties. Specifically, biological shapes are often represented by points on high-dimensional Riemannian spaces (). Differences between distinct shapes are best represented by their Riemannian distances rather than Euclidean distances, which are commonly used in dimension reduction. This can be seen from the example in, which shows that Riemannian distances better differentiate between different shapes. Indeed, non-linear Riemannian geometry of shape spaces is proposed as a tool of choice for characterizing geometric differences between shapes (). In this study, we described 2D shapes using their landmark representation (lack well-defined landmarks using their spherical harmonic representation (SHR) (). We developed a technique for nonlinear dimension reduction of these two shape representations on their Riemannian spaces. A key feature of our technique is that the non-linear distances between shapes are preserved in an embedded low-dimensional shape space. We demonstrate an application of our dimension reduction approach by combining it with non-linear mean-shift clustering on Riemannian spaces () for unsupervised clustering of shapes of mitochondria and proteins. Experimental results confirmed that the proposed dimension-reduction technique, when combined with mean-shift clustering, provided equivalent clustering performance but substantially reduced processing time, because the cost of computing the Riemannian distance between two shapes depends linearly on their dimension. The proposed dimension-reduction approach is general and can also be combined with other shape analysis techniques. In the remaining part of the article, we first outline the theory of shape space and then describe our dimension reduction technique and its integration with unsupervised mean-shift clustering on shape spaces. The overall shape analysis work flow is summarized in. We present experimental results on a variety of shape datasets, first on a generic 2D shape dataset, then on a 2D mitochondrial shape dataset and lastly on a 3D protein shape dataset.
Application
DiscussionIn this study, we proposed a technique for dimension-reduction on the Riemannian manifold of 2D and 3D biological shapes. A key advantage of this technique is that it preserves distances between different shapes in an embedded low-dimensional shape space. We showed that although SHR of 3D shapes differs from the landmark representation of 2D shapes, they share the same Riemannian geometry and thus can be processed using the same dimension-reduction technique. We verified the proposed technique on datasets of 2D and 3D shapes. Specifically, we demonstrated an application of the technique by combining it with non-linear mean-shift clustering for unsupervised classification of biological shapes. Our approach is general and provides a tool for analyzing and understanding large sets of high-dimensional shape data. It can also be integrated with shape analysis techniques other than mean-shift clustering. Our approach is similar to PGA () in that both aim for dimension-reduction of shape representations. PGA relies on principal component analysis on the tangent space of the mean shape. In comparison, our approach maps shapes directly from a high-dimensional shape space to a low-dimensional shape space without making use of the tangent space. In this way, our approach better preserves distances between different shapes by causing less distortion and therefore better retains Riemannian geometry in the dimension-reduced space (Tables 1 and 3). However, our approach also has its limitations. In its current form, it can only handle genus-zero surfaces and does not support local or adaptive approximation of shape features.