Motivation: Alignment of multiple liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) experiments is a necessity today, which arises from the need for biological and technical repeats. Due to limits in sampling frequency and poor reproducibility of retention times, current LC systems suffer from missing observations and non-linear distortions of the retention times across runs. Existing approaches for peak correspondence estimation focus almost exclusively on solving the pairwise alignment problem, yielding straightforward but suboptimal results for multiple alignment problems. Results: We propose SIMA, a novel automated procedure for alignment of peak lists from multiple LC/MS runs. SIMA combines hierarchical pairwise correspondence estimation with simultaneous alignment and global retention time correction. It employs a tailored multidimensional kernel function and a procedure based on maximum likelihood estimation to find the retention time distortion function that best fits the observed data. SIMA does not require a dedicated reference spectrum, is robust with regard to outliers, needs only two intuitive parameters and naturally incorporates incomplete correspondence information. In a comparison with seven alternative methods on four different datasets, we show that SIMA yields competitive and superior performance on real-world data. Availability: A C++ implementation of the SIMA algorithm is available from
INTRODUCTIONRecent developments in liquid chromatography/mass spectrometry (LC/MS) have afforded insight into the dynamics of biological systems at unprecedented levels of detail. High-resolution MSbased protein identification and quantitative MS are now established methodologies in fields as diverse as proteomics (), glycomics (), lipidomics () and metabolomics (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as jointRobust alignment of LC/MS experiments: current LC/MS experiments often investigate complex biological systems over a set of different environmental conditions and/or time-courses. The associated data are routinely split into multiple fractions and acquired in technical and biological replicates, yielding tens to hundreds of LC/MS runs. Each of these runs delivers a snapshot of the system of interest and to enable their joint analysis, the common components in different measurements need to be related to each other. In practical LC/MS applications, two major factors complicate the determination of component correspondences across multiple runs: (i) the limited reproducibility attained on LC systems, which gives rise to non-linear distortions of the retention time domain; and (ii) the limited sampling frequency inherent to data-driven MS/MS acquisition as a notorious cause for missing observations. To obtain quantitative estimates or to increase peptide identification rates over a series of experiments, LC/MS data analysis frameworks () rely on accurate mass and retention time alignment to propagate correspondence information between runs, experiments and samples. Accounting for LC distortions is a necessary prerequisite for such cross-experiment inference (). Although numerous pairwise alignment methods have been proposed, the question of simultaneous alignment of multiple datasets is still a particularly challenging task: as the number of potential correspondences grows exponentially, false initial multiple correspondence estimates are more likely, and estimation procedures for the associated warping functions need to be robust to potential outliers. Even more, in the light of practical application, multiple alignment methods should naturally cope with incomplete correspondences where peaks are only observed in a subset of runs and no obvious missing value imputation strategy is available. Types of LC/MS alignment algorithms: published alignment algorithms work on different representationseither peaks extracted from raw measurements or the raw measurements themselves (). This contribution focuses on the alignment of sparse sets of samples, i.e. peaks, which lie in a 3D feature space (ion mass-to-charge ratio, ion elution time and ion charge) as proposed in Cox and Mann (2008);. Existing approaches can be divided into three categories:(1) Alignment based on a static reference, where all observed measurements are aligned to a single reference peak list (). Because these approaches single out one measured reference run, they perform well if therePage: 988 987993
CONCLUSIONWe introduced SIMA, a novel approach for the simultaneous alignment of multiple LC/MS peak lists. SIMA is specifically tailored to the problems arising from large-scale experiments where