Motivation: Currently, there is great interest in detecting complex trait rare variant associations using next-generation sequence data. On a monthly basis, new rare variant association methods are published. It is difficult to evaluate these methods because there is no standard to generate data and often comparisons are biased. In order to fairly compare rare variant association methods, it is necessary to generate data using realistic population demographic and phenotypic models. Result: SimRare is an interactive program that integrates generation of rare variant genotype/phenotype data and evaluation of association methods using a unified platform. Variant data are generated for gene regions using forward-time simulation that incorporates realistic population demographic and evolutionary scenarios. Phenotype data can be obtained for both case–control and quantitative traits. SimRare has a user-friendly interface that allows for easy entry of genetic and phenotypic parameters. Novel rare variant association methods implemented in R can also be imported into SimRare, to evaluate their performance and compare results, e.g. power and Type I error, with other currently available methods both numerically and graphically.
INTRODUCTIONCurrently, there is great interest in detecting complex trait rare variant associations. Next-generation sequencing technologies, e.g. Illumina HiSeq, ABI 454 and Roche SOLiD, have made it possible to cost-effectively identify rare variants through the generation of exome and whole-genome sequence data. It has been demonstrated that for complex traits testing individual rare variants is grossly underpowered (). Therefore, a large number of rare variant association methods, which aggregate variants across a region, which is usually a gene, have been developed. However, comparing the power of these methods by reviewing the literature is difficult, because there is no regularity in data generation and sometimes to make a particular method appear more powerful than others, data are generated in an unrealistic manner. Although variant data can be obtained for example from the 1000 Genomes Project () and The National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) Exome Sequencing Project (), due to limited samples sizes, it is not possible to generate variant data which is reflective of the true distribution of rare variants (e.g. singletons and doubletons). It is therefore crucial to be able to incorporate evolutionary history to generate large samples of variant data. The SimRare program was developed to evaluate Type I and II errors of rare variant complex trait association methods by generating both variant and phenotype data using realistic models. SimRare, which has a graphical interface, is written in Python/C and can incorporate R scripts for the evaluation of novel and existing methods.
DESCRIPTION