Motivation: RNA sequencing analysis methods are often derived by relying on hypothetical paramet-ric models for read counts that are not likely to be precisely satisfied in practice. Methods are often tested by analyzing data that have been simulated according to the assumed model. This testing strategy can result in an overly optimistic view of the performance of an RNA-seq analysis method. Results: We develop a data-based simulation algorithm for RNA-seq data. The vector of read counts simulated for a given experimental unit has a joint distribution that closely matches the distribution of a source RNA-seq dataset provided by the user. We conduct simulation experiments based on the negative binomial distribution and our proposed nonparametric simulation algorithm. We compare performance between the two simulation experiments over a small subset of statistical methods for RNA-seq analysis available in the literature. We use as a benchmark the ability of a method to control the false discovery rate. Not surprisingly, methods based on paramet-ric modeling assumptions seem to perform better with respect to false discovery rate control when data are simulated from parametric models rather than using our more realistic nonparametric simulation strategy.
IntroductionOver the past decade, new high-throughput next-generation sequencing technology has become readily available for gene expression profiling of RNA samples. The new next-generation sequencing technology has unseated the previous dominance of microarray technology, offering low sequencing costs, more detailed sequencing information and a wider range of signal detection. A main focus in the statistical analysis of an RNA-seq dataset is the detection of differential expression. A gene is considered to be differentially expressed (DE) across a set of conditions if the mean gene expression level (as measured by RNA-seq read count) differs among any of the conditions. Otherwise, we say the gene is equivalently expressed (EE) or is a null gene. For the sake of exposition, we assume that the statistical analysis under discussion is on the gene level, though our comments could apply equally well to count datasets involving other genomic features for which counts can be reliably obtained.
DiscussionThe principal differences between the SimSeq algorithm for simulating RNA-seq data and the NB simulations are that the SimSeq algorithm makes no parametric distributional assumptions and preserves the complex gene dependence structure of the original dataset. In contrast, the NB method simulates data for each gene independently according to marginal NB distributions. Thus, we should expect methods that are more robust to varying distributional assumptions to behave more similarly between the two simulation methods. Conversely, methods that are less robust to departures from the parametric distributional assumptions on which they are based should perform worse when applied to the SimSeq simulated data. Under the SAMseq and Voom methods, which are not based on NB assumptions, there is little difference between the two simulation types in terms of average FDP. In contrast, we see substantial differences in FDR control properties across simulation types for the other analysis methods that rely on NB assumptions. The difference in the results between the two simulation approaches in terms of FDR control is important to point out. Some methods that appeared to control FDR or were slightly liberal with respect to FDR control under the NB simulations failed to control FDR under the SimSeq simulations. Further, the ranking of each of the methods in terms of FDR control sometimes differed depending on whether NB or the SimSeq simulation was used. It is also worth discussing the liberalness of the DESeq2 and edgeR methods in general. Although other simulation studies have already indicated that both of these methods exhibit liberalness in FDR control (), our simulation study shows even greater discrepancies between nominal and actual FDR control when these methods are applied to datasets simulated by SimSeq from the heterogeneous KIRC dataset. When we repeated the simulation study using the Bottomly et al. dataset as the source dataset (for which the NB assumption may be more reasonable), the liberalness of the two methods decreased, although both methods still remained liberal. Using the additional Cook's distance filtering criteria as implemented in the DESeq2 package reduced the difference in average4 (and Supplementary Figs. S1 and S2) is the larger variation in simulation results for SimSeq compared with the NB simulation method. This larger variation is a consequence of the realistic dependence from gene to gene in data simulated by SimSeq. Dependence among genes leads to dependence among P values within each analysis. This dependence among P values leads to greater variation in quantities computed from P values, such as estimates of FDR and sample quantiles of the P values from null genes. Results from NB simulations with independent genes may lead researchers to underestimate the uncertainty in simulation-based estimates of FDR. SimSeq creates a less optimistic but more accurate picture of the uncertainty that can be expected when analysis methods are applied to real RNA-seq data. We also compared the performance of the four statistical methods using partial area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (PAUROCC). PAUROCC indicates how well an analysis method rank orders genes from most significant to least significant. The specific value of PAUROCC utilized was calculated as the area under the receiver operating characteristic curve for specificity values !0.95. These specificity values correspond to type I error rates no larger than 0.05. PAUROCC was neither systematically higher nor systematically lower under the NB simulations over the class of statistical analysis methods studied. A factor to consider when using the SimSeq package is the choice of the source dataset. The source datasets used in this article were the KIRC dataset from the Cancer Genome Atlas project and the Bottomly et al. dataset. For the KIRC dataset, the samples stem from a heterogeneous population crossing diverse factors such as race, gender, age and ethnicity. This is in contrast to the Bottomly et al. dataset that contains homogeneous samples with genetically identical mice. The simulation experiments of Section 6 indicate that there are larger differences in average FDP minus target FDR level between the SimSeq simulations and the NB simulations for our source datasets based on a heterogeneous population than for the source dataset based on a more homogeneous population. To investigate the performance of analysis methods on relatively homogeneous observational or experimental units, more homogeneous source datasets should be used. As more large RNA-seq datasets become publicly available, the number and variety of source dataset options will increase. In conclusion, important performance benchmarks such as average FDP relative to nominal FDR can change drastically between the two simulation procedures depending on the statistical method used. The SimSeq algorithm simulates RNA-seq data that closely matches the marginal distributions and complex dependence structure of real RNA-seq data. Simulation studies using this method more accurately reflect average FDPs likely to be obtained in practice. Simulation experiments that rely on parametric models may paint an overly optimistic picture for the efficacy of a given method. As such, in evaluating current and future statistical methodologies in gene expression analysis, we recommend using the SimSeq algorithm because it more closely matches the complex structure of RNA-seq data.