SIMToolbox is an open-source, modular set of functions for MATLAB equipped with a user-friendly graphical interface and designed for processing two-dimensional and three-dimensional data acquired by structured illumination microscopy (SIM). Both optical sectioning and super-resolution applications are supported. The software is also capable of maximum a posteriori probability image estimation (MAP-SIM), an alternative method for reconstruction of structured illumination images. MAP-SIM can potentially reduce reconstruction artifacts, which commonly occur due to refractive index mismatch within the sample and to imperfections in the illumination. Availability and implementation: SIMToolbox, example data and the online documentation are freely accessible at
IntroductionIn structured illumination microscopy (SIM), a sequence of images is acquired, each taken with a different position of an illumination pattern in a fluorescence microscope but without a mask in the detection path (). Subsequent processing of the raw data is required to reconstruct the final image. Current SIM methods include optical sectioning microscopy (OS-SIM) () and super-resolution SIM (SR-SIM) (). Several different algorithms can be used to process SIM data (). SIMToolbox offers a set of MATLAB functions for processing both OS-SIM and SR-SIM data according to a variety of methods. SIMToolbox can also apply an alternative method for processing the data, maximum a posteriori probability estimation (MAP-SIM) (). The tools can be accessed from a user-friendly graphical user interface. Our goal is to offer a collection of processing methods, which were developed based on extensive testing with real data. The software can be used to process data acquired by commercial SIM systems; however, some of the tools and documentation provided are meant for researchers developing their own systems. In addition to the software, we provide example data, a user's guide and a detailed description of the implemented methods and algorithms. Please refer to the Supplementary Note for further details.