Motivation: Successful development and application of precision oncology approaches require robust elucidation of the genomic landscape of a patients cancer and, ideally, the ability to monitor therapy-induced genomic changes in the tumour in an inexpensive and minimally invasive manner. Thanks to recent advances in sequencing technologies, liquid biopsy, the sampling of patients bodily fluids such as blood and urine, is considered as one of the most promising approaches to achieve this goal. In many cancer patients, and especially those with advanced metastatic disease, deep sequencing of circulating cell-free DNA (cfDNA) obtained from patients blood yields a mixture of reads originating from the normal DNA and from multiple tumour subclones-called circulating tumour DNA or ctDNA. The ctDNA/cfDNA ratio as well as the proportion of ctDNA originating from specific tumour subclones depend on multiple factors, making comprehensive detection of mutations difficult, especially at early stages of cancer. Furthermore, sensitive and accurate detection of SNVs and indels from cfDNA is constrained by several factors such as the sequencing errors and PCR artifacts, and mapping errors related to repeat regions within the genome. In this paper, we introduce SiNVICT, a computational method that increases the sensitivity and specificity of SNV and indel detection at very low variant allele frequencies. SiNVICT has the capability to handle multiple sequencing platforms with different error properties; it minimises false positives resulting from mapping errors and other technology specific artifacts including strand bias and low base quality at read ends. SiNVICT also has the capability to perform time-series analysis, where samples from a patient sequenced at multiple time points are jointly examined to report locations of interest where there is a possibility that certain clones were wiped out by some treatment while some subclones gained selective advantage. Results: We tested SiNVICT on simulated data as well as prostate cancer cell lines and cfDNA obtained from castration-resistant prostate cancer patients. On both simulated and biological data, SiNVICT was able to detect SNVs and indels with variant allele percentages as low as 0.5%. The lowest amounts of total DNA used for the biological data where SNVs and indels could be detected with very high sensitivity were 2.5ng on the Ion Torrent platform and 10ng on Illumina. With increased sequencing and mapping accuracy, SiNVICT might be utilised in clinical settings, making it possible to track the progress of point mutations and indels that are associated with resistance to cancer therapies and provide patients personalised treatment. We also compared SiNVICT with other popular SNV callers such as MuTect, VarScan2, and Freebayes. Our results show that SiNVICT performs better than these tools in most cases and allows further data exploration such as time-series analysis on cfDNA sequencing data.
IntroductionOne of the most promising areas of precision oncology is the development of custom targeted therapies tailored for a patient. Successful development and efficient application of such therapies require efficient and inexpensive identification and monitoring of therapy-induced changes in a patient's tumour DNA. Unfortunately, especially in advanced stage cancers, the main cause of cancer's morbidity and mortality is the development of multiple metastatic lesions, often not easily accessible for tissue sampling. For example, in prostate cancer more than 90% of metastases occur in bone and/or deep lymph nodes (). Biopsying such sites is associated with significant morbidity for the patients and thus is not commonly performed. The existence of circulating cell free DNA (cfDNA) in mammalian blood has been known since 1948 (). cfDNA is thought to be released from the dying (necrotic/apoptotic) cells-both normal and tumour, as has been shown in 1994 when mutated RAS gene fragments were detected in the blood of cancer patients-see (). The non-specific mechanism of generating cfDNA results in integral representation of all tumour DNA of a patient subject to sampling variability and, possibly, to tumour's access to blood stream. In an earlier study, for example, we observed the presence of multiple mutated forms of AR (androgen receptor) gene in cfDNA of patients with castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) () that can be best explained by the presence of multiple subpopulations of cancer cells in each patient's body. This integral representation of multiple tumour foci/subclones provides an important advantage to the use of blood plasma as a source of tumourderived DNA. Unfortunately, the presence of both normal and tumour DNA in a patient's blood poses significant challenges to the analysis of cfDNA sequence data. To make matters worse, tumour DNA is many times derived from multiple subclones and is thus highly heterogeneous. An earlier study we performed on mutations in CRPC patients () demonstrated that cfDNA comprised an average of 4.7% (IQR 1 4.5%) of ctDNA, based on the proportion of reads with mutations in AR. There are several somatic and germline mutation callers that were developed to find single nucleotide variants (SNVs) as well as indels within a given population using WGSS (Whole Genome Shotgun Sequencing), as well as to detect specific variants in a patient's genome through sampling multiple loci from the same patient. Examples include GATK (), VarScan2 (), Freebayes (), Strelka (), MuTect (), and others. Most of these tools either use a frequentist or Bayesian approach to estimate the probability of a locus being an actual mutation instead of being a false positive caused by noise (due to sequencing or mapping errors). Among them, VarScan2 uses several heuristics to reduce the size of the candidate set and then applies some statistical test like Fisher's Exact on tumour/benign pairs to call somatic mutations. It also provides post-processing capability to enable further filtering based on additional factors such as strand bias. Other tools such as Freebayes, MuTect, and Strelka make use of the prior and posterior probabilities of a location being mutated in a Bayesian context in order to call mutations. Unfortunately, these tools are not designed to work with (i) sequencing data from patients at multiple time points, (ii) very high read depth (e.g. 20k-30k average, up to 90k and possibly more in the future), or, (iii) extremely low dilutions (can be as low as around 0.01% variant allele percentage ()), or, (iv) samples with high intra-tumour heterogeneity, or, (v) batches of samples that suffer from systematic noise. In addition, ctDNA levels can also be below the analytical sensitivity of existing ctDNA detection approaches in patients with localized disease and in patients that have received therapy (). In order to address problems mentioned above, we introduce SiNVICT a computational tool that can handle very high read depth and very low dilutions. SiNVICT can be run on a single tumour sample, on a batch of multiple tumour samples, or on multiple samples from a single patient sequenced at multiple time points. This feature allows SiNVICT to process samples from a single patient in multiple cancer stages, as well as a group of different patients that are being sequenced and analyzed at the same time. In cases where these samples have similar disease progression and dilution levels, SiNVICT can make use of the Signal-to-Noise ratio of the batch (explained later) to characterise the systematic noise and try to reduce the number of false positives due to the non-uniformity of noise across the sequenced regions. We evaluated robustness of SiNVICT on data obtained by two sequencing platforms with distinct error rates (0.1% substitution in Illumina; 1% indel in IonTorrent (), which were applied to the same tumour samples. Our experiments indicate that SiNVICT is highly sensitive to calls on data generated by both sequencing platforms. For example, three previously validated AR (Androgen Receptor gene) mutations () in a mixture of 22RV1 and 49C cell-lines-which were used as reference in AmpliSeq 2 calibration and Illumina calibration experiments-were detected with almost identical sensitivity by SiNVICT. SiNVICT was also able to detect previously validated mutations successfully from actual cfDNA sequencing data obtained from castrate resistant prostate cancer (CRPC) patients. These findings suggest that SiNVICT might be utilised in the analysis of deep sequencing cancer data obtained from both Ion Torrent and Illumina sequencing technologies. As importantly, SiNVICT addresses a unique problem and is not comparable to existing popular SNV and indel callers (e.g. GATK) particularly because such tools typically process a fraction of the reads in datasets with high sequencing depth since multiple occurrences of identical reads are marked as PCR duplicates. However, identical reads are to be expected in deep amplicon sequencing and this is not necessarily an artifact of PCR.
ConclusionSiNVICT is a highly accurate and sensitive tool for detection of SNVs and short indels in circulating tumour DNA at very low variant allele percentages. Mutation detection with high read depth is often difficult due to sequencing errors getting amplified with the Amplicon technology used in most deep sequencing platforms. SiNVICT is capable of filtering mutation calls by several parameters such as the minimum read depth, strand bias, etc. We provide more details on the effect of filters on the experiments performed in Section 3 in Supplementary Table 11. SiNVICT is also highly customisable, allowing the user to fine-tune several parameters to achieve the desired level of sensitivity and specificity. Timeseries analysis capabilities of SiNVICT might be utilised to gain insight to how certain drug treatments affect the overall clonal composition for a patient. Results obtained from experiments on simulated data suggest that at variant allele percentages below 0.5%, even increasing the read depth indefinitely will not help with the calls unless the sequencing errors are reduced. Results obtained from the cell-line experiments might allow us to speculate that 2.5ng for AmpliSeq and 10ng for Illumina are the safest amounts of DNA (among our calibration samples) from which a set of reliable calls can be obtained at all dilutions mentioned before.