Motivation: Targeted deep sequencing of specific genes or regions is of great interest in clinical cancer diagnostics where some sequence variants, particularly translocations and indels, have known prognostic or diagnostic significance. In this setting, it is unnecessary to sequence an entire genome, and target capture methods can be applied to limit sequencing to important regions, thereby reducing costs and the time required to complete testing. Existing next-gen sequencing analysis packages are optimized for efficiency in whole-genome studies and are unable to benefit from the particular structure of targeted sequence data. Results: We developed SLOPE to detect structural variants from targeted short-DNA reads. We use both real and simulated data to demonstrate SLOPEs ability to rapidly detect insertion/deletion events of various sizes as well as translocations and viral integration sites with high sensitivity and low false discovery rate. Availability: Binary code available at
INTRODUCTIONNext-gen sequencing technologies provide an enormous amount of genome data at a cost many orders of magnitude lower than conventional capillary-based sequencing methods. While the use of next-generation sequencing has, to date, been largely confined to complex whole-genome analysis projects (), the technology can similarly be applied to targeted 'deep' sequencing of particular genes or regions of interest. Using this hypothesis-driven approach, selected genes can be analyzed for rare sequence variants, indels and translocations easily and at low cost. This approach is particularly useful in the clinical laboratory where genes/regions of known prognostic significance can be analyzed simultaneously for structural variation. Furthermore, next-generation technologies have the capacity to sequence multiple samples at once through the use of 'barcodes' or indexed labels, further driving down the cost of individual experiments (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed., all viral DNA (red) or chimeric viral/human DNA (blue/red). The DNA fragments are processed into Illumina paired-end libraries and hybridized with capture probes specific for viral DNA sequences; fragments containing only non-complementary human genomic DNA are washed away. The captured DNA, including fragments with partial viral sequence matches, are then eluted, short cycle PCR-amplified using primers specific for the previously ligated adapters, and sequenced. Using SLOPE, chimeric reads representing the human/virus integration boundaries can be identified. Next-generation sequence data can be generated from whole genomes, generally with coverage of 20-to 30-fold, or from 'targeted' regions of interest with much higher fold coverage. Target enrichment methods include standard PCR, ligation-mediated PCR or hybrid capture (). Unlike PCR-based approaches, hybrid capture enrichment is an amplification-free method that uses labeled, complementary DNA 'probes' to hybridize to regions of interest in genomic DNA. (). The hybridized, captured DNA sequences are then physically immobilized, while non-complementary sequences are washed away, and the captured DNA is eluted and sequenced. A major benefit of hybrid capture over PCR is that non-complementary sequences adjacent to regions of complementarity are also captured, permitting the identification of viral integration sites (as in this case) or translocation breakpoints. Several programs, including BreakDancer, Pindel, VariationHunter, MoDIL and PEMer (), to locate structural variants from sequenced whole genomes exist. However, none of these software packages is
DISCUSSIONSLOPE is a fast and accurate tool for locating translocations and other structural variants from targeted, resequenced DNA. SLOPE was faster and more accurate than BreakDancer in detecting real and simulated insertion sites for MCPyV. SLOPE also required a much faster preprocessing step, alignment of the paired-end data to only the short viral genome, as compared with BreakDancer which required pre-alignment to a much larger genome (in general, the entire human genome). SLOPE also had higher sensitivity and specificity than BreakDancer for detecting indels from simulated data. SLOPE was not quite as fast as or as specific as Pindel for indel detection. However, except in the case of the smallest indels, SLOPE's sensitivity compared favorably with that of Pindel, which also does not detect translocations. In addition to the efficiency attained by aligning only to the targeted reference genome, SLOPE has the advantage of SNP and gap-tolerant alignments. This tolerance may be an important feature for a program used to interrogate genomes of cancerous cells. We do emphasize, however, that SLOPE is suitable only for targeted, resequenced DNA. For whole-genome searches, a program such as BreakDancer, which searches for discordant paired reads to detect structural variants in general, or Pindel, which uses a fast, but SNP-intolerant, patternmatching algorithm to detect indels, would be preferable (). Another useful feature of SLOPE is its ability to provide singlebase resolution of chimeric reads. Translocations are thought to underlie a wide variety of tumor types, and specific chromosomal rearrangements have prognostic value (). Current methods to detect translocations, including cytogenetics and fluorescence in situ hybridization (FISH), provide only a very low resolution indicator of the chromosomal aberration. Furthermore, cytogenetic studies require actively dividing cultured cells, which are not always available, especially in the case of solid tumors. The ability to accurately locate and characterize translocations from a variety of specimen substrates including the ubiquitous FFPE tissue may provide further diagnostic information, and may help to elucidate the mechanisms by which these translocations arise. Currently, SLOPE performs optimally for paired-end reads, since this allows the sample to be narrowed to only those reads for which one end maps (in its entirety) to the reference genome. The algorithm works in just the same way for single-end reads, however. This is an important advantage in terms of analyzing data for clinical use, as paired-end sequencing takes up to 5 days as compared 3 days for single-end sequencing. Use of single-end reads results in a widened sample space and somewhat noisier output. It also results in a much slower search, although the algorithm is trivial to parallelize. Future work will speed this search using a more sophisticated string matching algorithm. Given its ability to quickly and accurately define translocation breakpoints from target-enriched sequence data, SLOPE is well-suited to both research and clinical applications. For example, the Myeloid Leukemia Lymphoma (MLL) gene on 11q23 is commonly translocated in both acute myeloid leukemia and acute lymphoblastic lymphoma. However, as more than 80 MLL translocation partners are known, identification of partner genes by FISH is problematic. Use of a targeted sequenceenrichment approach (in this case for the MLL gene), followed by next-generation sequencing, and application of SLOPE could theoretically identify all such translocations regardless of breakpoint location or partner gene. Additionally, as next-generation sequencing methods are readily amenable to FFPE tissue blocks, identification of recurring translocations could easily be accomplished from Page: 2688 26842688