Motivation: Proteins and protein complexes coordinate their activity to execute cellular functions. In a number of experimental settings, including synthetic genetic arrays, genetic perturbations and RNAi screens, scientists identify a small set of protein interactions of interest. A working hypothesis is often that these interactions are the observable phenotypes of some functional process, which is not directly observable. Confirmatory analysis requires finding other pairs of proteins whose interaction may be additional phenotypical evidence about the same functional process. Extant methods for finding additional protein interactions rely heavily on the information in the newly identified set of interactions. For instance, these methods leverage the attributes of the individual proteins directly, in a supervised setting, in order to find relevant protein pairs. A small set of protein interactions provides a small sample to train parameters of prediction methods, thus leading to low confidence. Results: We develop RBSets, a computational approach to ranking protein interactions rooted in analogical reasoning; that is, the ability to learn and generalize relations between objects. Our approach is tailored to situations where the training set of protein interactions is small, and leverages the attributes of the individual proteins indirectly, in a Bayesian ranking setting that is perhaps closest to propensity scoring in mathematical psychology. We find that RBSets leads to good performance in identifying additional interactions starting from a small evidence set of interacting proteins, for which an underlying biological logic in terms of functional processes and signaling pathways can be established with some confidence. Our approach is scalable and can be applied to large databases with minimal computational overhead. Our results suggest that analogical reasoning within a Bayesian ranking problem is a promising new approach for real-time biological discovery. Availability: Java code is available at:
INTRODUCTIONFunctional mechanisms in the cell involve cascades of interactions among gene products, mostly proteins and small molecules. In recent years, a number of large-scale efforts have collected and organized data produced by the community in publicly available, online databases. Human curators summarize the current state of our understanding of the cell's functional landscape, for instance, * To whom correspondence should be addressed. by categorizing genes' and proteins' functional roles, distinguishing those that have been experimentally verified from those that are most probable using well established computational methods (; SGD). However, the current understanding of signaling and regulation dynamics that instantiate functions in the cell is far from complete. Functional discovery is key. The main challenges are the scale of the problem and the costs of the necessary experimental validation (). The space of possible interactions and their multiple functional roles is very large. Exploring it at random is inefficient expensive and time consuming. A sensible approach is that of prioritizing the experiments, testing the most probable functions and interactions first (). Methods routinely used by biologists today to assist biological discovery boil down to assigning priority scores to proteinfunction pairs and to proteinproteinfunction triples, individually or in small sets. Here we consider a slightly different scenario, where we want to assign priority scores to proteinprotein pairs in the absence of a clear functional implication. We propose a methodology to rank proteinprotein pairs that are most similar to a given small set of proteinprotein pairs of interest. We show that our approach, based on analogical reasoning, is able to identify additional protein protein pairs that share functional implications with the set of pairs of interest. These results suggest that our method may be useful in establishing new functional implications, which are not necessarily well annotated in existing databases. Bayesian analogical reasoning, the ability to learn and generalize relations between objects, seems particularly appropriate for biological discovery because it does not estimate feature weights and relations (during training) that are then fixed in stone to produce predictions. Rather, it calibrates a prior distribution on feature weights that takes into account how features relate to one another, but then updates these weights depending on the query, on the fly. To illustrate the practical benefits of the proposed methodology, consider the following scenario. A certain cellular process is poorly understood and the corresponding gene ontology function is poorly annotated, say, protein kinases. Consider extant protein interaction prediction methods; they typically estimate the correlation structure among features of all known proteins that is useful to predict existing interactions, e.g. with a Bayesian network (), store it on a web-server, and use it to rank interactions every time users submit a set of protein interactions. However, if we were to discover a few interactions with protein kinases and submit them as a query, extant systems would not be able to rank other interactions between kinases well, mainly for two reasons: (i) we