Rationale: The growing recognition of the importance of splicing, together with rapidly accumulating RNA-sequencing data, demand robust high-throughput approaches, which efficiently analyze experimentally derived whole-transcriptome splice profiles. Results: We have developed a computational approach, called SNPlice, for identifying cis-acting, splice-modulating variants from RNA-seq datasets. SNPlice mines RNA-seq datasets to find reads that span single-nucleotide variant (SNV) loci and nearby splice junctions, assessing the co-occurrence of variants and molecules that remain unspliced at nearby exon–intron boundaries. Hence, SNPlice highlights variants preferentially occurring on intron-containing molecules, possibly resulting from altered splicing. To illustrate co-occurrence of variant nucleotide and exon–intron boundary, allele-specific sequencing was used. SNPlice results are generally consistent with splice-prediction tools, but also indicate splice-modulating elements missed by other algorithms. SNPlice can be applied to identify variants that correlate with unexpected splicing events, and to measure the splice-modulating potential of canonical splice-site SNVs. Availability and implementation: SNPlice is freely available for download from https://code.goo gle.com/p/snplice/ as a self-contained binary package for 64-bit Linux computers and as python source-code.
IntroductionAlternative splicing is well known as an essential mechanism of gene regulation which may affect protein function (). To date, $95% of the mammalian genes are estimated to be subjected to alternative splicing; current knowledge explains only a portion of the underlying molecular events (). Most of the knowledge on the splicing was obtained through alignment of DNA and RNA sequences and systematic search for functional elements, facilitated by the recent advances of the sequencing technologies (). Among the major mechanisms affecting the splicing process are nucleotide changes that disrupt or createbinding sites for splicing, transcriptional and other regulatory factors (). In addition to the four consensus sequences critical for the spliceosome assembly5 0 splice site (5 0 SS), 3 0 SS, the branch sequence, and the polypyrimidine tract (PPT)changes in the exonic and intronic splicing enhancers and silencers (ESE, ISE, ESS and ISS) and other, less patterned sequences, are increasingly acknowledged as splicing modulators (). The emerging recognition of the importance of splicing has stimulated efforts for modeling the splice-modulating potential of genetic variants through probabilistic predictions based on junction nucleotide composition, dependencies among neighboring bases, local optimality in the context of the gene structure, homology alignments, interaction with splicing factors and comparison with experimentally verified splice-modulating motifs (). These approaches helped annotate numerous previously unknown splice-modulating variants; however, being mostly based on pre-existing knowledge, they may miss variants acting through unknown mechanisms. Several recent analyses have highlighted the importance of systematic, genome-wide evaluation of sequence-specific splicing events (). A survey of the splicing patterns on relatively small genome portion250 exons in HapMap-genotyped individualshas suggested that common splice-modulating SNVs can be frequent in the genome (). An analysis of splice-sensitive microarrays demonstrated high frequency of alternative splicing events within the usually unexplored areas of the genome, and, at significance levels much below standard multipletesting thresholds, implying that the extent of cis-regulated differential splicing between individuals may be far greater than estimated (). Concurrent with the above are findings from another study, which employs softwareSNPSplicerto compare matching genomic DNA and complementary DNA (cDNA) from individuals with different genotypes (). We developed a computational approach, SNPlice, which identifies potential splice-modulating variants from RNA-seq data generated through massively parallel sequencing. SNPlice assesses sequencing reads for co-occurrence of variant base and a nearby exon-intron boundary. Given that canonical splicing is expected to retain predominantly exonexon junctions in the transcriptome, we based our strategy on the assumption that transcriptome sequencing reads harboring an exonintron boundary indicate a biological process of junction alteration and, possibly, altered splicing.