The SNPman program calls the genotypes of single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNP) from TaqMan allelic discrimination assays. It utilizes the fluorescence data collected over the whole PCR run, rather than relying on the end point fluorescence measurements that is the basis of the genotype calling process in most software solutions sold with the real-time instruments. This inspection of run data facilitates genotype calls in difficult sample sets, especially in those containing various concentrations of DNA or inhibitors, as indicated by results of a reanalysis of 3738 genotyping samples. The program works with data from three different widely used PCR instruments. Availability: The compiled program is available online at
INTRODUCTIONThe TaqMan allelic discrimination is a very popular and widely used medium-throughput genotyping format: the assays use two short minor groove binder (MGB) hydrolysis probes, each annealing to one allelic variant of the genotyped single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) amplified within a short polymerase chain reaction (PCR) product (). The TaqMan allelic discrimination is supported by most of real-time PCR platforms; however, their proprietary software solutions utilize mainly the end point analyses, largely overlooking the potential of fluorescence data collected over the whole course of a PCR run. In PCR runs with samples of good quality and comparable quantity, the end point scatter plot suffices for genotype calling. Nevertheless, if the reaction runs in suboptimal conditions (e.g. cheaper alternatives to the brand polymerases are used, the quantity of starting DNA varies or the DNA contains inhibitors), the end point analyses may not effectively discriminate genotypes, because the groups in the scatter plot often stretch or blend together. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.We therefore aimed to develop a program that would aid in TaqMan genotype calling across various platforms by enabling a detailed inspection of fluorescence data from the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) runs. In particular, we aimed for improving the genotype call rate in runs with unequally concentrated samples, in home-brew assays and in samples with variable presence of inhibitors.