Motivation: Protein aggregation is associated with a number of protein misfolding diseases and is a major concern for therapeutic proteins. Aggregation is caused by the presence of aggregation-prone regions (APRs) in the amino acid sequence of the protein. The lower the aggregation propensity of APRs and the better they are protected by native interactions within the folded structure of the protein, the more aggregation is prevented. Therefore, both the local thermodynamic stability of APRs in the native structure and their intrinsic aggregation propensity are a key parameter that needs to be optimized to prevent protein aggregation. Results: The Solubis method presented here automates the process of carefully selecting point mutations that minimize the intrinsic aggregation propensity while improving local protein stability. Availability and implementation: All information about the Solubis plugin is available at http://solu
IntroductionProtein aggregation remains a major bottleneck in the production of many therapeutic proteins. To reduce this aggregation problem, several approaches have been developed such as (i) generation of a fusion protein containing a solubilizing tag (); (ii) careful formulation of the buffer () or (iii) increasing the colloidal stability by increasing the net charge (). Nowadays, it is, however, common knowledge that aggregation is mediated by the presence of aggregation-prone regions (APRs) resulting in several computational methods that can predict the aggregation tendency and therefore, the effect of a mutation on protein aggregation (Supplementary). As none of the available methods currently takes into account protein stability, there is a need of integrating these with protein stability predictors (Supplementary). The Solubis method is such an integration approach that selects mutations that reduce the aggregation tendency by combining both TANGO () and the empirical forcefield FoldX (). This combination results in a tool to guide the design of aggregation-resistant protein sequences, by identifying mutations that reduce TANGO while respecting the thermodynamic stability. We experimentally validated the approach by improving the solubility and abundance of both protective antigen and alpha-galactosidase (unpublished results). In addition, we analyzed the performance of our method on published variants that increase solubility (Supplementary). Eighteen of the 24 variants (75%) lower the aggregation tendency (DTANGO  0), where the other six mutations do not increase he aggregation tendency. In contrast, many of them do not pass our conservative criteria of respecting structural stability (DDG  1). However, for a large fraction of mutations with a DDG higher than 1, the calculation were based on homology models, which is known to negatively affect the performance of FoldX. Overall, 6 out of the 24 analyzed variants that increase solubility can be identified following the Solubis method presented here butthis number increases to six out of seven if homology models are not included. Therefore, the use of homology models is not recommended to obtain an accurate prediction of the effect on protein stability. For user friendliness, we here present an implementation of Solubis in the YASARA molecular viewer environment ().