Motivation: The application of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies to RNAs directly extracted from a community of organisms yields a mixture of fragments characterizing both coding and non-coding types of RNAs. The task to distinguish among these and to further categorize the families of messenger RNAs and ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) is an important step for examining gene expression patterns of an interactive environment and the phylogenetic classification of the constituting species. Results: We present SortMeRNA, a new software designed to rapidly filter rRNA fragments from metatranscriptomic data. It is capable of handling large sets of reads and sorting out all fragments matching to the rRNA database with high sensitivity and low running time.
INTRODUCTIONThe application of next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies for metatranscriptomic profiling has been a successful venture in practice. Scientists may now gain access to the full set of coding and non-coding RNA in a community of organisms, which becomes particularly important for samples that cannot be cultivated outside their native environment (). The initial challenge of metatranscriptomic sequenced data analysis is to sort apart the RNA fragments based on their biological significance. Messenger RNAs (mRNAs) cast a universal glimpse on the gene expression patterns between interactive species. Likewise, the ribosomal RNAs (rRNAs) disclose information on the community's structure, evolution and biodiversity, and prevail in classification and phylogenetic analyses. The rRNA can comprise up to 90% of total RNA. Various prior-to-sequencing procedures, such as mRNA amplification kits, can help to enrich the yield of mRNA (). However, these kits are not fully satisfactory, as secondary steps may be required to verify if the resulting material is an accurate representative of the initial samples (). New software has been recently developed to address this issue; this software can identify and isolate rRNA fragments from a set of sequenced reads. The first set of programsMeta-RNA 3 (), SSUALIGN () and rRNASelector ()shares a common algorithmic approach to represent an rRNA family database using a probabilistic model. Both Meta-RNA and rRNASelector use prebuilt Hidden Markov Models (HMM) and consequently sort reads against the database with the HMMER3 package (), whereas SSU-ALIGN uses covariance models to support secondary structure information. An alternative algorithm outside the domain of probabilistic models is riboPicker (), which uses a modified version of the Burrows-Wheeler Aligner (). Lastly, BLASTN () is used in numerous home-made workflows for this problem. With BLASTN, however, reads should be compared with all sequences of an rRNA database to achieve a good sensitivity level. In all cases, computational time is still an issue to handle large collections of reads. In this article, we describe SortMeRNA, an efficient filter requiring only a representative set for an rRNA database and rapidly sorting through millions of reads. The underlying algorithm is analogous to the seeding strategy, focusing on finding many short regions of similarity between an rRNA database and a read. SortMeRNA also takes advantage of redundancy between homolog sequences, as HMMs do, and builds a compressed model of all rRNA sequences. The generated results adhere to the accuracy of the HMM-based programs and are computed in a fraction of the time.
DISCUSSIONSortMeRNA has shown to be a rapid and efficient filter that can sort a large set of metatranscriptomic reads with high accuracy comparable with the HMM-based programs. SortMeRNA implements seeds with errors (substitution and indel), and this important characteristic renders the algorithm robust to errors of different types of sequencers while providing the ability to discover new rRNA sequences from unknown species. The method used by the algorithm is universal and flexible. The database can be constructed on any family of sequences provided by the user. Moreover, the algorithm does not require a multiple sequence alignment file to build the database, as HMM-based programs do, and this is an advantage when sequences are hard to align or only partial sequences are available. Another advantage of SortMeRNA is the small number ofparameter settings required by the program (see Section 2 of the Supplementary Data).