Motivation: Modelling methods that find structure in data are necessary with the current large volumes of genomic data, and there have been various efforts to find subsets of genes exhibiting consistent patterns over subsets of treatments. These biclustering techniques have focused on one data source, often gene expression data. We present a Bayesian approach for joint biclustering of multiple data sources, extending a recent method Group Factor Analysis to have a biclustering interpretation with additional sparsity assumptions. The resulting method enables data-driven detection of linear structure present in parts of the data sources. Results: Our simulation studies show that the proposed method reliably infers biclusters from heterogeneous data sources. We tested the method on data from the NCI-DREAM drug sensitivity prediction challenge, resulting in an excellent prediction accuracy. Moreover, the predictions are based on several biclusters which provide insight into the data sources, in this case on gene expression, DNA methylation, protein abundance, exome sequence, functional connectivity fingerprints and drug sensitivity. Availability and Implementation
IntroductionNumerous clustering approaches have advanced to extract knowledge from sets of e.g. gene expression experiments, when conditions of the samples are either not known or researchers are interested in dependencies within or across experiments. Conditions or treatments can affect the expression levels of certain genes only, and similarly, many genes are likely to be co-regulated under certain conditions only. For this purpose, biclustering techniques have been developed (). Biclustering is traditionally defined as simultaneously clustering both rows and columns in a data matrix. Depending on the metric and the data, different approaches have emerged, aiming to cluster genes based on their expression levels being the same, differing by a constant, or being linearly dependent, with respect to different conditions ().introduced a generative approach called Factor Analysis for Bicluster Acquisition (FABIA), accounting for linear dependencies between gene expression and conditions. The biclusters are factors of the measurement matrix, and hence can be overlapping in both genes and conditions, whereas many approaches are limited to distinct clusters. Each bicluster can also include oppositely regulated genes (up-and down-regulated) across conditions. Similar approaches have been proposed by, with the latter one additionally focusing on the inference of gene co-expression networks. FABIA has also been extended to better suit genotype data ().proposed an algorithm for simultaneous biclustering of heterogeneous multiple species data collections. They investigate the identification of conserved co-regulated gene groups(modules) by comparing genome-wide datasets for closely related organisms and the evolution of gene regulatory networks. Most genes are unlikely to be co-regulated under every possible condition, and exclusive gene clusters cannot capture the complexity of transcriptional regulatory networks. Their proposed approach aims to identify meaningful condition-dependent conserved modules, integrating data across the same genes present in multiple species. Inferring bicluster structure jointly from multiple data sources is potentially more accurate than analysis of a single set, and the discovered relationships between the sources may offer new insights. In this paper, we extend a recent generative Bayesian modelling approach, group factor analysis (GFA) (). GFA was developed for exploratory analysis of multiple data sources (views), resulting in an interpretable group-sparse factorization of the data collection. When the factors are additionally variable-wise sparse, as a result of introducing suitable priors, they are interpretable as biclusters of multiple co-occurring data sources that need not share the same features (genes; as opposed to). As a factor model GFA further shares the favourable properties of FABIA. We demonstrate its use in a multi-view drug sensitivity prediction task that the previous bicluster methods could not handle naturally: the approach shows superior prediction performance, and is able to infer meaningful structure present in subsets of the data.