Motivation: For a mechanistic understanding of skin and its response to an induced perturbation, systems biology is gaining increasing attention. Unfortunately, quantitative and spatial expression data for skin, like for most other tissues, are almost not available. Results: Integrating organotypic skin cultures, whole-slide scanning and subsequent image processing provides bioinformatics with a novel source of spatial expression data. We here used this approach to quantitatively describe the effect of treating organotypic skin cultures with sodium dodecyl sulphate in a non-corrosive concentration. We first measured the differentiation-related spatial expression gradient of Heat-Shock-Protein 27 in a time series of up to 24 h. Secondly, a multi-dimensional tissue classifier for predicting skin irritation was developed based on abstract features of these profiles. We obtained a high specificity of 0.94 and a sensitivity of 0.92 compared with manual classification. Our results demonstrate that the integration of tissue cultures, whole-slide scanning and image processing is well suited for both the standardized data acquisition for systems biological tissue models and a highly robust classification of tissue responses.
INTRODUCTIONThe human body is shielded against outside influences by the skin, exhibiting a carefully regulated equilibrium of cell proliferation, differentiation and cell death. Even though this homeostasis guarantees a monthly self renewal, the exposition to harmful substances can lead to severe perturbations of the skin (). The skin therefore is a main target in toxicity testing and drug development. Systems biology is gaining increasing attention in these areas (), offering a novel approach to cope with the complexity of the skin as a biological system (). * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Besides mimicking the physiologic system's processes, the potential of respective computational models lies in the prediction of skin response following e.g. a chemical exposure. For identifying those system elements and pathways mainly contributing to the observed system response, a standardized experimental setup is necessary. On the single cell level high content screening (HCS) based on cell lines or strains allows the quantification of phenotypic changes after perturbation by automated fluorescence microscopy and subsequent image analysis (). However, approaches addressing individual cells do not reflect the spatial complexity of the human skin with its stratified organization. For example, substances applied to the surface of normal skin have to pass the barrier built by the stratum corneum and the perturbation induced is buffered by robust homeostatic molecular networks leading to differentiationdependent expression changes. Therefore, predictions based on these simple single cell model assumptions are not necessarily transferable to human skin. According to our best knowledge, up to now there is no suitable data acquisition method for the standardized and automated study of spatial skin response after perturbation. Recently, automated whole slide scanners (Virtual Microscopy) became available, offering the opportunity to analyze whole tissue sections in high throughput. Thus, the combination of whole slide scanners with industrially standardized tissue cultures could open up a novel way for the systematic characterization of perturbations induced to the human skin. Industrially manufactured organotypic skin cultures offer a well organized, reproducible spatial morphology and could therefore serve as a standardized source for spatial organized data. Such full thickness models are composed of epidermal keratinocytes growing air exposed on a matrix of native collagen type I containing viable fibroblasts (). A perturbation inflicted upon such a skin tissue culture will, depending on its strength, alter tissue homeostasis hallmarked by a specific spatial gene-and proteinexpression. We have shown previously how such differentiationdependent protein expression can be measured by quantitative spatial profiles (QSPs) based on automated image analysis of native skin sections, stained by indirect immunofluorescence (). We therefore set out to develop a novel data generation pipeline for systems biology experiments comprised of perturbing a standardized skin tissue culture, histological sectioning, immunofluorescence staining, whole slide scanning and automated
DISCUSSIONWe here presented an approach for the quantitative capturing and subsequent classification of tissue response following substanceinduced perturbations. The approach comprises standardized skin tissue cultures, whole slide-scanning, automated image processing and classification. We consider such a system ideally suited for the quantitative toxicological study of chemicals. Since chemicals of similar mechanisms of toxicity are expected to show similar phenotypic effects, the endpoints of this method also qualify for classification. In contrast to HCS, allowing the spatial quantification of molecules in single cell strains or cultures, our approach addresses the question of how a full tissue with its complex structure quantitatively reacts to perturbations. Besides the spatial layering, a skin culture also exhibits a barrier formed by the stratum corneum that is not present in cell strains. Substances applied to the surface of normal skin have to pass this barrier before perturbations can be induced at all. Common in vitro methods for skin irritation testing like the MTT (3-(4,5-Dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyltetrazolium bromide) test measure inside a homogenate thus loosing all spatial information. Furthermore, the irritative effect is correlated to the degree of cellular destruction (). This makes these methods blind for early and subtle modifications of the tissue before corrosion sets in.Therefore, we here presented an approach based on measuring the spatial and quantitative change of protein expression in intact, immunofluorescence-stained tissue sections. Recording modifications at the protein level guarantees a certain expression stability, as not being as transient as mRNA expression changes. Based on the determined QSPs a multi-parametrical and automatic classifier was built, assigning to each tissue culture the status irritated or non-irritated. In our experimental setting, tissue cultures were treated for different time durations with the standard irritant SDS. The visual inspection of the cultures identified a considerable change in Hsp27 expression (premature, planar and increased) after 6 h of treatment. This change is clearly reflected in the QSPs when measuring marker intensity against the normalized distance to basal lamina. To quantify such changes in the QSPs, we presented five different features extracted from the profiles (SE, A SE , A 4070, A Rel and NucleiIntensity40-70). The premature expression is reflected in an early increase of the QSP. With SE we were able to determine the onset of expression. The increase of total expression is manifested in an increase of the QSP's integral i.e. the area below the profile. We therefore developed features quantifying the profile's area (A SE , A 4070 , A Rel ). The determination of SE for all modes of treatment revealed that most changes occur between 40% and 70% relative distance. Hence, the features A 4070 and NucleiIntensity40-70 focus on this part of the QSP. The one-by-one comparison of all features identified A 4070 as the feature with the most prominent changes after treatment. However, the feature subset selection for classification by first translating the multi-dimensional problem into the Mahalanobis distance and then minimizing the classification error in a leave-one-out-validation revealed an optimal subset consisting of SE, A SE , A 4070 and A Rel. Interestingly, the feature NucleiIntensity40-70 reflecting the translocation of Hsp27 into the nuclei as described in literature did not improve the classification result. However, also the visual inspection of the stained sections did not reveal a noticeable translocation. The increase during treatment mainly arises from the general expression increase in the area between 40% and 70% relative distance. Based on the selected feature subset we were able to reproduce the manual classification with our automatic classification by the Mahalanobis distance to 'none cultures'. We report a specificity of 0.94 and a sensitivity of 0.92 compared with the manual classification results based on the visually observed phenotype. We therefore conclude that the presented features are well suited for the characterization of the tissue's response. The classification result in conjunction with the good confidence intervals of the calculated profiles argues for a well reproducible tissue response. We showed that the observed spatial changes could be described by profile features allowing a precise classification. This indicates a highly suitable method for a standardized data acquisition in the context of skin irritation. To further increase the accuracy of our profiling method a staining unambiguously delineating the epithelium would be preferable to improve tissue segmentation. In the presented method, thePage: 2765 27602766