Motivation: Topological domains have been proposed as the backbone of interphase chromosome structure. They are regions of high local contact frequency separated by sharp boundaries. Genes within a domain often have correlated transcription. In this paper, we present a computational efficient spectral algorithm to identify topological domains from chromosome conformation data (Hi-C data). We consider the genome as a weighted graph with vertices defined by loci on a chromosome and the edge weights given by interaction frequency between two loci. Laplacian-based graph segmentation is then applied iteratively to obtain the domains at the given compact-ness level. Comparison with algorithms in the literature shows the advantage of the proposed strategy. Results: An efficient algorithm is presented to identify topological domains from the Hi-C matrix. Availability and Implementation: The Matlab source code and illustrative examples are available at
IntroductionChromosome conformation capture techniques (3C, 4C, Hi-C) have yielded an unprecedented level of information about genome organization, and many studies are now exploring the relationship between genome structure and transcription (). Chromosome conformation capture studies suggest that eukaryotic genomes are organized into structures called topological domains (or topologically associating domains, TADs). Topological domains can be defined as linear units of chromatin that fold as discrete three-dimensional (3D) structures tending to favor internal chromatin interactions (). A majority of regulatory protein binding sites localize within topological domains. This suggests that sites associated with domain borders represent a functionally different subclass of alleles that delimit regions containing housekeeping genes and insulator sites (). Detecting the topological domains is thus helpful for studying the relationship between chromosome organization and gene transcription. For additional works on delineating structural domains (see Le). Topological domains can be detected using data from Hi-C, which allows genome-wide identification of chromatin contacts. The Hi-C method probes the 3D architecture of the whole genome by coupling proximity-based ligation with massively parallel sequencing. The Hi-C data matrix records the contact frequency between pairs of loci. Topological domains, as regions that have high intra-contacts, are characterized by diagonal blocks in the Hi-C matrix. To identify topological domains, in () the authors employed a Hidden Markov Model (HMM) on the directionally index from a Hi-C matrix to determine regions initiated by significant downstream chromatin interactions and terminated by a sequence of significant upstream interactions.formulated the identification problem by maximizing the domaintotal reads and introduced a dynamic programming algorithm to solve the problem with a given scale parameter. These methods perform analysis on a 1D read index or on a 2D image segmentation subblock, and they suffer from sensitivity to initialization (e.g. HMM model parameter adjustment), and high computational complexity (e.g. dynamic programming for combinatorial optimization). However, these methods do account for the fact that Hi-C matrices depend on interactions of loci on the genome. Specifically, the largest entries in a Hi-C matrix define a graph whose vertices are loci in the genome and whose edge weights are the contact frequencies between loci. Loci with high contact frequency are associated with small Euclidean distance in 3D space. Identifying fine domain resolution structures such as TADs can directly be translated to the problem of segmenting the graph into components with weak interconnections. Such graph partitioning approaches have been well developed in spectral graph theory (). Representation of HiC data as a graph and the usage of graph theoretic approaches have also been investigated by. While the former uses networks to present its experiment results and the later use graph theory to discover hubs in chromatin interaction data, neither of them discusses from the point of view of the graph segmentation for chromatin data. Based on a graph theoretic interpretation of Hi-C matrices, we propose a simple and mathematically sound algorithm for topological domain discovery based on spectral graph cuts. Domains at different scales are identified by running the spectral graph cuts algorithm recursively, until the connectivity of the graph associated with the domain reaches the level of desired compactness. Compared with previous algorithms inand, the proposed spectral method has several advantages: First, the method leads to topological domains that are highly correlated with gene transcription. Second, the proposed method admits a unique solution, and does not suffer from the severe initialization sensitivity of the HMM method, which is due to the fact that HMM involves an iterative expectationmaximization (EM) algorithm. Note that stability with respect to initialization affects the robustness of a method. Third, using the proposed graph connectivity stopping criterion leads to domains with sizes more closely related to the inherent structure of the region. Finally, the proposed method relates the Hi-C matrix to the spatial coincidence of loci via a graph and has moderate computational complexity. In the results section, the advantages of the algorithm are confirmed on Hi-C data collected from human fibroblast.
ConclusionIn this paper, we presented a method for identifying topological domains based on the spectral decomposition of the graph Laplacian of the Hi-C matrix. The proposed algorithm has clear mathematical interpretation and is more computationally efficient than previous methods, allowing it to be applied to higher resolution Hi-C data. Its favorable comparison with other algorithms and its higher correlation with gene transcription dataillustrate the advantages of the proposed spectral method. Future work may include investigating fast iterative algorithms or parallel computation algorithms for improving the efficiency at higher resolutions.