Motivation: Most biological processes are mediated by the protein– protein interactions. Determination of the protein–protein structures and insight into their interactions are vital to understand the mechanisms of protein functions. Currently, compared with the isolated protein structures, only a small fraction of protein–protein structures are experimentally solved. Therefore, the computational docking methods play an increasing role in predicting the structures and interactions of protein–protein complexes. The scoring function of protein–protein interactions is the key responsible for the accuracy of the computational docking. Previous scoring functions were mostly developed by optimizing the binding affinity which determines the stability of the protein–protein complex, but they are often lack of the consideration of specificity which determines the discrimination of native protein– protein complex against competitive ones. Results: We developed a scoring function (named as SPA-PP, spe-cificity and affinity of the protein–protein interactions) by incorporating both the specificity and affinity into the optimization strategy. The testing results and comparisons with other scoring functions show that SPA-PP performs remarkably on both predictions of binding pose and binding affinity. Thus, SPA-PP is a promising quantification of protein–protein interactions, which can be implemented into the protein docking tools and applied for the predictions of protein–protein structure and affinity. Availability: The algorithm is implemented in C language, and the code can be downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONProteins often function only when they are assembled into complexes (). The formation of highly efficient and specific protein complexes, particularly proteinprotein complexes, is a fundamental process in the cell. The structures of the proteinprotein complexes are the principal components of a systems-level description of genome-wide protein networks, which rely on the coordinated and tightly regulated activities of interacting proteins (). The proteinprotein interactions play a key role in various mechanisms of protein functions () and become attractive targets for therapeutic intervention (). Thus, determination of the proteinprotein structures and insights into their interactions are increasingly important in the post-genomic era. Although the individual protein structures are increasingly well determined, protein assemblies are still poorly represented in the Protein Data Bank (). This is because the experimental determination of assembly compositions and structures generally requires the combination of a number of the experimental techniques and theoretical approaches to maximize completeness, accuracy and resolution (). As an alternative, computational docking approaches provide a practical mean to predict the structures of multi-protein assemblies starting from the individual components (). Computational docking procedure usually incorporates two steps (), initial sampling of the configurational space of the interacting proteins to generate docking poses and pose scoring to select the putative native (or nearnative) proteinprotein conformations. Comparative assessment of the current proteinprotein docking and scoring approaches shows that efficient sampling strategies may generate the library of poses, including the native or near-native poses. However, the scoring function often fails to discriminate the native or nearnative poses against other non-native poses and can not always produce reliable estimation of the binding affinity of the complex (), suggesting there is substantial room for the improvement of the scoring functions. The development strategies of previous scoring functions for proteinprotein docking (), whether physicsbased, empirical or knowledge-based, mainly focus on the prediction of binding affinity (or free energy), which determines the stability of the complex. However, high affinity does not guarantee high specificity, which is controlled by either partner binding to other proteins discriminatively (). The development strategies of previous scoring functions are often lack of the *To whom correspondence should be addressed. considerations of the specificity, which is the discrimination of the specific native proteinprotein complex against the competitive ones. According to the Boltzman distribution (P $ expF=KT), the equilibrium population is exponentially dependent on the binding free energy. A gap in binding free energy or affinity will lead to significant population discrimination between the specific complex and alternative ones. As such, introducing the consideration of specificity into the computational design of proteinprotein interactions has achieve a few successful applications (). These work designed interactions that seek to stabilize the desired structures and also destabilize the competitive structures, as the specificity-related interactions lie in the binding patches constituting the interface of the complex (Malod). Thus, to develop a scoring function, the strategy should satisfy the requirement that the stability of the specific complex is maximized, whereas the stability of competing complexes is minimized, which can guarantee both the stability and the specificity for the specific complex. The conventional definition of specificity is the preference of a protein ligand specifically binding to a protein receptor over other competitive alternatives (). The definition is clear, although in practice, the quantification of the conventional specificity still remains challenging (). The conventional specificity requires comparison of the affinities of all the different protein receptors with the same protein ligand (). This makes the practical quantification of the specificity impossible, as the receptor universe is huge, and the information is often incomplete on the competitive alternatives. To circumvent the challenge, we have proposed a novel concept named as intrinsic specificity, which had been successfully applied in the receptorligand (where the ligand is small molecule and the receptor is the protein) system (). Here, we apply the concept to the proteinprotein system. The intrinsic specificity refers to the preference in affinity of a protein ligand binding to its protein receptor with a preferred pose over other poses (). Imagining the N-and C-terminus of multiple protein receptors is linked together, resulting in an effective single large receptor; then the conventional specificity can be transformed to the intrinsic specificity that a ligand binds to the large receptor covering the whole universe of proteins with a preferred pose over other poses (). The equivalence of conventional specificity and intrinsic specificity is under the assumption that the protein receptor is sufficiently large to represent the whole universe of proteins and their interfaces. In reality, there is only finite number of protein folds ($1300) in nature (). Thus, the protein receptor may not need to be infinitely large to represent the whole universe of proteins. A reasonable size of protein surface may provide a few of the diversified interfacial interactions presumably formed by the whole universe of proteins. The process of proteinprotein binding can be physically quantified and visualized as a funnel-like energy landscape towards the native binding state with local roughness along the binding paths (). The native conformation of the complex is the conformation with the lowest binding energy. The energies of the conformation ensemble follow a statistical Gaussian-like distribution. According to the theory of energy landscape, the intrinsic specificity ratio (ISR  E E
CONCLUSIONIn this work, we developed a scoring function for proteinprotein interactions, named as SPA-PP. The development strategy of SPA-PP takes into account of both specificity and affinity of proteinprotein binding. It represents a significant advance over the previous investigations on proteinprotein binding interactions and scoring functions, which only focused on affinity for development. Also, we used the largest set of high-quality proteinprotein structures so far for training the scoring function. It makes SPA-PP independent on the training set and more general for applications. The remarkable performance of SPA-PP was validated by testing the ability on the predictions of native pose and binding affinity. The success of SPA-PP demonstrates that the specificity is critical to the proteinprotein interactions and necessary to be incorporated to the scoring function and the computational design of the proteinprotein interactions. SPAPP is a kind of statistical pair-potentials, which are discrete potentials dependent on the distances between the interacting atom pairs. The statistical pair-potentials incorporate multiple energy terms, such as van der Waals interactions, electrostatic interactions and hydrophobic interactions, into one potential energy term. Therefore, the computational docking procedure with SPA-PP could cost less computational time if SPA-PP is implemented into the sampling and ranking of proteinprotein binding.) is 0.63 (statistical significance P50:001). The predicted affinity is obtained by scaling the binding scores with a linear equation:y  0.018  4.79, which is a fitting equation based on the experimental affinities