Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulators of biological processes in plants and animals. Recently, miRNA genes have been discovered, whose primary transcripts are spliced and which cannot be predicted directly from genomic sequence. Hence, more sophisticated programs for the detection of spliced miRNAs are required. Results: Here, we present the first method for the prediction of spliced miRNAs in plants. For a given genomic sequence, SplamiR creates a database of complementary sequence pairs, which might encode for RNAs folding into stem–loop structures. Next, in silico splice variants of database sequences with complementarity to an mRNA of interest are classified as to whether they could represent miRNAs targeting this mRNA. Our method identifies all known cases of spliced miRNAs in rice, and a previously undiscovered miRNA in maize which is supported by an expressed sequence tag (EST). SplamiR permits identification of spliced miRNAs for a given target mRNA in many plant genomes. Availability: The program is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are short (22 nt), non-coding RNAs which generally negatively regulate gene expression (). These short RNAs were first studied in Caenorhabditis elegans () and Drosophila melanogaster (), but the term miRNA was coined later (). Since their discovery, miRNAs have been identified in a number of animals, plants and viruses (). In plants and animals, miRNAs regulate many biological processes (;), while virus miRNAs mainly target host mRNAs involved in antiviral response, cell proliferation and apoptosis (). Plant miRNAs are key regulators of a variety of developmental processes, including root development (), vascular development (), flower development (), leaf morphogenesis () and phase change from vegetative to reproductive development (). In addition, plant miRNAs are crucial for controlling stress responses as well as nutrient homeostasis (). In plants, a miRNA gene is commonly transcribed by RNA polymerase II (), giving rise to a primary miRNA transcript (pri-miRNA), which folds into a stemloop structure (). Next, mainly unpaired nucleotides at the 3 and 5 ends are cleaved by a multiprotein complex, resulting in a pre-miRNA (). Pre-miRNAs feature a huge diversity of lengths (). Further processing of the premiRNA generates a miRNA:miRNA* duplex structure composed of the mature miRNA and its complementary part, the miRNA* (). This duplex exhibits high complementarity, including the standard Watson Crick as well as G:U wobble base pairs, with generally less than four mismatches, and rare and small asymmetric bulges (). The miRNA:miRNA* duplex is either exported to the cytoplasm, where it is unwound, or it is unwound in the nucleus and the mature miRNA is exported to the cytoplasm (). After incorporation into the RNA-induced silencing complex (RISC), the mature miRNA guides the recognition of the target mRNA, which then leads to post-transcriptional regulation of this mRNA (). Featuring standard and wobble base pairs, with usually less than four mismatches and few bulges, the miRNA is highly complementary to its target mRNA. This way, plant miRNAs generally guide mRNA cleavage (). The minimum length of mature miRNAs in plants is 16 nt (). Some primary transcripts of miRNAs contain introns (). In most published cases, the characteristic stemloop structure is encoded by one of the exons of the miRNA gene. Recently, however, intron-containing miRNA genes have been identified for which the stemloop structure cannot be predicted based on the unspliced primary transcript (hereafter referred to as pri U-miRNA) (). Several of these spliced miRNAs belong to the miR444 family which has only been identified in