SpliceSeq is a resource for RNA-Seq data that provides a clear view of alternative splicing and identifies potential functional changes that result from splice variation. It displays intuitive visualiza-tions and prioritized lists of results that highlight splicing events and their biological consequences. SpliceSeq unambiguously aligns reads to gene splice graphs, facilitating accurate analysis of large, complex transcript variants that cannot be adequately represented in other formats. Availability and implementation: SpliceSeq is freely available at
INTRODUCTIONThe majority of human genes can express alternative transcripts as a function of tissue type, developmental stage or physiological context, and aberrant splicing patterns can lead to disease, notably cancer. Nonetheless, most analysis pipelines remain tied to a one-gene, one-protein, one-function model despite the incisive, high-resolution data now provided by next-generation sequencing. Our web-based SpliceCenter resource () provides the laboratory biologist with a user-friendly resource for visually analyzing the impact of splice variation on such technologies as reverse transcriptionpolymerase chain reaction (RTPCR), microarrays, RNAi and peptide agents. However, it does not provide tools for detailed analysis and visualization of the rich, new data from RNA-Seq. Hence, we have developed SpliceSeq to fill that gap. Several other analytical approaches have been used to analyze the relative abundance of various transcript isoforms in a sample using the short reads provided by RNA-Seq. See, e.g.. Those methods have generally predicted isoform expression levels by making probabilistic assignments of reads to matching isoforms, paying particular attention to reads that cross splice junctions. Some also include inferences from paired-end insert length. Those approaches have delivered ground-breaking results, but there are limitations. For example, many RNA-Seq analysis tools lack detailed protein annotations that can identify functional impacts of alternative splicing. Most serious, they do not readily handle genes with many densely distributed alternative splice paths or splice events separated by more than the read length (or insert length of paired-end reads). Those difficult cases seemed rare when we originally explored transcript databases such as RefSeq, but more comprehensive databases now show complex splicing patterns for the majority of multi-exon genes. In our own database of alternative splice forms, $54% of human genes have multiple alternative splice events separated by 4750 bases, the average paired-end insert length. Instead of probabilistically assigning reads across isoforms, we base our analysis on splice graphs. Splice graphs with exons as nodes and splices as edges have been used previously in transcriptome analysis for assembly of ESTs and short reads (). We use them here because short reads can be mapped unambiguously to the graph, providing an intuitive, composite view of alternative splicing. Furthermore, recursive graph traversal weighted by depth of read provides a prediction of the protein sequences produced by the isoforms, and UniProt annotations indicate functional elements impacted by the splicing. Our initial implementation of SpliceSeq includes only human genes and is designed to detect only known exons and splices. However, the algorithms are equally applicable to other species and can be extended to detect novel splice events. Those extensions are in development.