SPRINT is a software package that performs computational multistate protein design using state-of-the-art inference on probabilistic graphical models. The input to SPRINT is a list of protein structures, the rotamers modeled for each structure and the pre-calculated rotamer energies. Probabilistic inference is performed using the belief propagation or A* algorithms, and dead-end elimination can be applied as pre-processing. The output can either be a list of amino acid sequences simultaneously compatible with these structures, or probabilistic amino acid profiles compatible with the structures. In addition, higher order (e.g. pairwise) amino acid probabilities can also be predicted. Finally, SPRINT also has a module for protein side-chain prediction and single-state design. Availability: The full C++ source code for SPRINT can be freely downloaded from
INTRODUCTIONThe objective of engineering a protein to perform a particular biological function is called protein design. The design problem is usually restricted to the search for an amino acid sequence that assumes a target 3D structure (), presuming that it will possess a corresponding function. This paradigm typically assumes a fixed protein backbone, and the amino acid side chain conformations to be considered are taken from a library of energetically favorable empirical observations termed rotamers (). Lastly, pairwise atomic energy functions are used to assign pseudo-physical energetic values to pairs of rotamer atoms (), and thus employed to score the compatibility of a particular sequence to the structure. Recently, researchers have moved toward more realistic modeling of proteins in their cellular environment by generalizing the design concept to explicitly seek sequences that adopt multiple functional states, (). We have achieved this goal by formulating protein design using probabilistic graphical models (). Here, we * To whom correspondence should be addressed. present the software built to this end, SPRINT (side-chain prediction inference toolbox for multistate protein design). SPRINT accepts as input multiple protein structures, their respective rotamers and their pre-calculated energies. Furthermore, it is explicitly built to provide the user with a global view of the sequence space compatible with these multiple structures, since we have shown the significance of predicting both multiple low-energy sequences () and amino acid profiles ().