Sequencing by hybridization to oligonucleotides has evolved into an inexpensive, reliable and fast technology for targeted sequencing. Hundreds of human genes can now be sequenced within a day using a single hybridization to a resequencing microarray. However, several issues inherent to these arrays (e.g. cross-hybridization, variable probe/target affinity) cause sequencing errors and have prevented more widespread applications. We developed an R package for resequencing microarray data analysis that integrates a novel statistical algorithm, sequence robust multi-array analysis (SRMA), for rare variant detection with high sensitivity (false negative rate, FNR 5%) and accuracy (false positive rate, FPR 1×10 −5). The SRMA package consists of five modules for quality control, data normalization, single array analysis, multi-array analysis and output analysis. The entire workflow is efficient and identifies rare DNA single nucleotide variations and structural changes such as gene deletions with high accuracy and sensitivity. Availability: http://cran.r-project.org/,
INTRODUCTIONTo understand the specific DNA variants that contribute to the inheritance of human diseases is a major goal of human genetics (). Medical resequencing has greatly accelerated the identification of disease-related DNA variants. Resequencing array technology utilizes differential hybridization of target DNA to oligonucleotide probes to decode individual DNA sequences. It has been successful in identifying novel and very rare variants in disease candidate genes (). However, low-variant frequency (1/1000 bp), variable data quality as well as technical and experimental limitations have the potential to create sequencing errors. There is a need for improved statistical methods for arraybased resequencing. We have recently developed sequence robust multi-array analysis (SRMA) for resequencing array data analysis * To whom correspondence should be addressed.(). By improving preprocessing procedures, borrowing strength across samples and targeting unique features of rare variations, SRMA achieved a false discovery rate of 2% (FPR 1.210 5 , FNR 5%), which is comparable to that of nextgeneration sequencing technologies. Here, we have established an R package (R Development Core) called 'SRMA' that fully implements these methods and provides an automated analysis pipeline for medical resequencing array data with high accuracy of calling rare variants. (System requirements, file structure, package installation, and a description of the analysis of resequencing array data are provided in the Supplementary Material.)