Motivation: Fabrication of synthetic biological systems is greatly enhanced by incorporating engineering design principles and techniques such as computer-aided design. To this end, the ongoing standardization of biological parts presents an opportunity to develop libraries of standard virtual parts in the form of mathematical models that can be combined to inform system design. Results: We present an online Repository, populated with a collection of standardized models that can readily be recombined to model different biological systems using the inherent modularity support of the CellML 1.1 model exchange format. The applicability of this approach is demonstrated by modeling gold-medal winning iGEM machines. Availability and Implementation: The Repository is available online as part of http://models.cellml.org. We hope to stimulate the worldwide community to reuse and extend the models therein, and contribute to the Repository of Standard Virtual Parts thus founded. Systems Model architecture information for the Systems Model described here, along with an additional example and a tutorial, is also available as Supplementary information. The example Systems Model from this manuscript can be found at http://models.cellml.org/workspace/bugbuster. The Template models used in the example can be found at
INTRODUCTIONSince the discovery of recombinant DNA technology, scientists have manipulated living organisms in order to produce biofuels, drugs or other biomaterials. Over the years, a biotechnology industry has emerged exploiting this technology and delivered a number of successes (). However, in most cases, the development of biotechnology applications has been the product of a manually driven, trial-and-error-based approach. In order to achieve efficient and reliable biological system fabrication, synthetic biology promotes the application of * To whom correspondence should be addressed. engineering principles such as abstraction, standardization and characterization to biology (). These concepts have proven to be crucial in other engineering disciplines in order to mature from 'dedicated craftsmanship' to successful industrial solutions. Arguably, to date in synthetic biology, the best example of such an approach is the Registry of Standard Biological Parts (SBPs) (). The Registry (http://www.partsregistry.org) provides a collection of standard DNA parts (BioBricks) () that have been designed to facilitate DNA assembly. Through the International Genetically Engineered Machine (iGEM, http://www.igem.org) competition, the use of the Registry has clearly demonstrated the power of standardization in biology to stimulate innovation and creativity (). A critical lesson learnt from other engineering disciplines is that mathematical modeling can dramatically increase the speed of the design process as well as reducing the cost of development. A 'Holy Grail' in biological modeling would be to design reliable and robust biological systems in silico prior to fabrication, just as aeronautic engineers design planes using their computer-aided design (CAD) tools. CAD tools are already being developed in order to ease the process of designing synthetic biological systems (). However, they currently lack access to modular and reusable mathematical models. Accurate models of SBPs are required for the prediction of system function, but it is also crucial that mechanisms to easily compose part models into complete systems are available. Therefore, in parallel to increasing the number of parts available and characterizing them experimentally, a logical extension to the Registry would be to build a repository of modular models of SBPs to complement the physical part Registry (). Here we describe the development of an online repository of Standard Virtual Biological Parts (SVPs)mathematical model components describing the function of SBPs which can be downloaded, extended and recombined to aid the design, in silico, of synthetic biological systems. Repositories of models are already available, such as the BioModels database (). However, the curated models in this database are monolithic and do not allow further composition without some modification. Previous work has already explored the importance of modularity in modeling biological systems. For example, Rodrigo et al. reports the use of a library of parts encoded in SBML (). The composition of models has also been demonstrated using the modeling system ProMoT () and the Modeling Description
DISCUSSIONWe have developed the first iteration of standardized modular synthetic biology models in CellML, incorporating both common genetic elements and biochemical reactions. We show how models using these formulations can be reused and extended to compose complex models during the design of synthetic biological systems, without modification of the aggregated models. We provide an online repository for collaborative development of further model components and Systems Models by the global synthetic biology modeling community. We demonstrate the applicability of this approach by modeling examples from award-winning iGEM machines. We hope to foster the development of more Template, SVP and Systems Models by the modeling community and their storage online. As more models are contributed, and existing models have their parameters refined, the usefulness of the Repository will increase. This work provides an initial set of designs for Templates and SVPs, and as such does have some limitations. For maximum benefit from modeling, the kinetic parameters for each SVP would have to be accurately measured. This issue is common to the entire field of synthetic biology. Some important measures such as PoPs are not directly measurable at present. However, as is already occurring in the related field of Systems Biology, we expect accurate measurement for the parameterization of system components to be conducted as a process of iterative refinement. The development of a library of promoters with quantified activity was recently demonstrated (), and specification sheets for biological parts have also been proposed and developed (). Efforts such as these may help to standardize the SBPs that we are modeling with SVPs. Pragmatically, useful formulations may depend upon what is measurable. Until measurement issues are resolved it may be that the optimal mathematical formulation for synthetic device design purposes remains unknown with complete certainty.Appropriate formulations may also be refined by the investigation of non-specific effects in genetic systems. Designed systems are sometimes partially limited in that we do not fully comprehend all the interactions in a living cell, particularly if the cell grows and divides. In the future, we hope to extend our models to realistically simulate the system output against the background functions of the cell on a time scale comparable with the cell's growth cycle. To facilitate this, it would be useful to develop experiment-based tests for SVPs and Systems Models built from themdoes the biological system actually behave as the simulation? If not, why not? Pursuing these questions may lead to further insights both for modeling and biological science. At the technical level, there are also opportunities for the development of more tools to enhance model construction. The encapsulation of Template models by SVPs is currently done interactively in environments such as OpenCell, but could in theory be performed automatically by software, prompting the user only for the appropriate parameterization. The connection of the SVPs in the Systems Model is done by forming interface components. These components tend to follow a standard format and could also be produced semi-automatically by software with the user specifying which SVPs to connect and the positive or negative effect of the associated fluxes on particular species. This work presents the foundation on which tools catering for these more streamlined processes could be built. To aid computational composition and synthetic biology CAD, annotation of the models with metadata to give them semantic meaning would be of great benefit. A research project in this area is currently underway. While at present, models link, where appropriate, to the Registry of SBPs, it would also be advantageous to link from the Registry to the SVP Repository. It may also be useful to link SVP models with other repositories besides the Parts Registry. For example, molecular species such as enzymes may benefit from having specific information associated with them (such as EC number or similar), which could be implemented via each species having its own SVP with metadata linking to the appropriate repository. Such metadata would facilitate much-needed computerassisted searching for appropriate SVPs for particular modeling projects (). In addition, currently SVPs can be combined in any order where the units of their connecting variables allow; however, aside from units checking it is up to the modeler to ensure that the connections 'make sense' with respect to the biological reality being modeled. Metadata and metadata-aware tools could potentially provide checking that SVP connections are biologically meaningful, reducing cognitive load on the modeler and structural modeling mistakes. Since, however, the supporting metadata specification is still being defined, these features have not been incorporated for this first design iteration. The CellML language is itself under development, with proposals for version 1.2 being considered. Reusing SVP and Templates without modification has been demonstrated here through the use of flexible 'glue code', but reusing entire Systems Models, also without modification, may become possible through proposed enhancements borrowed from set theory. Another proposal concerns extending CellML simulators to enable stochastic simulation, which if implemented, would increase the applicability of SVPs still further. Finally, the CellML Model Repository is under continuous development, hence interface enhancements and new functionality