Motivation: A key goal of studying biological systems is to design therapeutic intervention strategies. Probabilistic Boolean networks (PBNs) constitute a mathematical model which enables modeling, predicting and intervening in their long-run behavior using Markov chain theory. The long-run dynamics of a PBN, as represented by its steady-state distribution (SSD), can guide the design of effective intervention strategies for the modeled systems. A major obstacle for its application is the large state space of the underlying Markov chain, which poses a serious computational challenge. Hence, it is critical to reduce the model complexity of PBNs for practical applications. Results: We propose a strategy to reduce the state space of the underlying Markov chain of a PBN based on a criterion that the reduction least distorts the proportional change of stationary masses for critical states, for instance, the network attractors. In comparison to previous reduction methods, we reduce the state space directly, without deleting genes. We then derive stationary control policies on the reduced network that can be naturally induced back to the original network. Computational experiments study the effects of the reduction on model complexity and the performance of designed control policies which is measured by the shift of stationary mass away from undesirable states, those associated with undesirable phenotypes. We consider randomly generated networks as well as a 17-gene gastrointestinal cancer network, which, if not reduced, has a 2 17 ×2 17 transition probability matrix. Such a dimension is too large for direct application of many previously proposed PBN intervention strategies.
INTRODUCTIONTo date, probabilistic Boolean networks () form one of the widely accepted mathematical models for cellular systems. One of their important applications is to design * To whom correspondence should be addressed. intervention strategies that beneficially alter cell dynamics through studying the long-run network behavior. Since the probabilistic description of a PBN is an ergodic and irreducible finite Markov chain (MC;), it possesses a steady-state distribution (SSD) reflecting its long-run dynamics. Different stochastic control policies have been employed to change the long-run dynamics so as to reduce the risk of entering aberrant states and thereby alter the extant cell behavior (); however, owing to the inherent computational complexity of optimal control methods using Markov chain theory, it is often computationally prohibitive to achieve optimal control policies for large networks (). Several approximate and greedy algorithms () have been proposed to find suboptimal solutions but many of them still have complexity that increases exponentially with the number of genes in the network. Hence, there is a need for size reducing mappings that produce more tractable models whose stationary control policies induce suboptimal stationary control policies on the original network. This article proposes a greedy procedure to reduce the network state space. We study the effects of the proposed reduction with respect to the changes of the long-run network dynamics and intervention performance of stationary control policies derived using long-run network dynamics. Whereas the available reduction mappings () consider deleting genes to reduce the state space, we focus on deleting states by changing the regulatory rules and thereafter the transition probability matrix of the original network, in a way that does not interfere with the trajectories of the critical states in the network, for example, its attractors. We reduce the state space based on the structure of the basins of attraction (BOAs) in a network. As the BOAs before and after this state reduction procedure remain similar, the long-run dynamics, especially the proportion of stationary masses for critical states, also remains similar. Hence, we can design stationary control policies on the reduced network based on long-run dynamics similar to those inand then, from these, induce stationary policies on the original network. Our in silico experiments show that the induced control policies achieve substantial beneficial shift of stationary mass of the original network toward desirable phenotypes.
DISCUSSIONUsing randomly generated networks as well as a larger, real-world network designed from a gastrointestinal cancer dataset (), we now study the effects of the proposed state reduction algorithm with respect to both the approximation of long-run dynamics and intervention performance.