Motivation: Understanding the substrate specificity of human immunodeficiency virus (HIV)-1 pro-tease is important when designing effective HIV-1 protease inhibitors. Furthermore, characterizing and predicting the cleavage profile of HIV-1 protease is essential to generate and test hypotheses of how HIV-1 affects proteins of the human host. Currently available tools for predicting cleavage by HIV-1 protease can be improved. Results: The linear support vector machine with orthogonal encoding is shown to be the best pre-dictor for HIV-1 protease cleavage. It is considerably better than current publicly available predictor services. It is also found that schemes using physicochemical properties do not improve over the standard orthogonal encoding scheme. Some issues with the currently available data are discussed. Availability and implementation: The datasets used, which are the most important part, are available at the UCI Machine Learning Repository. The tools used are all standard and easily available.
IntroductionGlobally, an estimated 35 million people were living with human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection at the end of 2012, and roughly as many have died of HIV-related illnesses since the beginning of the epidemic (). HIV-1 protease, also known as HIV-1 retropepsin (EC 3.4.23.16), is an aspartyl protease belonging to the retroviral protease (retropepsin) family. The protease plays a crucial role in the life cycle of HIV, the causative agent of acquired immune deficiency syndrome (AIDS); it cleaves the HIV-1 polyproteins in multiple sites to create mature protein components of the virions, the infectious HIV particles (). Because the formal discovery of HIV in the early 1980s and the ensuing characterization of HIV-1 protease, successful attempts have been made to create drugs that inhibit the protease (). These slow down or even stop the progression of HIV infection to AIDS (however, the effectiveness of the treatment can decrease with time due to mutations in the virus). Today, combinations of drugs with different mechanisms of action are often used to achieve high efficacy against the virus but as low toxicity as possible to the patient. Although HIV therapy is one of the most successful pharmacotherapeutical achievements in the history of medicine it is not curative, but rather transforms a deadly infection into a chronic one, often with a prolonged asymptomatic phase if properly treated. A reliable predictor of cleavage by HIV-1 protease can be used to aid in the identification of novel HIV-1 protease substrates in human host cells (cf.) and aid in the understanding of the specificity and the development of even more tightly fitting and more potent HIV-1 protease inhibitors in the future, but hopefully with less severe side effects, such as metabolic syndrome and gastrointestinal symptoms. The work may also be of help in prediction and understanding of other viral proteases in the future. The HIV-1 protease specificity is considered to be both broad and specific; it cleaves a variety of sequences but also processes the HIV-1 gag and gag-pol polyproteins accurately ().There are two different approaches to predicting cleavage by HIV-1 protease: molecular modeling and sequence analysis. It has been argued that the HIV-1 protease recognizes shape rather than a specific amino acid sequence (), which supports aiming for the molecular modeling approach. However, the method is cumbersome and no large scale study has been done on the accuracy of molecular modeling approaches so it is very unclear if the approach is, or will be, competitive with the sequencebased approach. This article demonstrates the current state-of-theart prediction, which uses the sequence-based approach. Several bioinformatics researchers have attacked this problem during the last 20 years, using a diversity of methods (for the most recent review see R gnvaldsson et al., 2007). It was early on claimed that the problem required non-linear methods. However, 10 years ago it was demonstrated that the relatively few experimental data (362 octamers at the time) did not support a non-linear model (R gnvaldsson and). Five years later, when more experimental data were available, linear methods [linear support vector machines (LSVMs)] still performed better than non-linear ones (). This was when the methods were evaluated through out-of-sample testing on a large dataset from human proteins (). It was therefore speculated (seefor the discussion) that linearity could be a characteristic for the HIV-1 protease cleavage problem. (Note that linear and non-linear relate to when the standard orthogonal encoding is used.) A number of papers have been published on the subject over the last 5 years. The most common theme in them is to introduce new features plus a feature selection scheme and show that this yields slightly better prediction accuracy when evaluated with cross-validation. Surprisingly few studies have used the experimental data from the article by, which is more than double the size of any other available dataset. Og  ul (2009) used variable context Markov chains () to construct a generative model for the HIV-1 cleavage specificity. He reported the highest ever prediction accuracies with this method, evaluated with cross-validation.created a number of different features and fused classifiers, among others using genetic programming (GP). Their proposed classifiers performed better than a non-optimized LSVM with standard encoding, when evaluated using cross-validation. Their software is available. Jaeger and Chen (2010) suggested new biophysical features and fused several classifiers [neural networks, support vector machines (SVMs) and decision trees]. They reported that they often achieved better performance than just using a single classifier from this, when evaluating with cross-validation.suggested a feature selection method where a multilayer perceptron was trained and then used to compute the effect of the different inputs so that the best inputs were selected. They reported that this gave a much smaller feature set and better prediction accuracy. They tested this on a small dataset with cross-validation.mapped the amino acid sequences to a local kernel space and reduced the dimensionality together with a LSVM classifier. They reported that this was better than other methods when evaluated using cross-validation.studied the specificity using cascade detection on two larger datasets and concluded that favorable cooperativity between sites is weak. Newell used the larger dataset from Schilling and Overall in his study. G k and O  zcerit (2012) studied several encoding schemes and suggested the OETMAP encoding scheme, based on amino acid features, together with a linear classifier. This encoding improved the prediction performance significantly compared with standard amino acid encodings when evaluated on two larger datasets using crossvalidation. G k and O  zcerit used the larger dataset from Schilling and Overall. Their encoding schemes are available on a web server (http://yufes.yalova.edu.tr/).presented a web server for predicting cleavage by many different proteases, using support vector regression together with many different features. Features were encoded with bi-profile Bayesian feature extraction and selected using a Gini score. They used the larger dataset from Schilling and Overall plus other published data on cleavage of full proteins. Their methods are available (https://prosper.erc.monash.edu.au/).used a correlation-based feature subset selection method combined with genetic algorithms to search for the best subset in a large set of features. This gave better performance than the standard methods when evaluated with cross-validation. O  zt rk et al. (2013) used a sequence representation and introduced a feature selection method (that removed features). They reported improved prediction results with this when tested with cross-validation on a small dataset with only cleaved octamers. Their software is designed to work with the Waikato Environment for Knowledge Analysis (WEKA) () and is available by email. In summary, many have claimed improvements over the LSVM using standard orthogonal encoding. However, few have taken the effort to check if their new features, feature selection method or model combination method really does better on out-of-sample data or if they are better than improvements suggested by others. This is a significant weakness since there is a real risk of being overly optimistic about one's own algorithm if one has access to the data that it is tested on. There are two motivations for mining HIV-1 protease cleavage data: one is to describe the available experimental data, e.g. with sequence motifs or cleavage rules, the other is to design a method for predicting new cleavage sites. In the latter case, which is by far the most common motivation, the test data must be different from the data used to train the algorithm. A correct evaluation of methods must be done on test data that have not in any way been involved in the training of the algorithms. This is typically not done.