Motivation: One of the difficulties in metagenomic assembly is that homologous genes from evolutionarily closely related species may behave like repeats and confuse assemblers. As a result, small contigs, each representing a short gene fragment, instead of complete genes, may be reported by an assembler. This further complicates annotation of metagenomic datasets, as annotation tools (such as gene predictors or similarity search tools) typically perform poorly on configs encoding short gene fragments. Results: We present a novel way of using the de Bruijn graph assembly of metagenomes to improve the assembly of genes. A network matching algorithm is proposed for matching the de Bruijn graph of contigs against reference genes, to derive gene paths in the graph (sequences of contigs containing gene fragments) that have the highest similarities to known genes, allowing gene fragments contained in multiple contigs to be connected to form more complete (or intact) genes. Tests on simulated and real datasets show that our approach (called GeneStitch) is able to significantly improve the assembly of genes from metagenomic sequences, by connecting contigs with the guidance of homologous genes—information that is orthogonal to the sequencing reads. We note that the improvement of gene assembly can be observed even when only distantly related genes are available as the reference. We further propose to use gene graphs to represent the assembly of reads from homologous genes and discuss potential applications of gene graphs to improving functional annotation for metagenomics. Availability: The tools are available as open source for download at
INTRODUCTIONMetagenomics, also called environmental sequencing, is the study of microbial genomes sampled directly from the environment. We are seeing more metagenomics projects than ever before, due to (i) advances in next-generation sequencing (NGS) technology, such as Roche/454 () and Illumina/Solexa (); (ii) the fact that only a few species can be cultured and studied using conventional microbiological techniques () and (iii) many studies that have shown the impact of the 'microbiome' (i.e. the entire set of genomes in a microbial community) on almost every aspect of life on Earth [e.g. microbes residing in the human body encode far more genes than the genes encoded by the human genome (. Metagenomics has been applied to many studies of natural environments () as well as human and animal associated microbiomes (; * To whom correspondence should be addressed.), providing an unprecedented opportunity to gain knowledge about the vast majority of uncultured microbial species. One of the first steps to analyzing metagenomic sequences is to assemble the reads. For example, reads sequenced from the Acid Mine Drainage dataset yielded two near-complete and three partial genomes (). This, however, is a very simple bacterial community; assembling sequences sampled from most whole microbial communities remains a challenging problem (). Since most metagenomic sequences are obtained using NGS technology, the traditional 'overlap-layout-consensus'approach may not be realistic due to the short reads. On the other hand, the de Bruijn graph approach (), which breaks the reads into k-mers and then constructs a de Bruijn graph on these k-mers, is difficult because of the mixture of genomic sequences from many species and the higher rate of NGS sequencing errors. As a result, it is difficult to assemble complete genomes from metagenomic sequences, even when the community structure is simplefor example, the Acid Mine Drainage dataset () contains merely five species, but yields only two nearly complete genomes. One of the characteristics of de Bruijn graph-based assemblers is that the resulting graph is usually very tangled, especially when sequencing errors exist. This greatly impedes the formation of long contigs, because the branches cannot be resolved. Moreover, k-mers from different regions or even from different species may be connected together, which further complicates the structure of the de Bruijn graph. As a result, many short contigs will be reported, which are often insufficient for downstream analysis, such as ab initio gene prediction in these short contigs (), or homology searches of the contigs (). For instance, the MetaHIT consortium only considered contigs of length 500 bp, which represented only 42.7% of the sequencing reads (proposed a gene-boosted assembly approach to improve assembly quality, which used proteins from reference genomes to recruit sequencing reads to fill in the gaps between contigs (2008). Combining this approach with several other strategies, they successfully produced 76 contigs from 8 27 900 33 bp reads obtained from Pseudomonas aeruginosa PAb1, with the largest contig being 512 638 bp. They also demonstrated that most of the genes in a newly sequenced bacterial strain can be assembled using the genome of another strain of the same species as the reference, using gene-boosted assembly. This approach, however, was only applied to single genome assembly problems. Metagenome assembly is more difficult, because of the presence of homologous genes from multiple species in the same community that may behave like repeats for assemblers. Hence, the success of the approach relies on the utilization of a closely related genome (e.g. the genome of the
DISCUSSIONWe present GeneStitch, which is based on a network matching algorithm, for inferring gene paths and gene graphs from the tangled de Bruijn graphs that result from assembly of metagenomic sequences. If we have prior knowledge of the taxonomic composition of a metagenomic dataset (e.g. through 16S rRNA gene profiling (), or taxonomic analysis using shotgun sequences ()), we can use genes from the most closely related species available as references for GeneStitch, considering that GeneStitch benefits more by using the most similar gene sequences as the reference. However, in principle, we can use a general dataset of genes (e.g. microbial genes in the NCBI nr dataset) as reference genes in GeneStitch, if we have no prior knowledge of the taxonomic composition of a metagenomic sample. For all tests that we performed, the application of GeneStitch greatly improves the assembly of genes, resulting in complete or nearly complete genes. The assembly of complete gene sequences is important because traditional metagenome sequencing projects are largely limited by the length of contigs and scaffolds, and small contigs are often difficult (if not possible) to use for subsequent functional analysis. We believe that our approach will increase the amount of information that can be gleaned from past and future genome and metagenome projects, by providing longer genes for analysis. We note that GeneStitch is able to improve the gene assembly even when only distantly related species are available as references, and when sequence depth is modest. This capability i367is especially important because sequenced bacterial or archaeal genomes are still limited and very closely related species (such as different strain of the same species) are not always available. GeneStitch greatly broadens the choice of reference species for gene annotation in metagenomic assemblies. Our approach can be conceived as a gene predictor that works with de Bruijn graphs for assembly, instead of linear sequences. In this sense, GeneStitch is fundamentally different from current gene predictors including FragGeneScan () and GLIMMER (). Note that gene paths are fundamentally different from the directed acyclic graphs used to represent exons (as nodes) and their connectivity (the edges) in predictors for eukaryotic genes (). We have also proposed a novel concept, the gene graph, to represent a collection of homologous genes in a metagenomic dataset. A gene graph may not include all similar (or homologous) genes in a metagenomic dataset, because we set the identity threshold to a relatively high value (e.g. 70%) in the process of constructing gene graphs. But it is not our goal to build comprehensive gene graphs; instead, we want to assemble metagenomic sequences into separate genes as long as wehave strong evidence the assembled genes contain no misassemblies. We note that GeneStitch cannot help with the assembly of novel genes that lack similarity with known genes. Although the gene graph is used to represent the cases where gene paths overlap with each othera non-conventional way of representing geneswe argue that gene graphs can be considered as single units for downstream functional analysis of metagenomes. For example, we can attempt to get all real genes from the gene graphs by walking all potential paths in the gene graphs and select those supported by reads. This approach is used by the Trinity assembler to find all spliced isoforms and transcripts of recently duplicated genes from transcriptomes (). Another application would be functional prediction, we can search an unknown gene against all gene graphs and determine which gene graph is most similar to this gene, in order to determine its function. Notably, other strategies have been used to improve metagenome assembly, for examples by merging assemblies from different assemblers or using the same assembler but with various parameter settings (); by recruiting reads to fill in gaps between contigs using tblastn searches against reference genes as i368
CONCLUSIONWe designed an approach to infer gene paths and gene graphs from a de novo assembled metagenomic dataset that each represents a gene or a single family of homologous genes. Each gene graph also generates a representative sequence that best represents the graph. We tested this approach on simulated datasets consisting of reads from one genome and the results are promisinglonger genes are assembled and more intact genes are retrieved, and there are almost no misassembled genes. We also tested it with a dataset from an artificial microbial community and found that we again assembled more complete genes. We expect that gene graphs can be used to improve metagenome assemblies and that gene graphs will be a useful resource for the functional annotation of metagenomic samples.