StochKit2 is the first major upgrade of the popular StochKit stochastic simulation software package. StochKit2 provides highly efficient implementations of several variants of Gillespies stochastic simulation algorithm (SSA), and tau-leaping with automatic step size selection. StochKit2 features include automatic selection of the optimal SSA method based on model properties, event handling, and automatic parallelism on multicore architectures. The underlying structure of the code has been completely updated to provide a flexible framework for extending its functionality. Availability: StochKit2 runs on Linux/Unix, Mac OS X and Windows. It is freely available under GPL version 3 and can be downloaded from http://sourceforge.net/projects/stochkit/. Contact
INTRODUCTIONTraditional deterministic representations of biochemical systems are useful when the interacting chemical species are present in high concentrations. However, many processes in systems biology are driven by reactions between chemicals with small copy numbers. These processes are inherently stochastic and often display behavior that cannot be captured by deterministic models. Gillespie's stochastic simulation algorithm (SSA) provides a method for generating trajectories that capture the stochastic behavior of biochemical models (). The SSA begins with a model of N chemical species {S 1 ,S 2 , ... ,S N } with associated discrete populations {x 1 ,x 2 , ... ,x N }. These species interact via M reaction channels {R 1 ,R 2 , ... ,R M }. Reaction R i is characterized by a stoichiometric vector denoted v i and a propensity function denoted a i. The stoichiometric vector describes the change in population that occurs when reaction R i fires. The propensity function describes the probability that reaction R i will occur in the next infinitesimal time interval dt. With a few simplifying assumptions, including spatial homogeneity, the evolution of the system can be represented as a Markov jump process that is described by the chemical master equation (CME). The CME is generally too complex to solve directly. The SSA is a Monte Carlo method that proceeds by simulating every reaction event in the system to generate exact trajectories of the CME. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Generally, an ensemble of trajectories is run to obtain an estimate of the probability distribution. Since Gillespie's pioneering work, there have been numerous advances in efficient exact SSA variants as well as approximate methods that sacrifice exactness in exchange for increased computational efficiency (e.g.). The StochKit2 software package allows practicing systems biologists to perform stochastic simulations of biochemical models. The simulation algorithms automatically detect and utilize multicore architectures for efficiency and perform consistency checks for reliability. The code has been built upon a carefully designed simulation framework to be easily extensible.