Motivation: The Expectation–Maximization (EM) algorithm has been successfully applied to the problem of transcription factor binding site (TFBS) motif discovery and underlies the most widely used motif discovery algorithms. In the wider field of probabilistic modelling, the stochastic EM (sEM) algorithm has been used to overcome some of the limitations of the EM algorithm; however, the application of sEM to motif discovery has not been fully explored. Results: We present MITSU (Motif discovery by ITerative Sampling and Updating), a novel algorithm for motif discovery, which combines sEM with an improved approximation to the likelihood function, which is unconstrained with regard to the distribution of motif occurrences within the input dataset. The algorithm is evaluated quantitatively on realistic synthetic data and several collections of characterized pro-karyotic TFBS motifs and shown to outperform EM and an alternative sEM-based algorithm, particularly in terms of site-level positive pre-dictive value. Availability and implementation: Java executable available for download at http://www.sourceforge.net/p/mitsu-motif/, supported on Linux/OS X. Contact: a.m.kilpatrick@sms.ed.ac.uk
INTRODUCTIONTranscription factor binding site (TFBS) motifs are short DNA sequence patterns that have important roles in genetic transcriptional regulation. These patterns are of considerable interest to biologists, as they are central to understanding the mechanisms of gene expression. The discovery and further analysis of TFBS motifs remains an important and challenging problem in bioinformatics [examples from the recent ENCODE project include; as a result, there is continued interest in developing algorithms for unsupervised discovery of TFBS motifs (). The majority of TFBS discovery algorithms are probabilistic algorithms, which search the input data (usually a collection of promoter regions of coregulated genes) for sequences that are statistically over-represented. Deterministic algorithms make up a large proportion of commonly used algorithms for motif discovery. The deterministic ExpectationMaximization (EM) algorithm is one of the earliest probabilistic motif discovery algorithms () and is the basis for a number of others, including the benchmark motif discovery algorithm MEME (). However, the EM algorithm has several well-known limitations. For example, the EM algorithm is highly sensitive to its starting parameters. Owing to this sensitivity and the use of a local search strategy, the EM algorithm cannot be guaranteed to converge to the global maximum of the likelihood function, instead converging to an insignificant local maximum or saddle point of the likelihood function. In general, the steps of the EM algorithm can become either analytically or computationally intractable in many practical situations. The stochastic EM (sEM) algorithm is motivated by the limitations of the deterministic EM algorithm, particularly the issues of intractability.note that the sEM algorithm is generally more successful than the EM algorithm owing to stochastic perturbations, which allow the sEM algorithm to escape stable fixed points of the EM algorithm such as insignificant local maxima of the likelihood function. In addition to this, retaining the underlying EM dynamics means that the sEM algorithm generally converges in a relatively small number of iterations in comparison with full stochastic methods. Stochastic variants of the EM algorithm have been applied to motif discovery previously; for example, the SEAM () and MCEMDA () algorithms. However, the power of sEM in a motif discovery context has not been fully explored. Most notably, these algorithms are limited to the 'one occurrence per sequence' (OOPS) model, which places a constraint on the distribution of motif occurrences within the input dataset. Further, algorithms based on stochastic variants of EM have so far not implemented features commonly found in other motif discovery algorithms, including the ability to automatically determine the most likely motif width from a range of plausible values. In this article, we present MITSU (Motif discovery by ITerative Sampling and Updating), a novel algorithm for TFBS motif discovery that combines a stochastic version of the EM algorithm with a derived dataset, which leads to an improved approximation of the likelihood function. Significantly, this likelihood function is unconstrained with regard to the number of motif occurrences in each input sequence. The algorithm also incorporates MCOIN, an information-based heuristic to automatically determine the most likely motif width (). MITSU is evaluated quantitatively on realistic synthetic data and several collections of previously characterized prokaryotic TFBS sequences and shown to outperform an EM-based algorithm and the SEAM algorithm, most notably in terms of site-level positive predictive value. The results of additional tests demonstrate that MITSU has significant advantages over current sEM-based approaches for motif discovery.