Motivation: The growing interest in the role of stochasticity in biochemical systems drives the demand for tools to analyse stochastic dynamical models of chemical reactions. One powerful tool to elucidate performance of dynamical systems is sensitivity analysis. Traditionally, however, the concept of sensitivity has mainly been applied to deterministic systems, and the difficulty to generalize these concepts for stochastic systems results from necessity of extensive Monte Carlo simulations. Results: Here we present a Matlab package, StochSens, that implements sensitivity analysis for stochastic chemical systems using the concept of the Fisher Information Matrix (FIM). It uses the linear noise approximation to represent the FIM in terms of solutions of ordinary differential equations. This is the first computational tool that allows for quick computation of the Information Matrix for stochastic systems without the need for Monte Carlo simulations.
INTRODUCTIONIn the past decade, dynamic modelling of biochemical systems using stochastic approaches has become increasingly popular as the role of stochastic effects has turned out to be significant for the functioning of living cells. The dynamical behaviour of such systems can not be understand by intuition alone but requires computational tools for the analysis. In the case of deterministic models sensitivity analysis is a concept that greatly helps to understand the dependance between parameter values and the dynamic outputs. Various software packages have become available to address this problem [e.g.; Rodriguez-Fernandez and Banga (2010); D.A.. The classical sensitivity coefficient can simply be understood as a derivative of an output Q with respect to a parameter . The behaviour of a stochastic system, however, is not defined by an observable Q that can be measured in a reproducible way. Instead it is defined by a distribution with density  from which measurements are taken. Therefore, there is a qualitative difference how outputs of stochastic and deterministic systems need * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to be quantified. In order to predict a change in the behaviour of a deterministic system resulting from a perturbation in a parameter it is possible to calculate the derivative. In case of a stochastic system one needs to see how a distribution changes. Changes in the distribution  with respect to a change in the parameter  are traditionally quantified as the expected value of a squared infinitesimal change in the logarithm of the density,This quantity is called the Fisher Information (FI) and requires the value of the parameter  to be known (or at least a plausible range). When calculated for a vector of parameters it is called Fisher Information Matrix (FIM). FI behaves locally as the Kullback Leibler divergence and is directly related to the curvature of the expected likelihood function, therefore it is a natural measure of local sensitivity [see Supplementary User Manual (UM)]. The possibility to evaluate Equation (1) for stochastic models of chemical kinetics has been previously achieved by the means of Monte Carlo simulation of model variables [see e.g.; Plyasunov and]. Recently we proposed to evaluate Equation (1) by approximating  through the linear noise approximation, and expressing the first two momements of  and their derivatives in terms of ordinary differential equations (ODEs). The applicability of FI extends much further than only to sensitivity analysis. It is a primary tool to study robustness, understood as stability of behaviour under simultaneous changes to model parameters; to guide optimal experimental design; and for identifiability analysis that determines whether certain parameters can be estimated from experimental data of a given type. Here we present a Matlab package, StochSens, which implements symbolic and numerical procedures to calculate the FIM for stochastic chemical kinetics models as proposed in. It is the first package that allows computation of the FIM without Monte Carlo simulations; calculations are therefore very efficient and can easily be repeated for different parameter sets and alternative versions of a model corresponding to different experimental setups. The algorithm for FIM computation is accompanied by functions for its analysis, visualization and comparison.
DISCUSSIONStochSens is a new, computationally efficient and extendable Matlab package for computation and analysis of FIM's for stochastic (and deterministic) dynamical models of chemical reactions. Compared to sensitivity packages for deterministic models it accounts for the information that is contained in the noise structure. This together with the high interest in stochasticity in biochemical systems imply that our package can find wide applicability and be a basis for further extensions.