Lysine succinylation orchestrates a variety of biological processes. Annotation of succi-nylation in proteomes is the first-crucial step to decipher physiological roles of succinylation implicated in the pathological processes. In this work, we developed a novel succinylation site online prediction tool, called SuccFind, which is constructed to predict the lysine succinylation sites based on two major categories of characteristics: sequence-derived features and evolutionary-derived information of sequence and via an enhanced feature strategy for further optimizations. The assessment results obtained from cross-validation suggest that SuccFind can provide more instructive guidance for further experimental investigation of protein succinylation. Availability and implementation: A user-friendly server is freely available on the web at: http://bio
IntroductionLysine succinylation is a novel identified PTMs pathway present in both prokaryotic and eukaryotic cells, which orchestrates a variety of biological processes. Succinylation was first discovered to occur at the active site of homoserine trans-succinylase (). With an antibody based enrichment strategy and MS-based proteomics,identified several dozens of succinylation sites in bacteria in 2011. Subsequent work recognized a number of succinylation sites in animal tissues () and on histones (). Recently, plenty of lysine succinylation sites were also identified in extracellular toxoplasma tachyzoites (). As the rapid development of sequencing techniques, identification and functional study of succinylation has emerged to be an intriguing topic and attracted much attention. But it is still unknown about the mechanism of succinylation as well as the succinyl donor to lysine remains, a global analysis of lysine succinylation in diverse organisms is still lacking. Yet annotation of succinylation in proteomes is a first-crucial step toward decoding protein function and understanding of their physiological roles that have been implicated in the pathological processes. For systematically investigating the lysine succinylation and its relevant function, a prerequisite is to establish a reliable and comprehensive dataset. However, while only a small amount of known succinylation sites was detected, experimental verification of succinylated substrates is labor-intensive, time-consuming and biased toward abundant proteins and proteotypic peptides. Thus, in silicon prediction of succinylation sites can serve as an alternative strategy for whole proteome annotation. We thus developed the SuccFind to determine whether a fragment which contains lysine residues can be succinylated or not, which is constructed to predict the lysine succinylation sites based on sequencederived features, and evolutionary-derived information of sequence and via a enhanced feature strategy for further optimizations. Coincidentally, when we built SuccFind to predict protein succinylation sites, another protein succinylation site predictor calledSucPred was reported as well (). But when we try to visit the web server of SucPred, the website is not accessible. So there is no way to compare with it. Since SucPred only considered unilateral features with no further optimization to build prediction models, features might contain redundant and noisy information and some other potential value information will inevitably lose. Here, we have considered different aspects of the features and via a two-step feature selection strategy to carry further optimizations when developed the model so our system can provide a more accurate and comprehensive prediction performance as well as a more stable and sustained online service.