Motivation: The metabolic pathway is an important biochemical reaction network involving enzymatic reactions among chemical compounds. However, it is assumed that a large number of metabolic pathways remain unknown, and many reactions are still missing even in known pathways. Therefore, the most important challenge in metabolomics is the automated de novo reconstruction of metabolic pathways, which includes the elucidation of previously unknown reactions to bridge the metabolic gaps. Results: In this article, we develop a novel method to reconstruct metabolic pathways from a large compound set in the reaction-filling framework. We define feature vectors representing the chemical transformation patterns of compound–compound pairs in enzymatic reactions using chemical fingerprints. We apply a sparsity-induced classifier to learn what we refer to as enzymatic-reaction likeness, i.e. whether compound pairs are possibly converted to each other by enzymatic reactions. The originality of our method lies in the search for potential reactions among many compounds at a time, in the extraction of reaction-related chemical transformation patterns and in the large-scale applicability owing to the computational efficiency. In the results, we demonstrate the usefulness of our proposed method on the de novo reconstruction of 134 metabolic pathways in Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG). Our comprehensively predicted reaction networks of 15 698 compounds enable us to suggest many potential pathways and to increase research productivity in metabolomics. Availability: Softwares are available on request. Supplementary material are available at
INTRODUCTIONThe importance of metabolomics research is growing fast in recent years. Metabolomics can provide sensitive and thorough metabolic signatures as effective biomarkers for the diagnosis of diseases such as cancer. The knowledge about metabolism (e.g. reaction networks, fluxes, drug metabolism) has proven useful for performing rational drug design (). Some metabolites of plants and fungi have long been of vital use to drug leads in the pharmaceutical industry (). In addition, systematic simulation studies on metabolic pathways rely on accurately predefined reaction network models. However, a large number of metabolic pathways remain unknown, and many reaction steps are still missing even in known pathways. For example, detailed analysis of human metabolome () implies that even wellinvestigated species like human have many unknown metabolic pathways. As the experimental verification of reaction networks remains daunting, there is a strong need to develop in silico methods to infer unknown but possible metabolic pathways. A variety of computational methods for reconstructing metabolic pathways have been developed thus far, which can be categorized into the three frameworks, as shown in. The most traditional one is 'reference-based framework' (). In this framework, many known pathways are collected from literatures to construct a combined pathway, named 'reference pathway', which only considers chemical transformations without distinguishing the difference of organisms (, left). For an organism of interest, enzyme genes are assigned to appropriate positions in predefined reference pathways based on orthologous information (and some other evidences if available) about genes across different species () (, right). However, such reference pathway information is available only for a limited set of genes, enzymes and metabolites, and it is inherently incomplete owing to the lack of experimentally identified compounds and homology information. These missing reaction steps may cause misleading interpretations in practice. Therefore, the most important challenge in metabolomics research is de novo reconstruction of metabolic pathways, which includes the elucidation of previously unknown reactions to bridge the metabolic gaps (). The previous studies on the de novo reconstruction can be classified based on different aspects, i.e. whether it automatically hypothesizes the compounds that are not identified yet, whether it relies on pre-defined chemical transformation patterns and whether the target (and/or source) compound(s) has/have to be specified, as shown in. One framework is 'compoundfilling framework' (), which predicts pathways by hypothesizing intermediate compounds necessary between the source and target compounds. Many of the prediction systems based on this framework are not freely available (), but there are some free *To whom correspondence should be addressed.
CONCLUSIONWe presented a novel de novo metabolic pathway reconstruction method in the reaction-filling framework. The proposed method does not require manually predefined rules, i.e. it automatically learns a statistical model to predict enzymatic reaction likeness for any compound pairs based on all possible existing knowledge. This method can deal with any compounds (even if they are not found in KEGG) as long as they are represented in chemical fingerprints. An advantage of our method lies in finding potential reactions among many compounds at a time. The previous study () used graph isomorphism, which contributed to the accuracy of the method but took much more calculation time. The current study used fingerprints (instead of graph isomorphism) to improve calculation time and deal with vast amount of compounds. For more accurate prediction, we are going to develop the two-step prediction, where fingerprints are applied to filter out vast amount of negative pairs in the first step, and graph isomorphism is applied to refine the predicted pairs in the second step. In principle, our method (i.e. reaction-filling framework) is insufficient to correctly predict a multi-step pathway, which can be better dealt with the other framework (i.e. compoundfilling framework). This does not imply which framework is superior; these two frameworks can complement each other for more successful de novo metabolic pathway reconstruction. We assume the proposed study is an important preliminary step toward the hybrid framework. Further improvement of the de novo metabolic pathway reconstruction method would enable the on-demand integration of reaction network and gene (or protein) networks derived from metabolome and other omics, e.g. genome, transcriptome and proteome.