The large amount of data produced by proteomics experiments requires effective bioinformatics tools for the integration of data management and data analysis. Here we introduce a suite of tools developed at Vanderbilt University to support production proteomics. We present the Backup Utility Service tool for automated instrument file backup and the ScanSifter tool for data conversion. We also describe a queuing system to coordinate identification pipelines and the File Collector tool for batch copying analytical results. These tools are individually useful but collectively reinforce each other. They are particularly valuable for proteomics core facilities or research institutions that need to manage multiple mass spectrometers. With minor changes, they could support other types of biomolecular resource facilities. Availability and Implementation: Source code and executable versions are available under Apache 2.0 License at http://www.vicc .org/jimayersinstitute/data/ Contact:
INTRODUCTIONMass spectrometry (MS)-based proteomics offers a remarkably powerful technology for identification of proteins in complex biological samples. Bioinformatics tools are essential to this process (). Proteomics services are often provided through shared MS instrumentation with the support of external computing resources. Core facilities often struggle to manage the volume of data that these instruments can generate, resulting in irregular or non-existent backup plans and long delays separating sample receipt and information release for end-users. Existing freely available tools such as TPP (), CPAS () and CPFP () focus only on data analysis by providing a set of tools for peptide identification and validation. A Laboratory Information Management System may offer some capabilities for integration of instrument data backup and data analysis, but these services usually catalog samples and bench procedure more effectively than they manage bioinformatics workflows, with little support for proteomics studies. We addressed * To whom correspondence should be addressed. these challenges by developing a suite of tools to support production proteomics. These tools are in daily use at the Vanderbilt Mass Spectrometry Research Center and the Jim Ayers Institute for Precancer Detection and Diagnosis. They are now freely available with source code to commercial, government and academic users.