Motivation: In a typical gene expression profiling study, our prime objective is to identify the genes that are differentially expressed between the samples from two different tissue types. Commonly, standard analysis of variance (ANOVA)/regression is implemented to identify the relative effects of these genes over the two types of samples from their respective arrays of expression levels. But, this technique becomes fundamentally flawed when there are unaccounted sources of variability in these arrays (latent variables attributable to different biological, environmental or other factors relevant in the context). These factors distort the true picture of differential gene expression between the two tissue types and introduce spurious signals of expression heterogeneity. As a result, many genes which are actually differentially expressed are not detected, whereas many others are falsely identified as positives. Moreover, these distortions can be different for different genes. Thus, it is also not possible to get rid of these variations by simple array normalizations. This both-way error can lead to a serious loss in sensitivity and specificity, thereby causing a severe inefficiency in the underlying multiple testing problem. In this work, we attempt to identify the hidden effects of the underlying latent factors in a gene expression profiling study by partial least squares (PLS) and apply ANCOVA technique with the PLS-identified signatures of these hidden effects as covariates, in order to identify the genes that are truly differentially expressed between the two concerned tissue types. Results: We compare the performance of our method SVA-PLS with standard ANOVA and a relatively recent technique of surrogate variable analysis (SVA), on a wide variety of simulation settings (incorporating different effects of the hidden variable, under situations with varying signal intensities and gene groupings). In all settings, our method yields the highest sensitivity while maintaining relatively reasonable values for the specificity, false discovery rate and false non-discovery rate. Application of our method to gene expression profiling for acute megakaryoblastic leukemia shows that our method detects an additional six genes, that are missed by both the standard ANOVA method as well as SVA, but may be relevant to this disease, as can be seen from mining the existing literature. Availability: The R code for our method, SVA-PLS, is freely available on the Supplementary website http://www.somnathdatta.org/Supp/ SVPLS/ Contact:
INTRODUCTION
DISCUSSIONHidden array-specific (subject-specific) factors in microarray analyses may constitute a substantial source of gene expression heterogeneity. The effects of these factors are not detectable from outside and also cannot be removed by any standard normalizing method. But they can perturb the primary signals of differential gene expression and lead to erroneous conclusions on the detection of differentially expressed genes. This problem is relatively unexplored in gene expression studies. In this article, we have developed a novel technique for identifying these latent factors by using PLS and applied it to a wide variety of simulation settings characterizing different patterns of viable gene expression profiling studies. We have shown that the technique of PLS, by virtue of its basic principle of projecting to latent structures, can produce precise estimates of the hidden factors causing the spurious signal heterogeneity. These estimates (surrogate variables) when incorporated in the ANOVA model enhances detection of the genevariety interaction effects thereby leading to a large gain in sensitivity of the underlying bioinformatics screening procedure. The resulting method, SVA-PLS, also yields a reasonably high specificity for a wide range of data structures, thereby ensuring an efficient control over the incorrect detection of many silent genes. The FDR is marginally higher for our method, but is sufficiently well compensated by a substantially large gain in the margin of sensitivity. Overall, SVA-PLS emerges as the winner when compared with two other competing methods in a range of controlled settings. The utility of our method in detecting potentially interesting genes missed by other methods is also demonstrated by an analysis of a real dataset on AMKL patients. Unaccounted sources of variation (hidden variables) in a model can adversely affect the outcomes of statistical tests. This is particularly true if the unmeasured variables are confounders, i.e. correlated with the variables in the model whose effects on the outcomes are being tested. In a simple two group comparison, a standard assumption for the validity of the commonly used two sample pooled t-test is that the error variances in the two groups (populations) are equal. A departure from this model assumption is known as the BehrensFisher problem and has received a great deal of assumption in the statistics literature [see e.g.. A common solution to this problem is to use separate variance estimates for the error distribution in two groups and resort either to an approximate t-distribution () or to a large sample normal approximation of the distribution of the test statistics. Indeed, if one assumes (as in our formulation) the existence of an unmeasured factor contributing to the outcome in a linear model formulation of the two sample problem that is equated with the model errors, one gets a model with unequal variances in the two groups. Thus, our method may provide an alternative solution to Page: 806 799806