Motivation: The design of de novo circuits with predefined performance specifications is a challenging problem in Synthetic Biology. Computational models and tools have proved to be crucial for a successful wet lab implementation. Natural gene circuits are complex, subject to evolutionary tradeoffs and playing multiple roles. However, most synthetic designs implemented to date are simple and perform a single task. As the field progresses, advanced computational tools are needed in order to handle greater levels of circuit complexity in a more flexible way and considering multiple design criteria. Results: This works presents SYNBADm (SYNthetic Biology Automated optimal Design in Matlab), a software toolbox for the automatic optimal design of gene circuits with targeted functions from libraries of components. This tool makes use of global optimization to simultaneously search the space of structures and kinetic parameters. SYNBADm can efficiently handle high levels of circuit complexity and can consider multiple design criteria through multiobjective optimization. Further, it provides flexible design capabilities, i.e. the user can define the modeling framework, library of components and target performance function(s). Availability and Implementation: SYNBADm runs under the popular MATLAB computational environment , and is available under GPLv3 license at https://sites.
IntroductionComputer-aided design (CAD) is fundamental in modern engineering. During the last decade, many efforts in the context of Synthetic Biology have been dedicated to incorporate CAD as part of the forward-engineering design cycle (). Marchisio (2014) and Huynh and Tagkopoulos (2014) offer a comprehensive review of computational tools for the design of synthetic biological circuits. The GEC language byand the Parts  Pools framework by) are pioneering works conceptualizing modular computational design of synthetic gene circuits. Both tools use search algorithms not based on optimization to explore designs compatible with prespecifications. Automated design of biocircuits was first formulated as an optimization problem in Optcircuit (Dasika and Maranas, including those non-intuitive or previously unknown want to be considered, allowing identifying new design principles. Here we present SYNBADm (SYNthetic Biology Automated optimal Design in Matlab), a software toolbox that enables to automatically find biocircuit designs with pre-specified performance starting from a library of biological components, using global optimization. SYNBADm is developed aiming for optimality, modularity, biological diversity, and a high flexibility regarding the target behaviours and components. SYNBADm includes state of the art global mixed-integer nonlinear programming (MINLP) optimization solvers with proven efficiency in biocircuit design (Otero-Muras and). It handles high levels of circuit complexity, and incorporates multi-objective design to find gene-circuits with best trade-offs between multiple conflicting criteria.