Motivation: In systematic biology, one is often faced with the task of comparing different phylogenetic trees, in particular in multi-gene analysis or cospeciation studies. One approach is to use a tanglegram in which two rooted phylogenetic trees are drawn opposite each other, using auxiliary lines to connect matching taxa. There is an increasing interest in using rooted phylogenetic networks to represent evolutionary history, so as to explicitly represent reticulate events, such as horizontal gene transfer, hybridization or reassortment. Thus, the question arises how to define and compute a tanglegram for such networks. Results: In this article, we present the first formal definition of a tanglegram for rooted phylogenetic networks and present a heuristic approach for computing one, called the NN-tanglegram method. We compare the performance of our method with existing tree tanglegram algorithms and also show a typical application to real biological datasets. For maximum usability, the algorithm does not require that the trees or networks are bifurcating or bicombining, or that they are on identical taxon sets.
INTRODUCTIONIn systematic biology, one is often faced with the task of comparing different phylogenetic trees, in particular in multi-gene analysis or cospeciation studies (). One way to visualize similarities and differences is to draw two phylogenetic trees as rooted trees side by side and to draw lines (which we will call connectors) between taxa that correspond to each other in the two trees, see. Such a depiction is called a tanglegram and different variations of the problem of computing an optimal tanglegram have been studied in the literature. For example, a number of articles () consider the One-Tree Crossing Minimization (OTCM) and the Two-Tree Crossing Minimization (TTCM) problems that both aim at minimizing the number of crossings between connectors. In the former problem, the layout of one of the trees is fixed and that of the other is mutable whereas in the latter formulation the layout of both trees are allowed to be changed. For binary trees, OTCM is solvable in O(nlogn) time (), while TTCM is NP-complete (). In, the authors describe a 'seesaw' heuristic for the TTCM problem for * To whom correspondence should be addressed.. A tanglegram between a phylogeny of sections of Ficus (a) and that of their associated genera of pollinating wasps (b). Adapted from (). binary (or bifurcating) trees, which operates by repeatedly solving the OTCM problem, each time switching the roles of the two trees. A branch-and-bound approach for binary trees that works in O(n 3 ) time and gives a 2-approximation for complete binary trees is presented in. A generalization of the algorithm to unbalanced binary trees is described in, though in this case the approximation factor does not hold. In addition, this article gives an ILP formulation and an exact branch-and-bound algorithm for binary trees, where the latter has a worst-case running time of O(n 2 +n2 2n ). Other approaches use fixed-parameter tractability (FPT) parameterized by the number k of connector crossings (). A generalization to nonbinary trees is discussed in. The only algorithm that is able to compute tanglegrams for binary trees with many-to-many connections is described in. Their algorithm requires O(k log 2 k/loglogk) time (where k is the number of connectors) in the case that one tree is fixed. Additionally, they present some alternating and local search strategies for the TTCM problem. While evolutionary histories are usually described by rooted phylogenetic trees, in some cases rooted phylogenetic networks may provide a more accurate evolutionary scenario, especially when mechanisms such as horizontal gene transfer, hybridization, recombination, reassortment or incomplete lineage sorting have played a role in shaping the history. There is currently much research on the development of computational methods for computing rooted phylogenetic networks, for an overview see Huson and Scornavacca (2011a);. The goal of this article is to introduce the concept of a tanglegram for rooted phylogenetic networks and to provide a useful heuristic for computing such tanglegrams. Unlike trees, rooted phylogenetic networks are not necessarily planar and so the definition of an optimal tanglegram is not immediately obvious for them. Our heuristic does not require that the networks are bifurcating orPage: i249 i248i256