Motivation: MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are important regulatory molecules. A critical step in elucidating miRNA function is identifying potential miRNA targets. However, few reliable tools have been developed for identifying miRNA targets in plants. Results: Here, we developed a Smith–Waterman-like alignment tool in order to accurately predict miRNA targets. Dynamic programming was used to build a score matrix based on the complementarity of nucleotides in order to trace the optimal local alignments. Important parameters, such as maximum mismatches and maximum consecutive mismatches between miRNAs and their targets, were also used for filtering the optimal local alignments. Almost all of the parameters in this alignment tool can be adjusted by users. Compared to other target prediction tools, Target-align exhibits strong sensitivity and accuracy for identifying miRNA targets. More importantly, Target-align can identify multi-target sites as well potential for non-cleaved targets sites by change the default settings. Windows, web and command-line versions were developed to better serve different users.
INTRODUCTIONMicroRNAs (miRNAs) are an extensive class of small regulatory molecules that post-transcriptionally regulate gene expression by either cleaving mRNA transcripts or by repressing protein translation. Currently, a total of 16 978 miRNAs have been deposited in the miRNA database, miRBase (). Of these, 2600 are from plants. Although increasing evidences have demonstrated that miRNAs play important roles in plant growth and development, the functions of the majority of these miRNAs remains unknown mainly due to a lack of knowledge of miRNA targets. Although many computational tools have been developed for predicting animal miRNA targets, few tools are available for identifying plant miRNA targets (). There are currently three tools [miRU (), Helper tools () and TAPIR (available for predicting plant miRNA targets; however, these programs have a limited set of options that allow the user to adjust the search criteria. Previous studies demonstrated that most plant miRNAs