Motivation: Massive amounts of high-throughput genomics data profiled from tumor samples were made publicly available by the Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA). Results: We have developed an open source software package, TCGA2STAT, to obtain the TCGA data, wrangle it, and pre-process it into a format ready for multivariate and integrated statistical analysis in the R environment. In a user-friendly format with one single function call, our package downloads and fully processes the desired TCGA data to be seamlessly integrated into a computational analysis pipeline. No further technical or biological knowledge is needed to utilize our software , thus making TCGA data easily accessible to data scientists without specific domain knowledge. Availability and implementation: TCGA2STAT is available from the https://cran.r-project.org/web/ packages/TCGA2STAT/index.html.
IntroductionOver the last decade, The Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) consortium has measured large-scale genomics and clinical profiles of cancer patients so that scientists can study tumor genomes and decipher the genetic underpinnings of cancer. The TCGA data can be downloaded from web portals or via web services, such as the TCGA data portal (https://tcga-data.nci.nih.gov/tcga/), cBio (), canEvolve (), or Broad Institute GDAC Firehose (http://gdac.broadinstitute.org/). However, manual download of this massive data is time consuming and web service calls like the firehose_get function require additional program installation and technical setup. Most importantly, these two approaches cannot be easily integrated into a framework for statistical analysis. Many extra steps and technical knowledge of molecular platform data formats are needed to wrangle and pre-process the data before it can be statistically analyzed. Further, this process must be repeated when new data versions or additional samples become available, hindering efforts at version-control and reproducible research. Others have provided software to obtain the TCGA data. cBio, for example, provides an R and Matlab package but was not designed to be used for genome-scale data analysis. It requires input of a list of genes from users and thus limits the exploratory use of the data. Another R package, RTCGAToolbox downloads TCGA data from Firehose (), but the downloaded data is not preprocessed into data formats conducive for multivariate statistical analysis. Further, linking and merging functions necessary for integrated statistical analyses such as sample matching across multiple platforms and merging clinical and molecular data are not available in this package. Because of these problems, use of the TCGA data can be limited to those with domain expertise, rendering the data inaccessible for general data scientists. In response, we have developed an R packageTCGA2STAT that makes the TCGA data in the open access data tier easily accessible to all by downloading, wrangling and pre-processing the data into a data matrix or list of matrices ready for multivariate or integrated statistical analyses. The package imports both molecular profiles and clinical data of more than thirty cancer types profiled with more than eleven high-throughput genomics platforms, including microarray, sequencing, methylation array, SNP array and array-CGH (See a full list in vignette). The imported molecular profiles and clinical data are automatically combined into a matrix for easy supervised analysis. Further, we provide functions for linking and merging samples from different molecular platforms that are necessary for integrated analysis. Most importantly, our package has one simple interface to perform all of these functions. The ease of obtaining this big biological data will encourage computational scientist to mine the TCGA data which in turn will bring new insights and breakthroughs in cancer research.