Motivation: Time-evolving differential protein–protein interaction (PPI) networks are essential to understand serial activation of differentially regulated (up-or downregulated) cellular processes (DRPs) and their interplays over time. Despite developments in the network inference, current methods are still limited in identifying temporal transition of structures of PPI networks, DRPs associated with the structural transition and the interplays among the DRPs over time. Results: Here, we present a probabilistic model for estimating Time-Evolving differential PPI networks with MultiPle Information (TEMPI). This model describes probabilistic relationships among network structures, time-course gene expression data and Gene Ontology biological processes (GOBPs). By maximizing the likelihood of the prob-abilistic model, TEMPI estimates jointly the time-evolving differential PPI networks (TDNs) describing temporal transition of PPI network structures together with serial activation of DRPs associated with tran-siting networks. This joint estimation enables us to interpret the TDNs in terms of temporal transition of the DRPs. To demonstrate the utility of TEMPI, we applied it to two time-course datasets. TEMPI identified the TDNs that correctly delineated temporal transition of DRPs and time-dependent associations between the DRPs. These TDNs provide hypotheses for mechanisms underlying serial activation of key DRPs and their temporal associations. Availability and implementation: Source code and sample data files are available at
INTRODUCTIONMany cellular events involve serial activation of cellular processes during which genes/proteins associated with the processes are up-or downregulated. Differential proteinprotein interaction (PPI) networks (DNs) have been used to delineate PPIs (edges) among differentially regulated nodes (DRNs), such as up-or downregulated genes or proteins. The DNs have been considered more effective for understanding the differences between two conditions, compared with non-DNs (). However, the DNs delineate no temporal transition of the DRNs and/or their edges to represent serial activation of cellular processes over time. Thus, time-evolving differential PPI networks (TDNs) have been introduced to delineate (i) temporal changes in abundances or activities of DRNs (node transition), and/or (ii) formation of new edges for the DRNs and disappearance of existing edges over time (edge transition). The TDNs are essential to understand serial activation of differentially regulated cellular processes (DRPs) during a cellular event and their underlying mechanisms. Time-course gene expression analysis can provide temporal changes in abundances of the DRNs (). Several interaction assays, such as yeast two-hybrid () and mass spectrometrybased tandem affinity purification () can be used to measure PPIs among the DRNs. However, it is still challenging to experimentally identify temporal transition of the edges among the DRNs because of the limited coverage of the interactomes detected by these assays (von). The limitation of the experimental methods prompted us to develop a computational method to estimate TDNs. Many methods for estimation of dynamic gene regulatory networks have been developed (). However, estimation of temporal transitions of differential PPI networks (i.e. TDNs) has been rarely studied. A couple of methods have been developed to identify differential PPI networks, which can be then used to estimate TDNs. First, a simple method to infer DNs using timecourse gene expression data identifies DRNs over time and constructs a template PPI network with the known PPIs among all the DRNs (). TDNs can be then constructed by selecting the interacting DRNs with significant expression changes at each t from the template PPI network. Second, principal network analysis (PNA) identifies differential expression patterns over time and then selects DRNs and their edges (known PPIs between the DRNs) showing the differential expression patterns (). A principal subnetwork (PS) is then constructed using both DRNs and edges selected for each differential expression pattern. Finally, TDNs can be constructed by selecting the edges in PSs for which the linked DRNs show significant expression changes at each t. Functional interpretation of the inferred TDNs is important to understand temporal transition of the DRPs. In most of the network inference methods, it is commonly performed independently from network inference using post hoc analyses of Gene Ontology biological processes (GOBPs) of the nodes in the inferred networks (). For example, the method proposed byclusters the nodes in timeevolving networks based on the similarity of temporal transitions of their edges and then links these clusters to cellular functions *To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The Author 2014. Published by Oxford University Press. This is an Open Access article distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution Non-Commercial License (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc/3.0/), which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com using GOBPs. However, none of the methods estimating DNs or TDNs integrates functional information, such as GOBPs, during the network inference such that the inferred TDNs can represent directly temporal transition of differentially regulated GOBPs and time-dependent interplays between the GOBPs, thereby facilitating functional interpretation of the TDNs. Here, we introduce a probabilistic model for estimating TimeEvolving differential PPI networks with MultiPle Information (TEMPI). Although many methods have used probabilistic modeling for estimating network structures (), a unique aspect of our model is that it models additionally probabilistic dependencies of GOBPs with network structures and time-course global data. By maximizing the likelihood function of the probabilistic model, TEMPI jointly estimates the TDNs showing temporal transitions of network structures with temporal activation of the GOBPs and their temporal interplays. During the network inference, TEMPI infers edges not included in the known PPIs, whereas most of the previous methods (e.g. PNA) select a subset of PPIs for estimation of TDNs from the known PPIs.