Motivation: Cryo electron tomography (CryoET) produces 3D density maps of biological specimen in its near native states. Applied to small cells, cryoET produces 3D snapshots of the cellular distributions of large complexes. However, retrieving this information is non-trivial due to the low resolution and low signal-to-noise ratio in tomograms. Current pattern recognition methods identify complexes by matching known structures to the cryo electron tomogram. However, so far only a small fraction of all protein complexes have been structurally resolved. It is, therefore, of great importance to develop template-free methods for the discovery of previously unknown protein complexes in cryo electron tomograms. Results: Here, we have developed an inference method for the template-free discovery of frequently occurring protein complexes in cryo electron tomograms. We provide a first proof-of-principle of the approach and assess its applicability using realistically simulated tomograms, allowing for the inclusion of noise and distortions due to missing wedge and electron optical factors. Our method is a step toward the template-free discovery of the shapes, abundance and spatial distributions of previously unknown macromolecular complexes in whole cell tomograms.
INTRODUCTIONCryo electron tomography (cryoET) enables the 3D visualization of a cell's interior under close to live conditions (). Such tomograms are essentially 3D representations of the entire proteome providing a snapshot of the distributions of protein complexes and their interaction networks (). However, retrieving shape information and distributions of macromolecular assemblies is not trivial due to the low signal-to-noise ratio (SNR), missing data and nonisotropic resolution, and the fact that individual macromolecules are difficult to recognize in a highly crowded environment (). So far, the identification of macromolecular complexes is accomplished mostly by template matching methods (where the signals representing the density map of a known protein complex structure are correlated to the signals in the cryoET map. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.The cross-correlation between the template and tomogram is calculated for each position and every possible orientation. Peaks in the resulting cross-correlation function across the whole tomogram may indicate positions occupied by the particular complex. A major drawback, however, is that template matching cannot discover yet structurally unknown complexes. So far only a relatively small fraction of large protein complexes have been structurally resolved. Furthermore, recent work has shown that the quaternary structure of large protein complexes varies considerably across different organisms () and available reference structures might therefore not be applicable to the desired organism. Even if a template structure is available, the template-based methods may fail if the template structure is in a different conformation or is bound to additional proteins than the target complexes in the tomogram. As a consequence, template-based methods may fail in detecting an unbiased atlas of the spatial arrangement of all complexes in a cell (i.e. a cellular proteome 'atlas'). It is, therefore, of great importance to develop template-free methods for the detection of macromolecular complexes in cryo electron tomograms. Such methods will allow not only the discovery of the shapes of unknown macromolecular complexes but also allow detecting their positions and orientations in the cryo electron tomograms. The key problem in a template-free approach is to identify frequently occurring density patterns in cryo electron tomograms. A pattern is defined by voxel regions with similar intensity structures, which appear multiple times at different position in the tomogram. Such frequently occurring patterns represent objects of biological interest. In this article, we focus on patterns that correspond to protein complexes. Once identical complexes are discovered, their subtomograms can be locally aligned and their density distribution averaged producing a density map of the complex with improved SNR. Identifying recurrent patterns in cryo electron tomograms is challenging because neither the composition nor the total number of the patterns is known. Moreover, cryo electron tomograms are of very low resolution (4 nm), low SNR and are subject to distortions due to electron optical effects. Therefore, traditional methods in computer vision derived for high resolution and high SNR 3D object recognition usually cannot be directly applied to cryo electron tomograms (). Here, we propose a step-wise approach for classifying cryo electron tomograms into recurrent density patterns (). First, an initial classification is generated based on rotation-invariant features of the tomogram. In the second step, this initial classification is refined using a Gaussian Hidden Markov Random Field (GHMRF) model. As an inference method, GHMRF models have shownrobustness in 2D image segmentations at relatively high noise levels (). Here, we extend the GHMRF framework to the classification of recurrent patterns in 3D cryoET maps, which contain high levels of noise and distortions. In this article, we provide the first proof of principle of the method, and demonstrate its applicability for the detection of frequently occurring protein complexes in noisy density maps with relatively high accuracy. We test our approach on realistically simulated cryo electron tomograms including low resolution, high levels of noise and distortions due to missing wedge effects and electron optical factors.