Text mining from the biomedical literature is of increasing importance, yet it is not easy for the bioinformatics community to create and run text mining workflows due to the lack of accessibility and interoperability of the text mining resources. The U-Compare system provides a wide range of bio text mining resources in a highly interoperable workflow environment where workflows can very easily be created, executed, evaluated and visualized without coding. We have linked U-Compare to Taverna, a generic workflow system, to expose text mining functionality to the bioinformatics community.
INTRODUCTIONOwing to the large and rapidly growing body of literature in the biological sciences text mining approaches are increasingly important for the extraction and collation of data. The collation of text mining data with bioinformatics databases is a separate topic () which space precludes enlarging on here. Yet many text mining methods are difficult to integrate with other bioinformatics tools as development tends to focus upon mining performance more than implementing accessible interfaces. U-Compare () is an all-in-one text mining system based on the UIMA (Unstructured Information Management Architecture) framework (). U-Compare mainly consists of two parts: the world-largest readyto-use UIMA component repository, and an all-in-one text mining platform. In text mining data structures tend to be more complex (e.g. phrase structures) than in bioinformatics so interoperability, which guarantees data type compatibility as implemented in U-Compare, is required to create text mining workflows easily. With text mining workflows simplified, users would naturally seek integration of text mining workflows with other bioinformatics resources. Taverna * To whom correspondence should be addressed.() is a generic workflow construction system widely used in bioinformatics. We have developed mechanisms that allow users to embed any U-Compare workflow in a Taverna workflow. As U-Compare is designed to facilitate the construction of text mining workflows, it is far simpler to expose a complete U-Compare workflow to Taverna than to construct the equivalent workflow from individual components within Taverna, which lacks text mining specific data structures. It is therefore the easiest way to add text mining functionality to Taverna.