TFInfer is a novel open access, standalone tool for genome-wide inference of transcription factor activities from gene expression data. Based on an earlier MATLAB version, the software has now been extended in a number of ways. It has been significantly optimised in terms of performance, and it was given novel functionality, by allowing the user to model both time series and data from multiple independent conditions. With a full documentation and intuitive graphical user interface, together with an in-built data base of yeast and Escherichia coli transcription factors, the software does not require any mathematical or computational expertise to be used effectively. Availability: http://homepages.inf.ed.ac.uk/gsanguin/TFInfer.html Contact:
INTRODUCTIONTranscription regulatory networks play a fundamental role in mediating external signals and coordinating the response of the cell to its changing environment. Recent technological advances in molecular biology, such as ChIP-on-chip and ChIP-seq, are uncovering an increasing amount of data about the static structure of these networks, providing us with information about interactions between promoters and specific transcription factors (TFs). However, despite these advances, intracellular concentrations of active TF proteins remain very challenging to measure directly in a dynamic fashion, thus limiting our ability to understand the dynamics of transcriptional regulation. To obviate these problems, several research groups have proposed statistical approaches that infer TF activity levels by combining connectivity data about the structure of the regulatory network with microarray data (e.g.). In this note, we present a novel implementation of one of these methods () which makes it freely available to the academic community in an intuitive, user-friendly platform. The method employs a linear approximation (in log space) to the dynamics of transcription and is * To whom correspondence should be addressed. based on a state space model of the following formHere, y n (t) is the mRNA log expression level for gene n at time t, X is a binary connectivity matrix (assumed known) encoding whether gene n is bound by TF m, b nm encodes the regulatory strength with which TF m affects gene n and c m (t) is the (log) concentration of active TF m at time t; the other terms are used to model noise and biases. The model places Gaussian prior distributions over the concentrations c m (t) and strengths b nm and uses a factorized variational approximation to infer posterior distributions given mRNA time course observations. Notice that the probabilistic nature of the model means that noise is treated in a natural and principled way, and estimates of the quantities of interest are always associated with a measure of the corresponding uncertainty. Since only the product of b nm and c m (t) appears in the likelihood, there is a sign ambiguity in the inferred quantities [see online tutorial andfor further discussion]. While the approach does rely on a simplified model of transcription, the model's results have been shown to capture important physiological effects which have led to the formulation and experimental validation of several hypotheses (). However, the model was until now only available as working code in MATLAB, requiring expert intervention to be used which resulted in significant bottlenecks in the analysis pipeline. We have now produced a new release which presents several significant advantages over the previous version: @BULLET it is open source, and significantly more efficient computationally; @BULLET it is fully documented and has an intuitive Graphical User Interface (GUI);
CONCLUSIONStatistical methods for inferring TF activities are an important area of research in computational biology due to their ability to extract information which is not readily available through standard experimental practice. We believe that the time has arrived for these methods to become standard software used in biological laboratories to complement experimental work, much in the way that sequence alignment tools are now routinely used by experimentalists. By providing a simple yet powerful implementation of an already tried and tested method, we hope TFInfer will become accessible and useful to a wide community of scientists working on gene regulation. Funding: University of Sheffield Director of Research devolved fund (to H.A., G.S. and J.G.). M.D.R. and J.G. thank the BBSRC for support through the SysMO initiative (www.sysmo.net) and are members of the SysMO-SUMO consortium.