The anisotropic network model (ANM) is one of the simplest yet powerful tools for exploring protein dynamics. Its main utility is to predict and visualize the collective motions of large complexes and assemblies near their equilibrium structures. The ANM server, introduced by us in 2006 helped making this tool more accessible to non-sophisticated users. We now provide a new version (ANM 2.0), which allows inclusion of nucleic acids and ligands in the network model and thus enables the investigation of the collective motions of protein–DNA/RNA and –ligand systems. The new version offers the flexibility of defining the system nodes and the interaction types and cutoffs. It also includes extensive improvements in hardware, software and graphical interfaces. Availability and implementation: ANM 2.0 is available at http://anm.csb.
IntroductionThe last decade has seen a remarkable increase in the number of studies that explore biomolecular systems dynamics using coarsegrained normal mode analysis, prompted by the introduction and establishment of elastic network models (ENMs). ENMs are efficient and accurate frameworks for robust predictions of cooperative, often functional, movements under equilibrium conditions (). More recently the low frequency modes predicted by ENMs were further shown to be useful in applications that extend beyond equilibrium motions, such as efficient sampling of conformational space, mapping of trajectories between known states, structure refinement and molecular docking (see, e.g.). A series of web servers have been developed to assist in the evaluation of normal modes either at atomic level [e.g. MoViES (), NOMAD-Ref () and NMSim (, or at a coarse-grained level, often using ENMs [e.g. ElNmo (), WEBnm@ (), iGNM (), AD-ENM (http://enm.lobos.nih.gov), and Promode Elastic (. Among ENMs, the anisotropic network model (ANM) and similar residue-based spring-and-node models, introduced 15 years ago (), have found wide applications in molecular and structural biology due to their simplicity, yet proved successful for predicting the directions of large-scale functional motions in accord with experimental observations (). Despite the simple theory behind the model, applying the code and exploring the results require some knowledge in command line scripting and molecular graphics. The ANM server, we introduced in 2006 () was also intended to fill this gap for users with little background in computational biology. It essentially allowed exploration of the dynamics in one button clickupon inputting the name of the Protein Data Bank (PDB) file (or coordinate files in PDB format) of the structure of interest. Nine years later, we now present an improved version, ANM 2.0, of the server, which includes, alongside with hardware and software upgrades, significant improvement in the functionality and capabilities of the site, in particular the extension from proteinsonly to biomolecular complexes and assemblies with DNA, RNA and ligands.