Heterogeneity and latent variables are now widely recognized as major sources of bias and variability in high-throughput experiments. The most well-known source of latent variation in genomic experiments are batch effects—when samples are processed on different days, in different groups or by different people. However, there are also a large number of other variables that may have a major impact on high-throughput measurements. Here we describe the sva package for identifying, estimating and removing unwanted sources of variation in high-throughput experiments. The sva package supports surrogate variable estimation with the sva function, direct adjustment for known batch effects with the ComBat function and adjustment for batch and latent variables in prediction problems with the fsva function. Availability: The R package sva is freely available from http://www .bioconductor.org.
INTRODUCTIONHigh-throughput data are now commonly used in molecular biology to (i) identify genomic features associated with outcomes and (ii) build signatures for prediction. These goals are complicated by the presence of latent variables or unwanted heterogeneity in the high-throughput data. Batch effects are the most widely recognized potential latent variable in genomic experiments. The impact of batch effects can be severe, potentially completely compromising biological results (). Furthermore, batch effects are not the only potential source of latent variation that may compromise the statistical or biological validity of a study (). Here we introduce the sva package for identifying and removing batch effects and other unwanted sources of variation. The sva package contains methods for removing artifacts both by:(i) identifying and estimating surrogate variables for unknown * To whom correspondence should be addressed. sources of variation in high-throughput experiments () and (ii) directly removing known batch effects using ComBat (). Removing batch effects and using surrogate variables have been shown to reduce dependence, stabilize error rate estimates and improve reproducibility (). Finally, the sva package includes the only publicly available function, fsva, for identifying and removing latent variables in genomic/epigenomic prediction problems.
DISCUSSIONWe have introduced the sva package, including the popular ComBat function for removing batch and other unmeasured or unmodeled sources of variation. We have also introduced the first function for removing batch effects in genomic prediction problems. The sva package is freely available from the Bioconductor website and is compatible with widely used differential expression software such as limma ().