Motivation: Protein sequence and structure representation and manipulation require dedicated software libraries to support methods of increasing complexity. Here, we describe the VIrtual Constrution TOol for pRoteins (Victor) Cþþ library, an open source platform dedicated to enabling inexperienced users to develop advanced tools and gathering contributions from the community. The provided application examples cover statistical energy potentials, profile–profile sequence alignments and ab initio loop modeling. Victor was used over the last 15 years in several publications and optimized for efficiency. It is provided as a GitHub repository with source files and unit tests, plus extensive online documentation, including a Wiki with help files and tutorials, examples and Doxygen documentation. Availability and implementation: The Cþþ library and online documentation, distributed under a GPL license are available from URL: http://protein.bio.unipd.it/victor/.
IntroductionStructural bioinformatics methods require valid software libraries to represent and manipulate proteins efficiently. A number of widely used tools have been developed over the years to visualize proteins, e.g. Chimera (), Swiss-PdbViewer (), MolIDE () and VMD () to name a few. Software libraries to manipulate proteins efficiently provide basic data representation and more advanced functionality with a different focus each. ESBTL () is mainly a Protein Data Bank (PDB) file parser. Biskit () additionally provides functionality for analysis of molecular dynamics simulations, while PTools () focuses on molecular docking. OpenStructure () places more attention on structure visualization and energy calculation. The latter is also supported by MSL () and Tinker (), while BALL () in addition provides many advanced optimization algorithms.) extracts sequence information from the protein structure and can be used as an interface to several available third-party tools. The critical assessment of techniques for protein structure prediction (CASP) series of experiments () demonstrates that structure prediction is increasingly becoming an engineering problem, where sophisticated methods have to be combined into extensive pipelines to provide state-of-the-art results (). This has raised the barrier for entry into the field to a point where little new developments are possible, considering that most software libraries used in CASP are proprietary and not available as open source. Here, we propose the open-source VIrtual Constrution TOol for pRoteins (Victor) C library as a way to mitigate this problem. Victor is both an efficiently designed C library, able to manipulate protein structures with minimal computing time, and a collection of advanced components for protein sequence and structure manipulation. In particular, Victorprovides three sample applications: profileprofile sequence alignments (), statistical potentials () and loop modelling (). Each of these three applications has been extensively described in the literature and is beyond the scope of this article. To the best of our knowledge, neither is available as an open-source C library yet. Profileprofile sequence alignments, in particular, have been widely used to improve target-template alignment in CASP (). Victor is composed of 60 000 lines of code and still expanding as it is used in the main author's teaching. It was developed inhouse over the last 15 years with the contribution of tens of developers and has reached a high level of maturity. Victor is released to provide a platform for contributions from the interested community. It provides extensive online material in the form of a Wiki with help files, tutorials, Doxygen documentation and a list of applications built using Victor can be accessed from the URL: http://protein.bio. unipd.it/victor/. The actual GitHub repository with C source files, a precompiled Ubuntu 64-bit version and unit tests are available from URL: https://github.com/BioComputingUP/Victor.