The development of bioinformatic solutions for microbial ecology in Perl is limited by the lack of modules to represent and manipulate microbial community profiles from amplicon and meta-omics studies. Here we introduce Bio-Community, an open-source, collaborative toolkit that extends BioPerl. Bio-Community interfaces with commonly used programs using various file formats, including BIOM, and provides operations such as rarefaction and taxonomic summaries. Bio-Community will help bioinformaticians to quickly piece together custom analysis pipelines and develop novel software. Availability an implementation: Bio-Community is cross-platform Perl code available from http://search.cpan.org/dist/Bio-Community under the Perl license. A readme file describes software installation and how to contribute.
INTRODUCTIONSequencing is common in most fields of biological research, and the throughput of modern platforms is orders of magnitudes higher than traditional Sanger sequencing (). The BioPerl bioinformatic toolkit () has attracted a large community of users and developers and has become critical in many sequencing projects by allowing quick code development and interaction between programs using incompatible file formats. In microbial ecology, sequencing is used routinely for 16S rRNA gene amplicon surveys (), metagenomics () and metatranscriptomics (). Because most microorganisms remain uncultivated (Rappend), culture-independent molecular surveys are essential for the characterization of environmental microbial communities. However, they require large computational resources, novel bioinformatic tools and elaborate pipelines. Many tools have been developed to analyze the resulting sequence data. For example, libraries written in Python () and R () provide blocks for building bioinformatic software. QIIME () and mothur () are dedicated packages with scripts to build complete analysis pipelines, but they use incompatible file formats. Here, we introduce Bio-Community, a set of format-agnostic modules and scripts to parse and manipulate taxonomic or functional microbial community profiles.