Motivation: Inference of gene regulatory networks from high throughput measurement of gene and protein expression is particularly attractive because it allows the simultaneous discovery of interactive molecular signals for numerous genes and proteins at a relatively low cost. Results: We developed two score-based local causal learning algorithms that utilized the Markov blanket search to identify direct regulators of target mRNAs and proteins. These two algorithms were specifically designed for integrated high throughput RNA and protein data. Simulation study showed that these algorithms outperformed other state-of-the-art gene regulatory network learning algorithms. We also generated integrated miRNA, mRNA, and protein expression data based on high throughput analysis of primary trophoblasts, derived from term human placenta and cultured under standard or hypoxic conditions. We applied the new algorithms to these data and identified gene regulatory networks for a set of trophoblastic proteins found to be differentially expressed under the specified culture conditions.
IntroductionComplex and adaptive biological systems exhibit homeostatic resilience. They are also capable of adopting a new steady state in response to endogenous or exogenous cues, and must therefore harbor robust transcriptional and translational regulatory networks. Network signals are transmitted within the cell, tissue or organismal environment. MicroRNA regulatory networks represent an important component of the adaptive cellular response (De Lella). There are extensive descriptions of the derivation of miRNA regulatory networks using experimental or computational methods. Experimental approaches are based on profiling and manipulation of signals, such as miRNAs knockdown/ overexpression and assessment of mRNA expression changes, or on enrichment approaches, where miRNAs and mRNAs are pulled down with the Argonaute 2 protein, as in HITS-CLIP () or PAR-CLIP experiments (). These approaches are used for searching miRNA-mRNA binding sites and the interactions among the selected transcripts. Computational methods, such as TargetScan (), miRDB () and PicTar (), are largely based on in silico strategies, where the miRNA's mRNA targets are predicted by thermodynamic analysis of miRNA sequence and V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com evolutionary conserved potential binding sites (e.g. in the 3 0 UTR) with the mRNA transcripts. Each of these approaches has advantages and disadvantages. For example, the experimental approaches can definitively address the regulatory relations between miRNAs and target mRNAs, and hence tend to serve as a gold standard, yet they are also expensive and tedious. In addition, enrichment for miRNA and mRNA by pull-down approaches may not imply a functional interaction. In silico approaches are fast and relatively cheap, but may provide an extensive list of possible miRNA-mRNA interactions, and fall short of inferring dynamic relations between miRNAs and mRNAs in any specific cell type or tissue. Unlike the experimental and the in silico approaches, the statistical approaches derive regulatory relations among miRNAs and mRNAs through analysis of miRNA and mRNA expression data. In particular, linear regression-based methods have been employed in the search of miRNAs that directly regulate targeted mRNAs in a specific system (). In these methods, the log expression of an mRNA is assumed to be expressed as a linear combination of the log expression of miRNAs targeting that mRNA, and/or the product of the log expression of the targeting miRNAs and Argonaute transcripts. Various model selection methods, including stepwise model selection using information criterion score, L 1 norm regularization based Lasso algorithm (), can be used to identify miRNAs that are significant predictors of target mRNAs. These selected miRNAs are assumed to be regulators of the target mRNA. The main advantages of these regression-based methods are that (i), they can utilize observational expression data that were generated for other purposes in order to derive the miRNA regulatory network for a particular system, and (ii), they can be used, with little or no modification, to identify the targets of any non-coding RNAs (ncRNAs). However, a major weakness inherent to the implementation of these methods to miRNA regulatory networks is their inability to distinguish between (partial) correlation and causation. Therefore, even when the assumptions of these algorithms were satisfied, miRNAs discovered using these algorithms will not only contain species that regulate target mRNAs, but also miRNAs concomitantly regulated with the target mRNA or with the protein product of the target mRNA. See a hypothetical miRNA/mRNA/protein regulatory network in Supplementary. In the past two and half decades, there have been rapid developments in research on learning causal relations from observational data (). A variety of causal learning algorithms have been proposed, including score-based algorithms, constraint-based algorithms, local learning algorithms, algorithms allowing latent variables, cyclic causal relations, time-series data and non-Gaussian numeric data (). These causal learning algorithms seem particularly suitable for inferring gene regulatory networks from high throughput gene expression data. However, applying causal learning algorithms to the construction of gene regulatory networks raises two major obstacles: (i) the regulatory networks are extremely complex, involving thousands of mRNAs, ncRNAs, proteins, and other molecular species, and (ii), the sample size of the ncRNA, mRNA and protein expression data may be small, often magnitudes less than the number of analyzed variables. In this article, we propose two new causal learning algorithms for inference of local ncRNA-mRNA-protein regulatory networks. Given a target mRNA/protein, these algorithms identify the molecular species that directly regulate the target, and the molecular species that are directly regulated by the target. These algorithms use a score-based, local learning strategy to address the challenges of a large number of ncRNA-mRNA-protein sets in the network. The first algorithm, called the Markov Blanket Search for mRNA Regulatory Networks (MBSmRN), requires knowledge of the molecular species that are directly regulated by the target molecule, and is specifically designed for identifying direct regulators of mRNAs. The second algorithm, called the Markov Blanket Search for Non-Gaussian Integrated Genomic data (MBSNIG), requires the expression data for the target molecular species to be 'count data' (e.g. sequencing count data for miRNA/mRNA expression, and mass spectral count data for protein expression), and can be applied to ncRNA-mRNA-protein expression data generated from most experimental designs. We evaluated the performance of these two algorithms using simulated data, and compared them with two representative algorithms, the general purpose Max-Min Hill-Climbing (MMHC) algorithm for local causal discovery (), and the Lasso regression based algorithm for miRNA regulatory networks (). The MMHC algorithm starts with a constraint based local learning algorithm, MaxMin Parents and Children (), to derive for each variable, a list of candidate parents and children (CPC) of that variable. This algorithm then orients and, possibly, trims the edges connecting the target variable and its CPC using a score based hill-climbing algorithm. The Lasso regression-based algorithm selects a set of miRNAs and proteins that best predict the expression of the target mRNA/protein using the Lasso-based feature selection method. The selected miRNAs/proteins are considered the direct regulators of the target mRNA/protein. We also applied our new algorithms to an integrated miRNA-mRNA-protein expression data set from experiments using primary human placental trophoblasts that were exposed for 72 h to standard culture conditions or to hypoxia (O 2  1%), which mimics physiologically relevant placental injury (). We selected 78 target mRNA/protein pairs and, for each of them, identified the miRNAs and proteins that directly regulated the target mRNA and protein.
ApplicationFrom the integrated miRNA-mRNA-protein dataset for trophoblasts cultured in standard or hypoxic conditions, we detected the expression of 231 miRNAs, 26 223 mRNAs and lincRNAs, and 3268 proteins. Among them, we identified 215 miRNAs and 20 381 mRNAs and lincRNAs that were differentially expressed during the time course and/or between standard or hypoxic culture conditions. Using the generalized linear mixed effect model, we also found 324 differentially expressed proteins. The heatmaps for these differentially expressed miRNAs, mRNAs, and proteins are shown in Supplementary. The clustering of differentially expressed miRNAs/mRNAs/ proteins, (), revealed common expression patterns: Relative to time 0, some miRNA/mRNA/protein sets were up-regulated throughout the experimental time course in both standard and hypoxic conditions, while others were down-regulated under both conditions. Other sets were down-regulated under standard conditions but up-regulated in hypoxia; and some were up-regulated in standard conditions but down-regulated in hypoxia. A pathway analysis of these different groups of proteins revealed the enrichment of network functions involved in energy production, lipid metabolism and small molecule biochemistry. Among molecular and cellular functions, the most abundant were cellular growth and proliferation (51 of 78 proteins, analyzed by Interactive pathways analysis, Ingenuity Systems). The multi-dimension scaling plots of all expressed miRNAs, mRNAs and proteins highlighted patterns of mRNA/protein expression profiles in trophoblasts cultured in standard or hypoxic conditions over the time course (Supplementary). We selected 78 proteins that were differentially expressed over the time course, and/or between the standard and hypoxic conditions by both the generalized linear mixed effect models and the maanova algorithm (). They all had a minimal average spectral count of 2 over all protein samples. We generated an integrated regulatory network for each of these 78 proteins and their respective mRNA transcripts using the MBSmRN and MBSNIG algorithms. Representative networks are shown in Supplementary. Supplementaryprovides plots of the expression of the miRNAs, mRNAs and proteins in theseThe PR curves and ROC curves of the competing regulatory network learning algorithms for direct regulators of (A) mRNA targets and (B) protein targets, based on the data generated using the first simulated networkLasso algorithm is applied to simulation data with the protein data removed.