Motivation: Complex carbohydrates play a central role in cellular communication and in disease development. O-and N-glycans, which are post-translationally attached to proteins and lipids, are sugar chains that are rooted, tree structures. Independent efforts to develop computational tools for analyzing complex carbohydrate structures have been designed to exploit specific databases requiring unique formatting and limited transferability. Attempts have been made at integrating these resources, yet it remains difficult to communicate and share data across several online resources. A disadvantage of the lack of coordination between development efforts is the inability of the user community to create reproducible analyses (workflows). The latter results in the more serious unreliability of glycomics metadata. Results: In this paper, we realize the significance of connecting multiple online glycan resources that can be used to design reproducible experiments for obtaining, generating and analyzing cell glycomes. To address this, a suite of tools and utilities, have been integrated into the analytic func-tionality of the Galaxy bioinformatics platform to provide a Glycome Analytics Platform (GAP). Using this platform, users can design in silico workflows to manipulate various formats of glycan sequences and analyze glycomes through access to web data and services. We illustrate the central functionality and features of the GAP by way of example; we analyze and compare the features of the N-glycan glycome of monocytic cells sourced from two separate data depositions. This paper highlights the use of reproducible research methods for glycomics analysis and the GAP presents an opportunity for integrating tools in glycobioinformatics. Availability and Implementation: This software is open-source and available online at https://bit bucket.org/scientificomputing/
IntroductionChanges in the dynamic expression of cellular glycans (sugars) and glycoconjugates have been implicated in the initiation and progression of neoplastic disease (). This finding has driven research interest in defining the glycome the complete repertoire of glycans and glycoconjugates that cells produce under specified conditions of time, space and environment. () Experimental techniques such as NMR, MALDITOF mass spectrometry (MS) and Liquid chromatography-MS are used to determine the sequence and structure of glycans (); while the specificity of glycan binding is analyzed by glycan arrays () or lectin microarrays () and computational methods in informatics and machine learning techniques are used to identify glycans and categorize their complexity (). While a chemically rigorous definition of carbohydrates is given elsewhere () that is not of relevance here. Compared with DNA, RNA and proteins, which are composed of nucleotides and amino acids, a glycan is structurally and conformationally more complex. The alphabets between these biomolecules differ. The 4 DNA monomers are the nucleotides derived from the A, C, T, G bases and the protein alphabet consists of 20 amino acids. The glycan alphabet is large. The monosaccharide database (http://www.monosacchari dedb.org/start.action) catalogues 776 monomers, GlyTouCan () the international glycan structure repository lists 800 monomers and the Bacterial Carbohydrate Structure Database (http://csdb.glycoscience.ru/bacterial/) registers 357 bacterial glycan monomers. Comparing the bacterial and mammalian registries of monosaccharides () reveals that bacteria have a much greater monomer diversity than humans. By defining the glycan alphabet in terms of the basetype (essentially the variation of the core, see formal definition in the reference ()) of a monosaccharide the human glycan alphabet consists of 14 monomers which is similar to that reported by Cummings, who suggests that the diversity in human glycans stems from merely 9 monomers (). While the human glycan alphabet is small in number (9), the complexity in glycan structure comes from the multiple linkages possible between monomers, the stereochemical possibilities for each linkage as well as the conformational flexibility of the monomers themselves. This complexity is evident by comparing the 9 combinatorial possibilities when linking three different amino acids to as many as 27 648 possibilities from three different monosaccharides (). A final level of complexity is the synthesis of glycans. Unlike DNA and protein synthesis, glycan synthesis is non-templated. Protein enzymes are responsible for glycan synthesis. Glycosyl transferases extend glycans by adding monomers to existing glycans, while Glycosyl Hydrolases lyse glycosidic linkages and divide glycans into smaller sections. The activity of these enzymes is influenced by factors including cellular metabolism, life stage and nutrient availability (). There are a number of well-developed, interoperable, robust tools and databases for gene and protein analysis (). This is due in part to the templated synthesis of these polymers that make relatively robust methods for synthesis (notably PCR) and sequencing possible. The combined effect of the biochemical synthesis and conformationally complex, multi-branched nature of glycans makes the purification, extraction and computational analysis of the structural data far more challenging than in genomics and proteomics (). Some tools developed for the genomic and proteomic paradigm have been applied to glycomics and used in the design and insertion of Nglycosylation sites on proteins (). Although limited efforts have been made to bridge glycomics with other fields, glycobioinformatics remains hamstrung by the complexity and diversity of oligosaccharide structures (). Superimposed on this is lack of sustained support from funding agencies for the development of glycomics methods and data repositories. The development of glycomics methods therefore relies upon independent and sporadically funded efforts. The resulting databases and toolsets therefore lack interlinks between similar and related tools. More serious is the lack of an emergent set of developmental standards amongst databases. Major online resources such as Consortium for Functional Glycomics (CFG) (), Kyoto Encyclopedia of Genes and Genomes (KEGG) (), GlycomeDB (), Resource for Informatics of Glycomes at Soka (RINGS) () and UnicarbKB () store glycan data, translate between various formats and provide other useful tools. A comprehensive overview of glycan sequence formats and databases has recently been reviewed, () the limitations in current glycomics recognized and partial solutions proposed. For example, GlycomeDB () is designed to be a single web portal that provides access to glycan structures from several databases while UnicarbKB () is a curated open access resource derived from EuroCarbDB that is itself a collaboration of several databases. Many web portals do not provide machine-readable web services; subsequently the Working Group on Glycomics Database Standards (WGGDS) initiated (i) the development of standards for inputs and outputs of glycomics web services and (ii) the development of guidelines to report glycomics data (). The Resource Description Format (RDF) is a model for exchanging data on the web that uses subject-predicate-object expressions (triples) to express formal naming and to describe relationships between pieces of information. The glycan RDF subgroup defined GlycoRDF, an ontology used for exporting glycomics data via the Semantic web (). The SPARQL Protocol and RDF Query Language (SPARQL) along with the RDF Query Language is used to query the RDF data from curated endpoints (). The GlyTouCan (https://glytoucan.org/) initiative aims to standardize glycan data that will result in an accessible international glycan structure repository (). Conducting an in silico systems biology experiment requires access to data repositories, computational tools and a knowledge base to connect these resources (). Access to remote web services and ensuring reproducibility of computational experiments requires a working knowledge of computer scripting and programming. Workflows () are useful for streamlining data analysis where a repeatable process describing the organization of the individual steps can be automated. Computational analyses encompass tasks that retrieve data, transform or analyze it followed by a visualization of the results (). Workflows implemented in Taverna (), Knime () and Galaxy () annotate each part of a computational experiment, that include the data source, data manipulation steps and assembly of necessary tools and parameters in a reusable template. Galaxy () provides a management system that requires no prior programming and web services experience. The workflows created on platforms such as this can be published using social research platforms such as myExperiment ().