Motivation: Targeting peptides are the most important signal controlling the import of nuclear encoded proteins into mitochondria and plastids. In the lack of experimental information, their prediction is an essential step when proteomes are annotated for inferring both the localization and the sequence of mature proteins. Results: We developed TPpred a new predictor of organelle-targeting peptides based on Grammatical-Restrained Hidden Conditional Random Fields. TPpred is trained on a non-redundant dataset of proteins where the presence of a target peptide was experimentally validated , comprising 297 sequences. When tested on the 297 positive and some other 8010 negative examples, TPpred outperformed available methods in both accuracy and Matthews correlation index (96% and 0.58, respectively). Given its very low–false-positive rate (3.0%), TPpred is, therefore, well suited for large-scale analyses at the prote-ome level. We predicted that from $4 to 9% of the sequences of human, Arabidopsis thaliana and yeast proteomes contain targeting peptides and are, therefore, likely to be localized in mitochondria and plastids. TPpred predictions correlate to a good extent with the experimental annotation of the subcellular localization, when available. TPpred was also trained and tested to predict the cleavage site of the organelle-targeting peptide: on this task, the average error of TPpred on mitochondrial and plastidic proteins is 7 and 15 residues, respectively. This value is lower than the error reported by other methods currently available.
INTRODUCTIONMitochondria and plastids (in plants) are membrane-enclosed organelles contained in eukaryotic cells that take part into essential biological processes, including cell bioenergetics and metabolism. Following the endosymbiotic theory, the DNAcontaining organelles derive from free-living bacteria that have been incorporated into the cytoplasm of early eukaryotic cells. The organelles retain a small portion of their original genome, encoding few tens and few hundreds proteins in mitochondria and plastids, respectively. However, both experimental and computational methods estimate that some thousands different proteins are located in organelles (). The last release of MitoMiner lists 2755 human proteins experimentally characterized as mitochondrial with mass spectrometry or with green-fluorescent protein tagging (), and the AT_CHLORO database lists 1323 Arabidopsis thaliana proteins annotated as chloroplastic on the basis of mass spectrometry experiments (). Most organellar proteins are, therefore, encoded by the nuclear genome, synthesized by the cytoplasmic ribosomes and then targeted to the organelles. The most common, although not unique, type of targeting signal consists of an N-terminal sequence (the targeting peptide, often referred as pre-sequence in mitochondria and transit peptide in plastids). The targeting peptide is cleaved when the native protein is translocated through the outer membrane of the organelles by means of the translocon protein complexes. In multicellular organisms, it has been estimated that $1025% of nuclear genes encode for proteins endowed with an N-terminal peptide targeting the protein to mitochondria and plastids (). Targeting peptides are highly heterogeneous in terms of length (ranging from 10 to 150 residues) and primary sequence (). Phylogenetic and structural studies recognized a modular architecture in targeting peptides, often consisting of two or three separate domains, potentially forming amphiphilic-helices or-strands when interacting with the organelle outer membrane (). The modular organization is probably involved in the sub-organellar trafficking of proteins and gives origin to a great variety of primary sequences for targeting peptides (). In a small but increasing number of proteins, the same targeting peptide can mediate the translocation to both the mitochondria and the chloroplasts (Presently, in UniProtKB, only 11% of $9200 sequences that are endowed with a targeting peptide are supported by experimental annotations. Because of the biological importance of targeting mechanisms and the scarcity of experimentally validated knowledge, machine-learning tools have been introduced to predict the presence of targeting peptides and the position of the corresponding cleavage sites. Early methods are specific for chloroplasts, e.g. ChloroP () and PCLR (), and mithochondria, e.g. MitoProt (). More recent tools integrate the prediction of targeting peptides with the prediction of secretory signal peptides, although they have different compositional and length features. Among these are TargetP (), which incorporates ChloroP, iPSORT (), Predotar () and PredSL (). All methods predict the presence of the targeting peptide, but only MitoProt, TargetP and PredSL predict the position of the cleavage site. In general, all the predictors analyse an N-terminal portion of the native protein, ranging from 40 to 100 residues, depending on the method. ChloroP (), TargetP (), PCLR () and Predotar () are based on neural networks (NNs) and their input includes residue composition, hydrophobicity and abundance of charged residues. iPSORT adopts a rule-based algorithm that considers 434 different propensity scales (). MitoProt defines a discriminant function on a pool of 47 physicochemical properties (). PredSL combines NNs, hidden Markov models (HMM) and scoring matrices (). Because of the paucity of data, all methods have been trained on datasets containing also non-experimentally validated targeting peptides, predicted with computational methods and/or inferred by similarity. Prediction of targeting peptide can be considered as a labelling problem, where residues of the N-terminal region of the sequence are assigned either to 't' (targeting peptide) or 'n' (non-targeting peptide) labels. Grammatical-Restrained Hidden Conditional Random Fields (GRHCRF) is a recently introduced machinelearning tool well suited to solve labelling problems (). GRHCRFs offer several advantages: (i) like HMMs, they can incorporate previous knowledge on the problem by introducing a grammar on the prediction labels; (ii) like the Hidden Conditional Random Fields (HCRF), they are discriminative models and do not require the strong independence assumptions made in HMMs (); and (iii) similar to NNs, they can analyse complex and heterogeneous input encodings. Here, we introduce TPpred, a new predictor for targeting peptides based on GRHCRFs. TPpred is trained on a nonredundant dataset containing only experimentally validated targeting peptides and efficiently predicts both the presence of targeting peptides and the localization of the cleavage sites.