RNA silencing is a complex, highly conserved mechanism mediated by small RNAs (sRNAs), such as microRNAs (miRNAs), that is known to be involved in a diverse set of biological functions including development, pathogen control, genome maintenance and response to environmental change. Advances in next generation sequencing technologies are producing increasingly large numbers of sRNA reads per sample at a fraction of the cost of previous methods. However, many bioinformatics tools do not scale accordingly, are cumbersome, or require extensive support from bioinformatics experts. Therefore, researchers need user-friendly, robust tools, capable of not only processing large sRNA datasets in a reasonable time frame but also presenting the results in an intuitive fashion and visualizing sRNA genomic features. Herein, we present the UEA sRNA workbench, a suite of tools that is a successor to the web-based UEA sRNA Toolkit, but in downloadable format and with several enhanced and additional features. Availability: The program and help pages are available at http://srna
INTRODUCTIONRNA silencing is a complex, highly conserved mechanism mediated by small RNAs (sRNAs) (). sRNAs, such as micro RNAs (miRNAs), are typically 2024 nt in length and act as guide molecules to regulate gene expression. Next generation sequencing (NGS) technologies have become the de facto way to generate sRNA datasets. These datasets often come from several samples, each consisting of millions of distinct reads. Therefore, there is an increasing need for computational tools for exploring and analysing such data.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. * To whom correspondence should be addressed.Several tools have been developed for NGS sRNA analysis (seefor a recent overview of tools for miRNA analysis). These are typically command-line driven, focused on a specific application (e.g. miRNA detection) and often require installation of supporting software packages. In addition, many of them lack tools for visualizing results. Herein, we present the UEA sRNA workbench, a suite of interactive Java-based sRNA analysis tools, which provides an easy-to-use, well-documented platform to create workflows for processing sRNA NGS data. The workbench is a successor to the web-based UEA sRNA Toolkit (), which, since its establishment in 2009, has received an average of 12 000 page views per month and processed over 5400 sRNA datasets. As well as being downloadable, the new workbench provides many improved features compared with the toolkit, with new tools for visualizing data and processing multiple datasets. In addition, the workbench is limited only by local memory whereas the toolkit had strict datasize limits due to the nature of its web-based interfaces. The workbench can also be command-line driven to allow users to easily plug it into existing pipelines ().
DISCUSSIONThe relative low cost of NGS has generated an abundance of sRNA data necessitating a demand for dedicated bioinformatics support. The sRNA workbench enables biologists to gain an understanding of the sRNAome in plants and animals through the efficient processing of large NGS sRNA datasets, complemented with easily accessible visualization tools. It is hoped that these tools will enable biologists to shed light on the key molecular pathways involved in RNA silencing.