Motivation: Gene networks have been used widely in gene function prediction algorithms, many based on complex extensions of the guilt by association principle. We sought to provide a unified explanation for the performance of gene function prediction algorithms in exploiting network structure and thereby simplify future analysis. Results: We use co-expression networks to show that most exploited network structure simply reconstructs the original correlation matrices from which the co-expression network was obtained. We show the same principle works in predicting gene function in protein interaction networks and that these methods perform comparably to much more sophisticated gene function prediction algorithms. Availability and implementation: Data and algorithm implementation are fully described and available at http://www .chibi.ubc.ca/extended. Programs are provided in Matlab m-code.
INTRODUCTIONGene interactions can be used to infer functional relationships, a principle known as 'guilt by association' (GBA) (). Genes can be judged to be interacting based on direct evidence of protein () or genetic interaction (), or by a similarity in behavior across a range of conditions such as expression profiles () or phylogenetic profiles (). The principle of GBA forms the basis for most gene function prediction algorithms, which typically use relational information (e.g. interactions) to predict new gene membership in gene function categories (). Some of these algorithms operate directly by GBA (), while others infer function from more complex relational properties (). In the simplest case, the function of a gene can be predicted by voting * To whom correspondence should be addressed. among its connected neighbors with known function (), perhaps with statistical control such as the Chi-square test (). For a given function, a gene's likelihood of possessing that function could be, for example, the fraction of its neighbors possessing that function. Simple nearest-neighbor voting ('Basic GBA' or BGBA) has been shown to predict gene function in a variety of biological networks, including protein interaction and gene co-expression (). Our focus is on a natural extension of these methods, which is to incorporate the broader network structuremeaning indirect connections among genesinto predictions. A large variety of techniques have been proposed to extend GBA to indirect connections, including voting within a fixed radius, clustering into function classes, specialized support vector machine, prediction by path length, weighting indirect connections by local topology, network propagation, topological overlap as well as others (). Most of these methods report improvement over GBA between direct connections, although where methods are compared they tend to perform comparably and only slightly better than direct GBA (). Gene function prediction and network analysis methods typically employ networks that are sparse: only a subset of possible edges are retained, based on some implicit or explicit threshold. In coexpression analyses, this threshold may be a correlation P-value, but is often a simple threshold above a certain rank in order to attain a matrix sufficiently sparse to be computationally tractable. Even in proteinprotein interaction networks (PPINs) the underlying data are typically some metric which must be thresholded (though there is also an earlier implicit threshold in terms of which proteins are even tested). Thresholding to determine confident interactions is particularly convenient for interaction networks which must aggregate the results of multiple studies. Also, this pre-filtered analysis leaves the networks performance open to the conventional interpretation of biological networks (in which specific network interactions have specific meaning). Of course, by applying a threshold for statistical confidence, information may be lost or disguised within the network. We will provide evidence that it is precisely this information which methods exploiting indirect connections reconstruct in their operation. There is a larger variety of gene function prediction methods that use indirect connections implicitly, such as support vector machine approaches () and Markov random fields (), but there are broadly only two approaches to explicitly incorporating indirect connections into gene function prediction:Page: 1861 18601866