We present a new, extended version of the Protein Topology Graph Library web server. The Protein Topology Graph Library describes the protein topology on the super-secondary structure level. It allows to compute and visualize protein ligand graphs and search for protein structural motifs. The new server features additional information on ligand binding to secondary structure elements, increased usability and an application programming interface (API) to retrieve data, allowing for an automated analysis of protein topology. Availability and implementation: The Protein Topology Graph Library server is freely available on the web at
IntroductionThe huge amount of three-dimensional (3D) protein structures available in databases like the PDB () call for tools for automated analysis and intuitive visualization of protein structures. Databases such as SCOP () and CATH () classify global protein topology based on semi-automated methods and expert knowledge. Some automated methods such as FSSP () rely on global 3D alignments and pairwise comparison. 3D Complex () focuses on protein complexes. ProSMoS (), TOPS (), TOPS (), Pro-Origami () and the Protein Topology Graph Library (PTGL,) all work on the super-secondary structure level and apply different methods to find substructures. Ligand information is of great interest to determine protein function and in drug discovery, but most databases ignore information on ligand binding to secondary structure elements (SSEs). The PTGL () is a database that uses a graph model to describe proteins on the chain level. The graphs are based on 3D atom data from the PDB and the SSE assignments of the DSSP algorithm (). A protein ligand graph (PLG) is a labeled, undirected graph that models one protein chain. Each vertex represents an SSE of that chain or a ligand assigned to the chain in the PDB file, and the edges model contacts between SSEs including their relative spatial orientation. A hard sphere model is used to define atom contacts. A rule set determines whether two SSEs are in a contact, based on the number of atom contacts between them. For details on how the contacts and orientations are computed, seefour different linear notation strings for FGs. Users can search the database for protein structural motifs, which is based on fast text matching in the linear notations. The PTGL provides intuitive twodimensional visualizations of the FGs for all linear notations. We rewrote the PTGL from scratch, implemented ligand support and other new features and updated all data to the April 2015 version of the PDB, which contains information on more than 230 000 protein chains. The data will be updated on a regular basis by our automated update procedure.