Motivation: Thermodynamics-based dynamic programming RNA secondary structure algorithms have been of immense importance in molecular biology, where applications range from the detection of novel selenoproteins using expressed sequence tag (EST) data, to the determination of microRNA genes and their targets. Dynamic programming algorithms have been developed to compute the minimum free energy secondary structure and partition function of a given RNA sequence, the minimum free-energy and partition function for the hybridization of two RNA molecules, etc. However, the applicability of dynamic programming methods depends on disallowing certain types of interactions (pseudoknots, zigzags , etc.), as their inclusion renders structure prediction an nondeterministic polynomial time (NP)-complete problem. Nevertheless, such interactions have been observed in X-ray structures. Results: A non-Boltzmannian Monte Carlo algorithm was designed by Wang and Landau to estimate the density of states for complex systems, such as the Ising model, that exhibit a phase transition. In this article, we apply the Wang-Landau (WL) method to compute the density of states for secondary structures of a given RNA sequence, and for hybridizations of two RNA sequences. Our method is shown to be much faster than existent software, such as RNAsubopt. From density of states, we compute the partition function over all secondary structures and over all pseudoknot-free hybridizations. The advantage of the WL method is that by adding a function to evaluate the free energy of arbitary pseudoknotted structures and of arbitrary hybridizations, we can estimate thermodynamic parameters for situations known to be NP-complete. This extension to pseudoknots will be made in the sequel to this article; in contrast, the current article describes the WL algorithm applied to pseudoknot-free secondary structures and hybridizations. Availability: The WL RNA hybridization web server is under construction at
INTRODUCTIONRNA is an important biomolecule, now known to play both an information carrying role, as well as a catalytic role. Indeed, the genomic information of retroviruses, such as the hepatitis C and human immunodeficiency viruses, is encoded by RNA rather than DNA, while the peptidyl transferase reaction, arguably the most important enzymatic reaction responsible for life, is catalyzed not by a protein, but rather by RNA (). It has recently emerged that RNA plays a wide range of previously unsuspected roles in many biological processes, including retranslation of the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. genetic code [selenocysteine insertion (), ribosomal frameshift (, transcriptional and translational gene regulation (), temperaturesensitive conformational switches (), chemical modification of specific nucleotides in the ribosome (), regulation of alternative splicing (), etc. A secondary structure for a given RNA nucleotide sequence a 1 ,...,a n is a set S of base pairs (i,j), such that a i ,a j forms either a WatsonCrick or GU (wobble) base pair, and such that there are no base triples or pseudoknots in S. 1 For example, the secondary structure of Y RNA 2 with EMBL access code AAPY01489510/220-119 is displayed inand b, whileand d depicts the pseudoknotted structure of the Gag/pro ribosomal frameshift site of mouse mammary tumor virus (). In conventional dot-bracket notation, this latter structure is given as follows, where it should be noted that two kinds of bracket are needed due to the pseudoknot AAAAAACUUGUAAAGGGGCAGUCCCCUAGCCCCGCUCAAAAGGGGGAUG ..............It is computationally intractable to compute the minimum freeenergy tertiary structure of RNA; indeed, determining the optimal pseudoknotted structure is nondeterministic polynomial time (NP)complete Lyngso and Pedersen (2000). In contrast, by disallowing pseudoknots, secondary structure prediction is algorithmically tractable; there are dynamic programming algorithms to compute the minimum free-energy structure for a single RNA molecule, as well as for the hybridization of two or more RNA molecules. In particular, such methods can be loosely grouped into two types of algorithm those that use (i) a stochastic context free grammar to compute a covariation model and (ii) free-energy parameters obtained from UV absorbance (optical melting) experiments, in order to determine the minimum free energy structure (i.e. thermodynamic-based algorithms). Examples of stochastic context-free grammars are the programs Infernal () and Pfold (). Examples of thermodynamics-based algorithms are the programs mfold (), UNAFOLD (), RNAfold (), RNAstructure (). Thermodynamics-based algorithms for hybridization of two structures are given in UNAFOLD (), RNAcofold (), while the NUPACK software considers hybridization of three or more RNA molecules. () Pseudoknot-free secondary structure of Y RNA with EMBL access code AAPY01489510/220-119, depicted in (a) in Feynman circular form, and in panel (b) in classical form. (c and d) Pseudoknotted structure for the Gag/pro ribosomal frameshift site of mouse mammary tumor virus, depicted in (c) in Feynman circular form, and in (d) in classical form. Images produced with sofware jViz () from structures taken, respectively, from Rfam () and Pseudobase ().
DISCUSSIONThedisplays the run time of the WL method, compared with that of RNAsubopt from the Vienna RNA package, while theof the same figure shows sample output from our WL program.clearly shows the advantage of WL over existent methods in computing the density of states for both single RNA molecules and for hybridization complexes of two RNA molecules.and b depicts the heat capacity computed by the WL method () and the program UNAFold (). Melting temperature, which is usually defined as the temperature at which half of the molecules are single-stranded, while the other half are hybridized, is determined as that temperature where heat capacity achieves its maximum. The program UNAFold does not allow any intramolecular structure (base pairing between 2 nt of the same structure), a feature that our WL method permits, as does the RNAcofold program. While it is clear that additional work must be done to improve heat capacity computation with the WL method, the melting temperature T M computed by WL agrees reasonably well i283), in computing density of states. Since the program ofis no longer publicly available, and is superceded by RNAsubopt (private correspondence from. Hofacker), we computed the execution time in seconds as a function of logn, where n is RNA sequence size. Horizontal green line is slightly above the value of exp(25) seconds, or equivalently a day. It appears that for sequences of length 46 nt, the WL method is more efficient than RNAsubopt. (b) Sample output of WL method on sequence CUGCUUUGAGGACAAAGAGAAUAAAGACUUCAUGUU, after 17402000 WL Monte Carlo steps, where the value of in line 4 ofis defined to be 0.001. The leftmost column contains the energy bin, the middle column contains the relative frequency in the WL sampling run, and the rightmost column contains the lowest energy secondary structure in the associated energy bin. Though our WL program allows the user to modify bin size, the default energy bin size (here) is 0.1 kcal/mol; empty bins, where no structure has yet been sampled, are not displayed. The lowest energy structure sampled by the WL method iswith that computed by O(n 3 ) methods UNAFold, RNAcofold, and the recent O(n 6 ) method ofeach of which methods admits slightly different interactions. We now describe how to approximately compute the partition function Z(T ) over all secondary structures and over all pseudoknotfree hybridizations, simultaneously over all temperatures from 0 @BULLET C to 100 @BULLET C, by performing two WL computations, followed by a computation of the convolution of enthalpy relative frequency with free-energy relative frequency. Similar computations using existent methods require over 100 cubic time computations. @BULLET Compute the relative density of states p h for free energy using WL with temperature T =273 @BULLET C (absolute zero Kelvin). It follows that p h is the relative density of states for enthalpy, Due to the fundamental thermodynamic relation
CONCLUSIONIn this article, we have implemented the WL algorithm to compute the relative density of states for RNA secondary structures and hybridizations. Separately computing the number of structures and hybridizations, we obtain the absolute density of states, which then yields the partition function, and thence, in the case of hybridization, the melting temperature. The WL method is much faster than existent software RNAsubopt in computing the density of states, but could not be benchmarked with the binning method ofwhich runs in O(m 2 n 3 ) time, for length n sequence and m energy bins, since the latter software is no longer available, being superceded by RNAsubopt-D. In preliminary tests, we obtain roughly the same melting temperature for duplex RNA, as that computed by existent methods; however, the real advantage of the WL method is that there is no restriction on types of allowed interaction, unlike the situation with dynamic programming approaches that disallow pseudoknots, zig-zags, etc.