Motivation: Abundance profiling (also called phylogenetic profiling) is a crucial step in understanding the diversity of a metagenomic sample, and one of the basic techniques used for this is taxonomic identification of the metagenomic reads. Results: We present taxon identification and phylogenetic profiling (TIPP), a new marker-based taxon identification and abundance profiling method. TIPP combines SAT\e-enabled phylogenetic placement a phylogenetic placement method, with statistical techniques to control the classification precision and recall, and results in improved abundance profiles. TIPP is highly accurate even in the presence of high indel errors and novel genomes, and matches or improves on previous approaches, including NBC, mOTU, PhymmBL, MetaPhyler and MetaPhlAn. Availability and implementation: Software and supplementary materials are available at
INTRODUCTIONMetagenomic studies of microbial communities commonly generate millionsto hundreds ofmillionsofsequencingreads.Theassignment of accurate taxonomic labels to these sequences is a critical componentinmanyanalyses,butiscomplicatedbythefactthatthemajority ofthe organisms found in environmental or host-associated communities cannot be easily cultured in a laboratory, and of the organisms that can be cultured, an even smaller number have been sequenced, even partially. Thus, these commonly encountered organisms are largely absent from existing databases of known genomes and genes. Providing taxonomic labels to metagenomic sequences requires extrapolating the knowledge contained in sequence databases to previously unseen deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) strings. Simple similarity-based approaches (e.g. picking the best database hit as the best 'guess' at the taxonomic label) have been shown to be insufficiently accurate (), leading to the development of new and more sophisticated methods. Recently developed methods improving on the simple similarity-based approaches include (a) composition-based approaches that rely on various machine learning techniques (Support Vector Machines in PhyloPythia and PhyloPythiaS (), Interpolated Markov Models in Phymm (), Bayesian models in NBC), or neural networks ()] to classify sequences based on their DNA composition (usually based on the frequency of short k-mers), (b) more sophisticated analyses of similarity search results [e.g. using lowest common ancestor aggregation in Megan (), or classifiers built from similarity search results as done in MetaPhyler (), MetaPhlAn () and mOTU () or protein profiles in Carma ()], and (c) combinations of multiple approaches (e.g., composition and similarity based approaches in PhymmBL (). Some of these approaches (e.g. most of the composition-based approaches) can be applied to any DNA sequence. However, others are specific to a reference collection of carefully selected genes (e.g. MetaPhyler, MetaPhlAn and mOTU use a collection of universal or cladespecific marker genes), and so are called 'marker-based' methods. Abundance profiling, also called 'phylogenetic profiling', seeks to estimate the relative abundance of the species (or genera, or families, etc.) within a sequence dataset. While many methods produce these estimates by characterizing most (or all) of the sequences in the dataset, marker-based methods produce these estimates by characterizing only those sequences that match the marker genes they rely on. The marker genes used by some of these methods (e.g. MetaPhyler and mOTU) are supposed to be single copy and universal; thus, the estimates produced using such markers can be used for profiling without needing to correct for copy number or missing data. We present taxon identification and phylogenetic profiling (TIPP), a new marker-based method for taxon identification and abundance profiling. We explore TIPP for abundance profiling using MetaPhyler's collection of 30 marker genes, but TIPP can be used with any single-copy gene for which a dense enough sample of full-length sequences is available. TIPP is implemented in Python and can be run on Unix and Mac.
DISCUSSIONThe study compared four marker-based methods (mOTU, TIPP, MetaPhyler and MetaPhlAn) and two composition-based methods (PhymmBL and NBC) on a collection of datasets. On the easy datasets with only known genomes (Experiment 1), many methods produced highly accurate abundance profiles, although which method was the best depended on the read length. On the easy short read datasets the most accurate methods were mOTU, MetaPhlAn and TIPP, while the most accurate methods on the easy long read datasets were TIPP and NBC, with MetaPhlAn a close third. However, when datasets had novel genomes or high indel error rates, the performance of most methods degraded significantly. For example, while NBC had excellent accuracy on the easy long read datasets, it had poor accuracy in the presence of high indel rates. Similarly, although mOTU had excellent accuracy on easy short read datasets with known genomes, it had poor performance on short read datasets with novel genomes and terminated with an error message on the datasets with high indel rates. We also saw that MetaPhyler had difficulties on datasets with long sequences and high indels (Experiments 2 and 3). TIPP did well on the easy datasets (known genomes with low sequencing error rates), where it tied for first with other methods. However, TIPP was the only method that was robust to all the tested model conditions (short versus long reads, novel versus known genomes, low indel versus high indel error rates), so that it was either first or tied for first under even very difficult conditions (novel genomes with high indel rates). Consequently, TIPP dominated the other methods in terms of overall performance. Thus, one of the main features of TIPP is its relative robustness to sequencing errors (both substitutions and indels) and its ability to perform well on novel genomes. We conjecture that the HMM Family technique within TIPP provides this robustness, which uses HMMs in a divide-and-conquer framework, and also benefits from the use of local alignment techniques. Therefore, the high error rates commonly encountered in single-molecule sequencing technologies [up to 14% indel rate for Pacific Biosciences technologies (] that are likely to be increasingly used in the context of metagenomic data may not be particularly problematic for TIPP, even when the data contain novel genomes. Instead, our results indicate that TIPP may well continue to have good accuracy with new sequencing technologies that result in reduced data quality. One of the interesting observations in this study is that the marker-based methods (TIPP, MetaPhlAn, mOTU and MetaPhyler) often gave more accurate abundance profiles than the composition-based methods (NBC and PhymmBL), even though marker-based methods estimate abundance profiles by characterizing only those reads that map to their selected marker genes. These results show that accurate profiles can be obtained by taxonomic characterization of only a fraction of the query sequences. However, the choice of marker genes, and the technique used to bin the reads to the markers, has an impact on the resultant abundance profile. Thus, future research should investigate whether improved performance can be obtained using a different set of marker genes and different techniques to map reads to the marker genes. Also, our abundance profile estimates were based on combining all reads for all markers into one set, and using the distribution estimated for that set; more sophisticated techniques could be used to combine distributions estimated for each marker.