Direct binding by a transcription factor (TF) to the proximal promoter of a gene is a strong evidence that the TF regulates the gene. Assaying the genome-wide binding of every TF in every cell type and condition is currently impractical. Histone modifications correlate with tissue/cell/condition-specific (tissue specific) TF binding, so histone ChIP-seq data can be combined with traditional position weight matrix (PWM) methods to make tissue-specific predictions of TF–promoter interactions. Results: We use supervised learning to train a naïve Bayes predictor of TF–promoter binding. The predictors features are the histone modification levels and a PWM-based score for the promoter. Training and testing uses sets of promoters labeled using TF ChIP-seq data, and we use cross-validation on 23 such datasets to measure the accuracy. A PWM+histone naïve Bayes predictor using a single histone modification (H3K4me3) is substantially more accurate than a PWM score or a conservation-based score (phylogenetic motif model). The naïve Bayes predictor is more accurate (on average) at all sensitivity levels, and makes only half as many false positive predictions at sensitivity levels from 10% to 80%. On average, it correctly predicts 80% of bound promoters at a false positive rate of 20%. Accuracy does not diminish when we test the predictor in a different cell type (and species) from training. Accuracy is barely diminished even when we train the predictor without using TF ChIP-seq data.
INTRODUCTIONChromatin immunoprecipitation combined with deep sequencing (ChIP-seq) has been applied to the prediction of transcription factor binding sites (TFBSs), allowing the creation of genome-wide maps of in vivo binding sites. These maps, however, are both tissueand condition specific, requiring ChIP-seq to be performed in each different tissue and condition of interest. The large number of tissues and conditions and the associated cost suggest that there is a strong continued role for in silico TFBS scanning. Fortunately, with the advent of ChIP-seq and other technologies such as protein-binding microarray (PBM), there has been a rapid expansion in the number * To whom correspondence should be addressed. of high-quality transcription factor (TF) binding site motifs available as position weight matrices (PWMs), widening the applicability of motif-based in silico prediction methods. Most in silico methods that aim to predict TF binding (and hence gene regulation), however, are not tissue-or condition specific (which we will abbreviate as 'tissue specific'). They base their TFBS predictions solely on the genomic DNA of the organism, in some cases also considering conservation in the DNA of related species. This approach fails to account for tissue-specific epigenetic changes to genomic DNA, which contribute to the well-known tendency of these methods to overpredict binding sites. More to the point, TFBS predictions that do not take dynamic epigenetic changes into account cannot be tissue specific. A major type of tissue-specific epigenetic change affecting TF binding involves proteins (called histones) around which genomic DNA is wrapped to form chromatin in the eukaryotic nucleus. Approximately, one-third of histone protein sequence comprises a 'tail' that is subject to many different covalent post-translational modifications. Approximately, 40 different histone modifications have been mapped genome wide, allowing the link between the different histone modifications and gene transcription to be extensively studied. Generally, acetylation and phosphorylation are indicative of active transcription; sumoylation is usually found in transcriptionally silent regions; and methylation and ubiquitination are implicated in both activation and repression of transcription (). Together, a combination of only three of these modifications was found to be highly predictive of gene expression (). Our goal is to predict the gene promoters bound by a given TF in a given tissue. Several studies have shown that the use of tissue-specific histone modification data can improve the prediction of TFBSs. These studies, however, have either used a relatively crude threshold filtering-based approach (), or have made genome-wide, low-resolution predictions of binding in 24000 bp regions (). Here, we expand on previous research by developing a chromatin modification-based tissue-specific predictor of TF binding in promoter regions. We restrict our attention to binding in the region 300 bp to +100 bp around the transcriptional start site (TSS). This allows us to more confidently associate predicted TF binding events to a particular TSS, and increases our confidence that the TF regulates a particular gene. Focusing separately on TF binding in promoters (rather than genome-wide) also eliminates the effects of differences in chromatin modifications between active promoters and enhancers.
DISCUSSIONOur new method for predicting if a promoter is bound by a TF computes a score that combines the promoter's maximum PWM score and the total ChIP-seq tag counts of histone modifications within the promoter in the tissue of interest. A single histone modificationH3K4me3appears to be as informative about the presence of TF binding as any of the combinations of histone modifications we tested. This means that our approach is immediately practical, since genome-wide ChIP-seq data for H3K4me3 in many tissues is already available. The software we make available (Dr Gene) can be used to make tissue-specific predictions of binding of a TF for which a PWM is available and for which H3K4me3 ChIP-seq data exist in the tissue of interest. As the results inshow, the accuracy of predictions will be improved if TF ChIP-data are available for at least one TF in the tissue of interest, but this is not necessary. Our predictor can be trained and used in tissues for which no TF ChIP-data yet exists. The effectiveness of combining PWM scores with H3K4me3 scores for predicting TF binding is consistent with our previous work (). There, we filtered out regions with low H3K4me3 scores, and then made binding predictions based on PWM scores. A drawback of this earlier approach is that regions with marginal H3K4me3 scores are treated as 'unbound' without considering their PWM score at all. Our current method removes this drawback, and also focuses exclusively on predicting bound promoters. The surprising ability of the H3K4me3 score of a promoter to predict whether it is bound by any TF (see green curve in) indicates that this score could function as an extremely good 'prior' for predicting TF binding. Evaluating in silico methods for predicting TF binding is problematic. We have chosen to consider all core promoters as 'bound' that contain the midpoint of a TF ChIP-seq peak. However, some ChIP-seq peaks may represent indirect binding by the TF, so the core promoter may not contain a strong match to the TF's PWM. It is tempting, therefore, to remove promoters lacking strong PWM matches from the list of bound core promoters in a given reference set. We feel that doing so would give an unfairly optimistic estimate of the accuracy of PWM-based prediction methods, including our nave Bayes score. Reference sets constructed using a given PWM method would be biased in favor of that PWM, since any core promoters that are directly bound by the TF but do not match the (possibly inaccurate) PWM would be eliminated. Our method of evaluation therefore considers all promoters as bound for which TF ChIP-seq data indicates binding within the core promoter, even though such binding may be indirect, and thus impossible for the TF's PWM to detect. In addition, we recognize that some directly bound promoters will be labeled as 'unbound' in our reference sets due to missing peaks caused by limitations in the raw ChIP-seq data (e.g. sequencing depth), and by the accuracy of the algorithms used to determine ChIP-seq peaks. Both conservation-based prediction approaches that we test here are on average actually less accurate than using a PWM to predict the core promoters bound by a TF. This does not necessarily mean that conservation-based predictions of TF binding sites are less accurate than PWM-based predictions if one is trying to predict all sites bound in any tissue. However, because we use tissue-specific ChIP-seq data to label core promoters, sites that are not bound in the tissue of interest, but are highly conserved because of function in a different tissue or tissues, will be treated as false positives. This potentially explains the slightly lower accuracy of the conservation-based prediction methods tested here. It is still somewhat unexpected that combining a conservation-based binding score with the H3K4me3 score (Monkey++H3K4me3) is no more accurate than the nonconservation-based PWM+H3K4Me3 score. This may be due to characteristics of our reference setssuch as the problems of indirectly bound promoters and missing peaks discussed above limiting the accuracy attainable by any PWM-based prediction method.