Motivation: Recent technological advances have made high-resolution mass spectrometers affordable to many laboratories, thus boosting rapid development of top-down mass spectrometry, and implying a need in efficient methods for analyzing this kind of data. Results: We describe a method for analysis of protein samples from top-down tandem mass spec-trometry data, which capitalizes on de novo sequencing of fragments of the proteins present in the sample. Our algorithm takes as input a set of de novo amino acid strings derived from the given mass spectra using the recently proposed Twister approach, and combines them into aggregated strings endowed with offsets. The former typically constitute accurate sequence fragments of sufficiently well-represented proteins from the sample being analyzed, while the latter indicate their location in the protein sequence, and also bear information on post-translational modifications and fragmentation patterns. Availability and Implementation: Freely available on the web at http://bioinf.spbau.ru/en/twister.
IntroductionTop-down mass spectrometry is a recently emerged technology for analyzing intact proteins, which is particularly suitable for detecting post-translational modifications (PTMs). Among its most important applications is characterization of therapeutic antibodies (), as part of the process of drug development. Nowadays, modern instruments allow to rapidly acquire vast amount of high-quality top-down data, but efficient algorithms for its processing are still in high demand. One of the key tasks of mass spectrometry-based proteomics is de novo sequencing of peptides and proteins from tandem (MS/MS) mass spectrometry data. In the last two decades, several algorithms have been proposed for de novo peptide sequencing from bottom-up data, and a few powerful tools appeared, including PEAKS (), PepNovo (), pNovo (), Lutefisk (), Sherenga (), Novor () and the program UVnovo () recently introduced for the case of 351 nm ultraviolet photodissociation (UVPD) mass spectra. Other achievements comprise methods for complete protein sequencing using multiple enzyme digest and assembly by sequence overlap, possibly referring to a homologous protein sequence (), and a number of alternative approaches benefit from complementarity of mass spectra acquired using different fragmentation techniques from either peptides () or intact proteins (). Yet to the best of our knowledge, only three published algorithms make any use of top-down data to achieve the abovementioned goal, and namely, the one from (), which, however, did not result in a publicly available tool, TBNovo () that processes combined MS/MS datasets and utilizes top-down spectra as a scaffold for assembling bottom-up spectra, and our recently developed approach called Twister (). At the same time, primarily due to increasing accessibility of hybrid Orbitrap Fourier transform mass spectrometers, the top-down technology is nowadays rapidly gaining popularity, thus enforcing the need in efficient approaches to de novo peptide and protein sequencing from top-down spectra alone. This work represents a continuation of our research summarized in (), where we introduced a method that extracts from deconvoluted MS/MS spectra a number of accurate sequence fragments of the proteins contained in a sample. Here we describe an algorithm that takes as input the fragments obtained this way, and combines them to produce a set of so-called aggregated strings, each endowed with direct and reversed offsets intended to match the masses of the two terminal fragments preceding and following it in the underlying protein sequence. Thereby we obtain longer sequence fragments of sufficiently well-represented proteins, among which should be the target ones (but can be also abundant enough contaminants). The number of aggregated strings is substantially smaller than that of the original fragments, thus allowing to see at a glance distinct components of the sample. Moreover, their associated offsets can provide extra insight into what was the composition of the sample at the level of proteoforms, which posttranslational modifications (PTMs) occurred in the sequence, or which fragment ions were measured in the experiment. This immediately turns the suggested approach into a handy stand-alone method for analyzing protein samples. In what follows, we outline the procedure for computing aggregated strings, illustrate the potential of the method by experimental results obtained for top-down MS/MS datasets for the standard protein carbonic anhydrase 2 (CAH2) and the Fab region of alemtuzumab, and indicate directions for further research. The proposed approach is implemented in a software tool Twister available at http://bioinf.spbau.ru/en/twister, which also incorporates the method introduced in (), and thus, takes as input a set of deconvoluted MS/MS spectra.
DiscussionWe have introduced a method for combining de novo sequence fragments, retrieved from deconvoluted top-down MS/MS spectra using our approach described in (), into the aggregated strings endowed with direct and reversed offsets. This gives us longer parts of sequences of proteins sufficiently well-represented in the sample, and helps to promptly focus our attention primarily on those. The main offsets of the aggregated strings often appropriately reflect their location in the sequence of the respective protein, and can serve to obtain an accurate intact mass estimate of a target protein, decide on which out of a few candidate proteoforms is contained in the sample, or facilitate characterization of the PTMs present in the protein being analyzed. We emphasize that the second and third tasks can be accomplished even without explicit evidence in the input spectra of the amino acids that differ between distinct proteoforms, or of the respective PTMs. Importantly, thereby an aggregated string with a very short, and not informative on its own, amino acid sequence can also be of true value. On the other hand, the input MS/MS data may sometimes allow to quickly and unambiguously locate a PTM detected in this way. The proposed method can be further adjusted so as to solve this problem as well. A careful analysis of the entire sets of direct and reversed offsets associated with the obtained aggregated strings can potentially provide further insight into the composition of the sample; we consider development of algorithms for this purpose as one of the subsequent tasks to be addressed. Alternatively, one can manually browse through the input de novo stringseach with a single associated offsetthat correlate well with the aggregated strings of interest, to gain additional information about the respective proteins. Our present work constitutes a next step towards complete de novo sequencing of proteins from top-down spectra alone, for which purpose, to the best of our knowledge, no methods exist so far. While the current limitations of the top-down technology in general would prevent the proposed approach from retrieving the entire protein sequence, since the latter is typically not fully covered even with short tags, the aggregated strings can undoubtedly serve as an excellent base for the full reconstruction. However, achieving this goal will require more algorithmic developments, thus providing yet another promising direction for future research.