Motivation: The accurate prediction of disease status is a central challenge in clinical cancer research. Microarray-based gene bio-markers have been identified to predict outcome and outperform traditional clinical parameters. However, the robustness of the individual gene biomarkers is questioned because of their little reproducibility between different cohorts of patients. Substantial progress in treatment requires advances in methods to identify robust biomarkers. Several methods incorporating pathway information have been proposed to identify robust pathway markers and build classifiers at the level of functional categories rather than of individual genes. However, current methods consider the pathways as simple gene sets but ignore the pathway topological information, which is essential to infer a more robust pathway activity. Results: Here, we propose a directed random walk (DRW)-based method to infer the pathway activity. DRW evaluates the topological importance of each gene by capturing the structure information embedded in the directed pathway network. The strategy of weighting genes by their topological importance greatly improved the reprodu-cibility of pathway activities. Experiments on 18 cancer datasets showed that the proposed method yielded a more accurate and robust overall performance compared with several existing gene-based and pathway-based classification methods. The resulting risk-active pathways are more reliable in guiding therapeutic selection and the development of pathway-specific therapeutic strategies.
INTRODUCTIONOne important challenge in clinical cancer research is the accurate prediction of disease states and responses to treatment, which guide the choice of optimal therapy for the patients. Microarraybased gene biomarkers have been identified to predict outcome and outperformed traditional clinical parameters (). However, the reproducibility of the individual gene biomarkers has been challenged (). The prediction performance of the gene signatures discovered in one dataset often decreased drastically in an independent dataset for the same disease phenotype. The main cause of this discrepancy may include the cellular heterogeneity within tissues, the inherent genetic heterogeneity across patients and the measurement error in microarray platforms. Moreover, the small number of samples that are available to build a classifier makes the problem more difficult (). To address this problem, several methods have been proposed to find more robust biomarkers at the level of functional categories rather than of individual genes (). Because the gene products are well known to function coordinately by way of a functional module or signaling cascade, the high-level perturbed functional modules may be more consistent than individual genes. Thus, integrating the expressions of function-related genes and extracting classification features at the functional level may produce more reproducible biomarkers. The biomarkers at the functional level could alleviate the impact of heterogeneity across the tissues or samples and provide a better biological interpretation of the relationships between the disease and canonical pathways such as the Gene Ontology () and KEGG databases (). A number of feature extraction methods have been used to integrate the expression value of the member genes in canonical pathways.used the mean and median of the expression values of member genes to infer the pathway activity ().used the first principal component of the expression values of the member genes to infer the pathway activity (). In contrast, Lee et al. inferred the pathway activity by using only a subset of genes [conditionresponsive genes (, whose combined expression delivers optimal discriminative power for the disease phenotype (). Other approaches estimated the pathway activity based on probabilistic inference (). The existing methods successfully incorporated the *To whom correspondence should be addressed.