Motivation: Quality assessment of protein structures is an important part of experimental structure validation and plays a crucial role in protein structure prediction, where the predicted models may contain substantial errors. Most current scoring functions are primarily designed to rank alternative models of the same sequence supporting model selection, whereas the prediction of the absolute quality of an individual protein model has received little attention in the field. However, reliable absolute quality estimates are crucial to assess the suitability of a model for specific biomedical applications. Results: In this work, we present a new absolute measure for the quality of protein models, which provides an estimate of the degree of nativeness of the structural features observed in a model and describes the likelihood that a given model is of comparable quality to experimental structures. Model quality estimates based on the QMEAN scoring function were normalized with respect to the number of interactions. The resulting scoring function is independent of the size of the protein and may therefore be used to assess both monomers and entire oligomeric assemblies. Model quality scores for individual models are then expressed as Z-scores in comparison to scores obtained for high-resolution crystal structures. We demonstrate the ability of the newly introduced QMEAN Z-score to detect experimentally solved protein structures containing significant errors, as well as to evaluate theoretical protein models. In a comprehensive QMEAN Z-score analysis of all experimental structures in the PDB, membrane proteins accumulate on one side of the score spectrum and thermostable proteins on the other. Proteins from the thermophilic organism Thermatoga maritima received significantly higher QMEAN Z-scores in a pairwise comparison with their homologous mesophilic counterparts, underlining the significance of the QMEAN Z-score as an estimate of protein stability. Availability: The Z-score calculation has been integrated in the QMEAN server available at: http://swissmodel.expasy.org/qmean.
INTRODUCTIONIn homology modelling, the quality of a model is largely dictated by the evolutionary distance of the protein of interest (target) * To whom correspondence should be addressed. to the available template structures. The sensitivity of tools for detecting remote homologues with very low sequence identity has increased significantly in recent years due to the development of sophisticated algorithms () and growth in sequence databases (). However, with decreasing sequence similarity, an increasing amount of structural divergence is observed (), and the resulting models may contain significant inaccuracies, especially models built on distant templates. Typical sources of errors range from misplaced side chains, incorrect loop conformations, backbone distortions, alignment errors, to choice of a template with incorrect fold (). Ultimately, the accuracy of a protein model determines its suitability for biomedical applications. However, at the time of modelling the quality of a model is unknown and has to be predicted as well. For this purpose, scoring functions have been developed that evaluate different structural features of protein models in order to generate a quality estimate. Most scoring functions are primarily designed to rank alternative models of the same protein sequence (). However, variability in model quality between different target proteins is typically by far larger than the variability within the ensemble of models generated by different prediction methods for a given protein (). Therefore, relative ranking of alternative models for a given protein is insufficient for determining its usefulness for biomedical applications such as drug design, mutagenesis experiments, analysis of functional sites, etc. Reliable absolute quality estimates are crucial for the scientist intending to use computational models (). The prediction of absolute model quality has rarely been addressed in the literature: the pioneering tool ProSA () has primarily been developed to evaluate experimental structures and estimates the statistical significance of a structure by comparing its knowledge-based score to random structures with the same sequence. The ProSA Z-score can hardly be used as a measure of absolute model quality as it is highly dependent on the protein size (i.e. the energy gap between the native fold and random decoy structures increases with protein size).apply support vector regression to estimate the quality of models based on other modelling cases with similar properties selected from a large database of precompiled structure-model pairs generated by thePage: 344 343350