Motivation: Influenza A viral heterogeneity remains a significant threat due to unpredictable anti-genic drift in seasonal influenza and antigenic shifts caused by the emergence of novel subtypes.
IntroductionVaccines are the most efficacious and efficient medical intervention known. While vaccines based on inactivated or attenuated whole microbes or single protein subunits have proved widely useful, vaccines based on ensembles of epitopes remain underexploited. We have recently developed a powerful new approach to the design of epitope ensemble vaccines combining available experimental data with informatics-based immunological predictions (). This approach now begins to gain a gratifyingly widening acceptance as a vaccine design tool (). Influenza is an infectious acute respiratory disease caused by single-negative-strand RNA viruses of the family Orthomyxoviridae, within which three generaInfluenzavirus A, Influenzavirus B and Influenzavirus Ccontain viral strains corresponding to influenza types A, B and C, respectively (ICTV, 2015; http://ictvonline.org/ virusTaxonomy.asp). Treatment when necessary includes antivirals to relieve symptoms and reduce complications. However, prevention through vaccination is currently the most effective strategy to combat influenza viruses (). Only influenza A has both seasonal epidemic and pandemic capability and is classified into subtypes according to its hemagglutinin (HA) and neuraminidase (NA) surface glycoprotein antigens (). Influenza A caused the), Asian (1957) and Hong Kong (1968) flu pandemics, which all led to global mortality in the millions (), as well as the milder 2009 pandemic. Pandemic strains from both 2009 (H1N1) and 1968 (H3N2) continue to circulate as seasonal influenza maintained by antigenic drift where mutations occur on the antigenic binding sites of NA and HA. However, pandemic strains arise through antigenic shifts, where a new subtype emerges via gene re-assortment after distinct influenza viruses co-infect an intermediate host. Seasonal flu vaccines are mediated by antibody responses against NA and HA proteins, which unfortunately are highly variable; the large numbers of annual deaths continues to raise serious questions about the effectiveness of current vaccines and vaccination strategies (World Health Organisation, 2009; http://www.who.int/ csr/don/2009_09_18/en/). Formulating a 'universal vaccine' where multiple strains are targeted to induce so-called heterosubtypic immunity (HSI) may prove more effective in combating novel strains before they can go on to cause pandemics (). Studies in animal models have suggested that generating cellular immunity via T cell responses may induce broad, cross-reactive protection that current vaccines apparently lack. T cells target exposed and non-exposed proteins that are processed and presented by Human Leukocyte Antigens (HLAs). There are two main types of T cells: cytotoxic CD8 T cell lymphocytes (CTLs) and CD4. CTLs recognize antigens presented by HLA class I (HLA I) molecules while CD4 T cell recognize antigens presented by HLA class II (HLA II) molecules. The role of CTL in cellular immunity includes the direct clearance of virally infected cells and the indirect recruitment of other immune cells via chemokine and cytokine secretion. CD4 T cells' primary roles include B cell stimulation leading to specific antigen antibody production as well as stimulating CD8 proliferation and memory responses. CD4 T cells also mediate direct and indirect viral clearance, and symptom severity reduction in secondary infection (). Many targets for influenza vaccine-development have been investigated, including those inducing T cell and/or B cell responses; e.g. the highly conserved 'stalk' domain of HA, termed HA2 (). Other evidence has implicated nucleoprotein (NP) and Matrix 1 (M1) as vaccine targets capable of inducing cross protection via enhanced T cell activation (). Another potential vaccine target is influenza matrix protein 2 (M2e). Initially this seemed highly conserved and induced broadly acting antibodies. However, over 20 variants of M2e were later identified in newly emerging influenza A strains, raising questions over its usefulness as a 'universal' vaccine. Nevertheless, regions of M2e may still be useful for inducing broadly acting protection (). Conserved targets would be useful in formulating a 'universal' vaccine, as they would cover multiple viral subtypes (). Such 'universal' vaccine design can potentially be addressed by a T-cell epitope ensemble vaccine comprising short, highly conserved, immunogenic peptides from influenza able to activate T cells. Some epitope-based influenza vaccines are already in clinical trials. One, Multimeric-001, which consists of a single recombinant protein composed of B and T cell epitopes, is seen to induce both cellular and humoral immunity (). Although such trials have been small, they are promising, inducing cross protective immunity without severe side effects. We address here the design of epitope ensemble vaccines that have wide coverage of the human population in terms of HLA binding and wide coverage of different viral subtypes. Such an approach draws strong support from both theoretical studies () and from a wealth of recent experimentally verified vaccines developed with concordant goals, including inter alia filoviruses (), HIV (), Dengue virus (), Survivin () and Metapneumovirus (). In what follows, we expand on an emerging paradigm within rational vaccine design () to include class II epitopes, and identify multiple, conserved influenza A T cell epitopes that together comprise putative non-seasonal flu vaccines.