Motivation: Estimating gene regulatory networks over biological lineages is central to a deeper understanding of how cells evolve during development and differentiation. However, one challenge in estimating such evolving networks is that their host cells not only contiguously evolve, but also branch over time. For example, a stem cell evolves into two more specialized daughter cells at each division, forming a tree of networks. Another example is in a laboratory setting: a biologist may apply several different drugs individually to malignant cancer cells to analyze the effects of each drug on the cells; the cells treated by one drug may not be intrinsically similar to those treated by another, but rather to the malignant cancer cells they were derived from. Results: We propose a novel algorithm, Treegl, an 1 plus total variation penalized linear regression method, to effectively estimate multiple gene networks corresponding to cell types related by a tree-genealogy, based on only a few samples from each cell type. Treegl takes advantage of the similarity between related networks along the biological lineage, while at the same time exposing sharp differences between the networks. We demonstrate that our algorithm performs significantly better than existing methods via simulation. Furthermore we explore an application to a breast cancer dataset, and show that our algorithm is able to produce biologically valid results that provide insight into the progression and reversion of breast cancer cells. Availability: Software will be available at
INTRODUCTIONA major challenge in systems biology is to quantitatively understand and model the topological and functional properties of cellular networks, such as the transcriptional regulatory circuitries and signal transduction pathways that control cell behavior in complex biological processes. In complex organisms, biological processes such as differentiation and development are often controlled by a large number of molecules that exchange information in a spatialtemporally specific and context-dependent manner. These cellular * To whom correspondence should be addressed.  The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint First Authors. networks are inevitably changing to take on different functions and reacting to changing environments. This necessitates studying different networks for each condition, such as each different developmental stage, tissue subtype, and cell lineage. Most existing techniques for reconstructing molecular networks based on high-throughput data ignore the intricate dependencies between networks of closely related biological subjects. For example, when studying cancer development, it is common to infer gene networks based on microarray data from different cancer specimens or cell lines separately and independently, despite that these biomaterials are usually collected over a contiguous disease progression course. As we discuss in detail, such an 'isolationist' strategy can compromise both the statistical power and biological insight of the inferred networks. In this article, we present a new methodology called Treegl, which adopts a statistically more powerful and biologically more natural 'connectionist' principle. Treegl reconstructs gene networks in related biological subjects via an inter-dependent approach such that the inferred networks directly embody and exploit the relationships of the biological subjects they represent. As a result, this reveals deeper insight on how the structure, function, and behavior of such networks evolve during evolution, differentiation and environmental perturbation. To better understand our rationale, take the analysis of stem cell differentiation as an example. It is well known that all organ-and tissue-specific cells in a multicellular organism are differentiated from a stem cell, following a well-known genealogy (). To date, gene networks from many of these organs and tissues have been derived using a variety of computational or experimental technologies (). However, knowledge about the cell lineage has rarely been utilized in constructing these networks. For example, according to the genealogy in, the platelets are more closely related to the red blood cells than to the lymphoblasts. The gene networks present in the platelets and red blood cells are thus expected to be more similar; microarray data from red blood cells should reflect the topology of a platelet's network to a greater extent than that of a lymphoblast network. Is it therefore legitimate and possible to use the red blood cell's microarray in addition to the platelet's microarray to infer the platelet's network? And, if yes, how? Essentially, what one needs to handle is a network of networks. In this article, we focus on the class of tree-shaped biological genealogies. This class of genealogies can be naturally found in crop and animal breeding, species evolution, cell-line lineage construction, and carcinogenesis.A tree-evolving network in the blood stem cell genealogy (http://www .siteman.wustl.edu/CancerDetails.aspx?id=661xml=CDR257990.xml). At the root is the blood stem cell. Over time it differentiates into more specialized cells along the genealogy, eventually becoming red blood cells, platelets, or white blood cells. Cell types closer together in the genealogy (e.g. lymphoblasts and white blood cells), are expected to have more similar gene regulatory networks than those far apart in the genealogy (e.g. red blood cells and white blood cells).