Motivation: An estimated 10–30% of clinically recognized conceptions are aneuploid, leading to spontaneous miscarriages, in vitro fertilization failures and, when viable, severe developmental disabilities. With the ongoing reduction in the cost of genotyping and DNA sequencing, the use of high-density single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) markers for clinical diagnosis of aneuploidy and biomedical research into its causes is becoming common practice. A reliable, flexible and computationally feasible method for inferring the sources of aneuploidy is thus crucial. Results: We propose a new method, TroX, for analyzing human tri-somy data using high density SNP markers from a trisomic individual or product of conception and one parent. Using a hidden Markov model, we infer the stage of the meiotic error (I or II) and the individual in which non-disjunction event occurred, as well as the crossover locations on the trisomic chromosome. A novel and important feature of the method is its reliance on data from the proband and only one parent, reducing the experimental cost by a third and enabling a larger set of data to be used. We evaluate our method by applying it to simulated trio data as well as to genotype data for 282 trios that include a child trisomic for chromosome 21. The analyses show the method to be highly reliable even when data from only one parent are available. With the increasing availability of DNA samples from mother and fetus, application of approaches such as ours should yield unprecedented insights into the genetic risk factors for aneuploidy. Availability and implementation: An R package implementing TroX is available for download at
INTRODUCTIONA fundamental step in meiosis is the segregation of chromosomes to create haploid egg and sperm cells. In humans, this process is highly error-prone: 1030% of clinically recognized pregnancies are thought to be aneuploid, i.e. to carry an abnormal number of chromosomes (). The vast majority of aneuploid pregnancies result in spontaneous miscarriages or lead to severe developmental disabilities in the child when not embryonic lethal (). Conversely, aneuploidy underlies more than a third of spontaneous miscarriages (). Aneuploidy results from the improper segregation of chromosomes to daughter cells (termed non-disjunction) and can in principle occur in either male or female and in mitosis or meiosis. In practice, in humans, the vast majority of non-disjunction events ($9095%) are of maternal origin (). Meiotic non-disjunction can further originate in meiosis I (MI), if homologous chromosomes fail to disjoin, or in meiosis II (MII), if sister chromatids do not segregate properly (). Errors in MI are thought to be more common, though the proportions vary across chromosomes [e.g. MII is more common for chromosome 18 (. Among known risk factors for aneuploidy are maternal age, with rates of trisomies increasing exponentially after the age of approximately 35 (), and errors in recombination. In humans, as in most sexually reproducing organisms, there is an obligate crossover per chromosome to ensure proper disjunction (see, and references therein). If no crossover occurs (and in the absence of a backup mechanism for achiasmatic segregation), chromatids are distributed randomly into daughter cells and thus are expected to result in aneuploidy in half the cases. Accordingly, the genetic map of chromosomes that experience non-disjunction in MI is shorter than seen in proper disjunctions (). In addition to too few crossovers, an abnormal placement of crossovers (e.g. events unusually close to the centromere) has been associated with chromosome 16 and 21 trisomies (Hassold and Hunt, 2001 and references therein). Beyond these features, little is known about the risk factors for non-disjunction. In particular, it remains unclear how much the locations of crossovers overlap between transmissions with proper disjunction and transmissions that lead to aneuploidy. The analysis of genetic data from trisomic children or trisomic products of conceptions (POC; henceforth referred to as 'probands') and their parents allows one to identify the stage (MI or MII) in which the non-disjunction occurred and the origin (maternal or paternal). In a subset of cases, it also allows one to infer the locations of a subset of crossover events that occurred on the tetrad of the chromosome that did not disjoin properly (). Thus, as genotyping and sequencing methods become much more accessible and as non-invasive methods to sample fetal DNA from maternal blood become widespread (), there is an *To whom correspondence should be addressed. unprecedented opportunity to gain a better understanding of genetic risk factors for non-disjunction. There exist a number of methods to infer the stage of meiosis at which non-disjunction occurred and to identify crossovers. All are based on the same basic idea: to look for chromosome segments in which the trisomic chromosome has retained the paternal or maternal heterozygosity (). Whether this segment surrounds the centromere is indicative of the stage of meiosis in which non-disjunction occurred, and the switches between retained heterozygosity and homozygosity point to the location of crossovers (). Existing methods suffer from important limitations, however. Some rely on few highly polymorphic markers such as microsatellites () and are not computationally feasible for highdensity markers, so do not allow recombination events to be precisely localized. Others can handle single nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) genotype data, but require data from both parents (), as well as complete triploid genotype calls for the proband (requiring that, for example, ATT be distinguished from AAT instead of simply read as heterozygous;). None of the existing methods have an explicit error model; instead, they rely on post hoc filtering to identify crossovers, potentially leading to errors and inconsistencies among studies. Finally, and perhaps most importantly from a practical standpoint, none of the computationally feasible methods can accommodate missing data from the male, when collecting samples from both male and female is often prohibitive. Motivated by these considerations, we developed a new method, TroX (trisomy crossover), and made the software available online as an R package. It uses a hidden Markov model (HMM) to identify the parent and stage of meiosis in which non-disjunction occurred and calls crossover locations on the chromosome involved in non-disjunction from dense SNP data. The method can be used on trio data or data from only the proband and one parent, and takes into account genotyping errors and missing data. Moreover, our method can be applied to diploid genotype data from the trisomic chromosome (i.e. where ATT and AAT are both simply considered heterozygous). We assessed the performance of our method using simulated trisomic sequences based on individuals from the 1000 Genomes Project () and, to evaluate how well the method performed when the father is masked, we applied the method to 282 trios with trisomy 21 previously analyzed by Oliver et al. (2012).
DISCUSSIONExisting methods for analyzing human trisomies using dense SNP data rely on the availability of DNA samples from both the mother and the father. However, it is often impractical to obtain a sample from the father, which in turn causes in a drastic reduction of full trios for study. For example, in a prospective study of recurrent miscarriages, paternal DNA was not available in $80% of the cases (Z. Williams, personal communication). By requiring only the sequence from the mother and the proband, our method overcomes this limitation. Importantly, our results suggest that even with diploid data, missing data from the male do not affect our estimates of the number of crossovers and stage of the error, unless the father is the NDJP. In this case, estimates of crossover locations become less reliable. However, this scenario should constitutes 510% of all cases [assuming that in 80% of the cases the data from the father are not available and a $10% chance that the father is the NDJP (. Thus, for most practical purposes, a sample from the father is unnecessary for these inferences, and therefore, our method allows one to reduce experimental costs by a third. A further advantage of our method is that, by incorporating an explicit error model, it bypasses the need to filter markers somewhat arbitrarily in ways that could introduce differences among studies. In addition, the method allows for missing parental data at a given site, increasing the number of markers that can be used. Our simulations further indicate that, without paternal data, the method performs better in estimating the number of crossovers when applied to AFR populations as compared with CEU populations (Supplementary Figures S5). One explanation is that in our model, we ignore linkage disequilibrium (LD) among sites and because LD levels are higher in EUR population, this assumption may be more problematic. We examined this hypothesis by applying the method on simulated sequences with no LD, and indeed, the method performs better in this case (data notshown). If precise resolution of crossovers is not important to the specific study, one solution might then be to thin the markers so to minimize LD among them, or alternatively to thin the markers to call crossovers and then localize them using all the data. One limitation of our method is that it relies on accurate knowledge about the ancestry of the parent whose data are missing. To assess the effect of using incorrect ancestry information, we switched population labels between CEU and AFR in the trisomy 21 samples, and reanalyzed the data. Our results suggest that the reliability of inference about the parent of origin remains the same and in 97% of the cases, estimates of the meiotic stage of the error are unaffected. In contrast, estimates of the number of crossovers become less reliable, with 23% of cases showing a different number than with the correct ancestry (13% after application of our filters). A related problem is what would happen if the parent whose data are missing is admixed. Both problems could be overcome either by extending this approach to consider the ancestries as additional parameters to be inferred by the method or by using methods such as principal component analysis (e.g.) to infer the ancestry of the missing parent from the proband and maternal genotype data. In conclusion, the rapid decrease in genotyping and sequencing costs, in combination with the advent of non-invasive approaches to sample fetal DNA from a maternal blood sample (), allow the genomes of mother and fetus to be readily surveyed. Among these will be a substantial fraction of cases in which the fetus is trisomic. Application of our method and related approaches to such data should yield unprecedented insight into recombination profiles that underlie non-disjunction and ultimately help to identify risk factors of aneuploidy in humans. An open source R package implementing our approach is available at http://przeworski.uchicago.edu/. Users can choose one of our error models or specify their own.