Motivation: A special characteristic of data from molecular biology is the frequent occurrence of zero intensity values which can arise either by true absence of a compound or by a signal that is below a technical limit of detection. Results: While so-called two-part tests compare mixture distributions between groups, one-part tests treat the zero-inflated distributions as left-censored. The left-inflated mixture model combines these two approaches. Both types of distributional assumptions and combinations of both are considered in a simulation study to compare power and estimation of log fold change. We discuss issues of application using an example from peptidomics. The considered tests generally perform best in scenarios satisfying their respective distributional assumptions. In the absence of distributional assumptions, the two-part Wilcoxon test or the empirical likelihood ratio test is recommended. Assuming a log-normal subdistribution the left-inflated mixture model provides estimates for the proportions of the two considered types of zero intensities. Availability: R code is available at
IntroductionThe appropriateness of a statistical test for detecting differential expression in omics experiments, e.g. microRNA, metabolomics or peptidomics, is primarily determined by the data distribution. After pre-processing steps intensity values of such experiments typically show a distribution consisting of a certain proportion of values at a point-mass at zero (point-mass values, PMVs) and a continuous component.distinguish between two types of PMVs: biological PMVs (BPMVs), meaning that the compound's intensity is absent; and technical PMVs (where a compound is present but its signal is below the limit of detection (LOD). Data taken from http://mosaiques-diagnostics.de/diapatpcms/ mosaiquescms/front_content.php?idcat257 will be used to demonstrate the occurrence of PMVs (see). Urine samples from 100 patients with chronic kidney disease (CKD; estimated glomerular filtration rate  45) and 100 samples from control patients (estimated glomerular filtration rate  60) are available. The dataset comprises 5,616 peptides of 25 randomly selected CKD and 25 control patients. Across all peptides the median PMV proportion amounts to 96% (quartiles 80%, 100%) in the control and 92% (quartiles 80%, 100%) in the CKD group. For the majority of peptides the PMV proportions in the two groups are V C The Author 2015. Published by Oxford University Press. All rights reserved. For Permissions, please e-mail: journals.permissions@oup.com close to each other (quartiles of the intra-compound difference of the number of PMVs are 1 and 2).shows histograms for two selected peptides. Similarly to the definition of biological and technical PMVs, Taylor and Pollard (2009) distinguish between 'true zeros' and 'truncated values' where the truncation results either from signals below the LOD or from a 'lower bound on meaningful signal set by the researcher'. Examples of such lower bounds are given infor microarray data. The same authors also discuss DNA methylation data where negative results due to only partially or un-methylated test regions would correspond to BPMVs in our nomenclature. BPMVs are also comparable to the 'rancid part of the sample' in Hallstrom (2010). In typical omics experiments, both, biological and technical, PMVs may occur. A biological phenomenon may lead to highly expressed compounds in one part of the samples, but to low or absent signals in another part, where different compounds are activated instead. This could be caused by sporadic posttranslational modifications which do not directly connect to the investigated experimental condition. As a result, for many compounds the observed distribution of intensities will be bimodal, with a lower mode exactly at the point mass and an upper mode characterizing the location of the continuous, i.e. highly expressed, part of the distribution. TPMVs may have two reasons: first, in some compounds, the distribution of intensities may be characterized by a high variance and a low mean but without bimodality. In these compounds we will find a high proportion of values below detection limit. Second, it is also plausible that the true intensity of a compound is just above the detection limit, but is not correctly detected because of technical reasons such as interference (e.g. adsorption of the compound or signal suppression) or misinterpretation of the signal (e.g. caused by incorrect charge assignment or error in monoisotopic mass determination). Therefore, statistical test procedures for comparing omics data between groups have to accommodate the information contained not only in the continuous part of the distribution but also the information present in the biological as well as in the TPMVs. Depending on whether the PMVs are considered as technical or biological the distribution of the continuous part is more adequately described by a left-censored or by a fully observed (uncensored) distribution. According to the observed distributions of compounds in two groups, Taylor and Pollard (2009) as well ashave distinguished between consonant and dissonant compounds. The former are characterized by exhibiting the higher PMV proportion in the group with the lower mean in the continuous part, while in the latter case the group with the higher PMV proportion also has the higher mean. This definition does not distinguish between technical and biological PMVs. However, the occurrence of TPMVs naturally corresponds to consonant compounds whereas BPMVs generally allow for both types. In our dataset we found 2942 (52%) consonant and 1153 (21%) dissonant peptides (27% have equal PMV proportions). An example of each type is shown in. There is extensive literature, independent of the context of omics data, on two-group comparisons for data including values below a LOD. A thorough overview is given by, who investigate the following test statistics (among others): various ad-hoc approaches to impute PMVs before applying a T-test; Tobit models for an explicit modeling of left-censored distributions; and log-rank type tests applied to the 'flipped' and thus right-censored data (see also). In all these tests, in some way or another, the PMVs are seen as being an implicit part of the full distribution instead of as one of two independent components of a mixture distribution. In this sense we will denote these tests as one-part tests and view them as primarily targeting distributions that contain TPMVs. Up to now the test statistics explicitly proposed for omics data comprise only two-part tests. These contain two independent components that contribute to a pooled test statistic, one measuring differences in the PMV proportion and the other one in the continuous subdistribution. Two-part test statistics are by construction adequate for cases where PMVs are primarily assumed as biological. Furthermore, the non-parametric empirical likelihood ratio test (ELRT) proposed byis implicitly of a two-part nature. The only two one-part tests investigated as competitors by these authors are the t-test and Wilcoxon's ranksum test. The same holds for other comparison studies such as that of. The goal of this paper is to evaluate the various statistical tests proposed for comparing distributions with zero-inflation under scenarios allowing for both types of PMVs. To our best knowledge no simulation study has yet been performed that directly compares two-part and one-part tests for the setting of omics data controlling for biological as well as technical PMVs simultaneously. The following section gives an overview of the test statistics considered for comparison in this paper. The subsequent two sections present the results of a comprehensive simulation study and of the application to the above mentioned real peptidomics data. The final section will discuss strengths and limitations of our study and draw some conclusions.
ApplicationIn this section the previously introduced and evaluated statistical tests are applied to the motivating dataset presented in the introduction. For this purpose we first restrict the dataset to peptides with a PMV proportion below 70% ignoring group labels. The restricted dataset contains 787 peptides with a median PMV proportion at 52% (quartiles 32% to 62%) including 408 (51.8%) consonant and 322 (40.9%) dissonant peptides and 57 (7.3%) with equal PMV proportions.shows the pair-wise correlations between the (uncorrected) p-values of the discussed tests. Spearman correlation coefficients of at least 0.80 are observed within the group of onepart tests with a few exceptions as well as within the group of all two-part tests and the LIM-LRT. The following method for controlling the False Discovery Rate (FDR) is used to adjust for multiple testing among the 1093 peptides: for various thresholds a we estimated false discovery rates () using are the empirical cumulative distribution functions of all p-values across all peptides in the restricted original dataset and across all peptides and all permutations, respectively, and ^ p 0 is the estimated proportion of genes for which the null hypothesis applies. This procedure resembles the one outlined in Kerr (2009) except of using ^ F p0 a   instead of a in the numerator. Finally,q-values based on these estimates of the FDR are given.presents the numbers of compounds declared significant based on a FDR of 0.05. As expected from our simulations the twopart tests and the LIM-LRT show a higher proportion of dissonant peptides among those declared significant than the other tests. As seen from the kappa coefficients inthere is a lower overlap of significant compounds between the LIM-LRT and the group of two-part tests than within the two-part tests. To assess whether technical or biological PMVs play a larger role in the set of 787 peptides we use the PMV proportion estimates from the LIM models. The median number of technical and biological PMVs is 0.1 (quartiles 0.1, 0.5) and 12.9 (quartiles 8.6, 16.6), respectively, in the CKD group and 0.3 (quartiles 0.1, 1.0) and 9.4 (quartiles 4.1, 13.4), respectively, in the control group. Across all 787 peptides, the median of the proportion of biological among all PMVs within a given peptide is 98.9% (quartiles 95.6%, 99.9%) in the CKD and 95.7% (quartiles 84.9%, 98.9%) in the control group. However, we have learned from Supplementarythat the proportion of BPMVs might be overestimated in the respective group with the lower location parameter. In addition to the prevailing, but not exclusive biological nature of the PMVs in this dataset the continuous parts largely exhibit an approximate (left-censored) log-normal distribution (graphical inspection, results not shown). Thus, the LIM-LRT and the two-part tests (including the ELRT) seem most appropriate for analysis. The detailed results for the two example peptides presented inare shown in. There are striking discrepancies between the two-part tests and the LIM-LRT on the one hand and the one-part tests on the other. For the consonant peptide the TobitSensitivity (Specificity): percent of peptides declared significant (non-significant) in 2  100 samples that are also significant (non-significant) in the presented 2  25 samples (see text)shows that the agreement between (subdistribution) LFC estimates is generally high among the two-part tests whereas there are large discrepancies with and among one-part tests (by construction the estimates of mT and 2T and those of 2W and ELRT are identical). The results for the top 25 peptides selected by the LIM-LRT are summarized in Supplementary. It can be seen that the proportion of TPMVs among the selected peptides is disproportionately high, 21 of the top 25 peptides exhibit TPMVs in at least one group. Furthermore, 10 of these peptides are dissonant. Finally, we re-examined the same set of peptides with the same methods in larger groups of 100 CKD cases and 100 controls which contains the 2  25 samples investigated so far as a subsample. As seen in the last two columns ofthe internal consistency in terms of sensitivity relative to the larger groups is generally higher for one-part tests and is smallest for the LIM-LRT. This pattern is quite similar in three other randomly selected 2  25 samples (results not shown). Specificity is generally around 85%.
DiscussionThis paper tries to fill the gap between proposals for handling PMVs in the context of omics data and those for general or other specific types of data showing a zero-inflation phenomenon. We applied several test statistics in an extensive simulation study and to a real dataset. We observed large differences between the results from one-part and two-part tests. This is a direct consequence of their respective construction. In the simulation study we generated data simultaneously exhibiting biological and technical PMVs since it is plausible that a (known or unknown) underlying mechanism controls the binomial part independently from the continuous part and from the mechanism producing the TPMVs. In contrast, the 'dependency model' by Hallstrom (2010) tends to produce only consonant distributions despite two independent sources of PMVs. It is clear from our investigations that the two considered types of PMVs have different implications for the operation characteristics of the considered tests. All tests of the one-part or the two-part types explicitly serve only one type of PMV but may be more or less robust to the other. Our results show that one-part tests give acceptable results for equal proportions of BPMVs. Generally, two-part tests show higher TPRs and the corresponding estimates have low bias depending on the proportion of TPMVs. For a particular data analysis it may often be difficult to judge whether the observed PMVs are technical or biological. The LIM-LRT offers a way to circumvent a decision between one-part and two-part tests by allowing for and explicitly estimating the proportion of both types of PMVs. The interpretation of the measures of location corresponding to one-part and two-part tests is quite different. For one-part tests location measures, and differences between groups calculated from them, are based on the full distribution of values, including the unobserved signals, which are generally assumed as being leftcensored. By contrast, two-part tests supply two separate estimates of group difference, one for the PMV proportion and one corresponding to the difference between the group-specific subdistributions of continuous values. In estimating these group differences, none of the two-part tests distinguishes between technical and biological PMVs unlike the LIM-LRT. By making a distributional assumption on the continuous subdistribution, the LIM-LRT can provide such a distinction, which can be useful in situations where both technical and biological PMVs occur. The group difference in the PMV proportions estimated by the LIM-LRT only incorporates those PMVs that have been classified as biological. We showed that the distinction between consonant and dissonant compounds has a large impact on test performance. It is, however, unclear if investigators are at all interested in detecting dissonant compounds by rejecting a compound two-part null hypothesis. As described in the introduction dissonant compounds of scientific interest could arise if several compounds are alternatively activated by the same biological phenomenon. This aspect, however, is more appropriately covered by testing whole sets of compounds instead of a single compound at a time. Further investigations are needed to see whether the likelihood ratio nature of the LIM-LRT allows for a useful extension along those lines. This study did not consider other continuous distributions than the normal distribution (on the log 2 scale). Extensions in this direction have been investigated byfor two-part tests and byfor the Tobit model. These authors observed that parametric test statistics were fairly robust to other distributions. We also did not consider different variability in the two groups and across compounds and set all variances in the simulations equal to one. Neither did we vary the LOD across compounds or samples. In analogy to tW we also investigated a truncated version of the T-test (see Supplement) with a performance close to that of tW (results not shown). In conclusion, the two-part Wilcoxon test and the ELRT show good overall properties without any distributional assumptions for the continuous part. They are recommendable if technical PMVs can be ruled out beforehand. If the assumption of a (left-censored) log-normal subdistribution is reasonable and technical PMVs are possible then the LIM-LRT is an interesting alternative.. Differences of (subdistribution) LFC estimates (row minus column). Upper triangle: medians; lower triangle (italic): interquartile ranges W T tW mT Tob 2W 2T ELRT LIM W 1.0 0.0 0.5 0.9 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 T 3.8 1.3 0.7 2.6 0.7 0.7 0.7 0.7 Tw 2.0 7.1 0.5 0.7 0.5 0.5 0.5 0.6 mT 1.4 4.1 2.2 2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 Tob 4.4 8.9 2.2 4.7 2.0 2.0 2.0 2.0 2W 1.3 4.1 2.1 0.2 4.7 0.0 0.0 0.1 2T 1.4 4.0 2.2 0.0 4.6 0.2 0.0 0.0 ELRT 1.3 4.1 2.1 0.2 4.7 0.0 0.2 0.1 LIM 1.7 4.5 2.2 0.2 4.6 0.4 0.2 0.4