Motivation: The detection of structural variations (SVs) in short-range Paired-End (PE) libraries remains challenging because SV breakpoints can involve large dispersed repeated sequences, or carry inherent complexity, hardly resolvable with classical PE sequencing data. In contrast, large insert-size sequencing libraries (Mate-Pair libraries) provide higher physical coverage of the gen-ome and give access to repeat-containing regions. They can thus theoretically overcome previous limitations as they are becoming routinely accessible. Nevertheless, broad insert size distributions and high rates of chimerical sequences are usually associated to this type of libraries, which makes the accurate annotation of SV challenging. Results: Here, we present Ulysses, a tool that achieves drastically higher detection accuracy than existing tools, both on simulated and real mate-pair sequencing datasets from the 1000 Human Genome project. Ulysses achieves high specificity over the complete spectrum of variants by assessing , in a principled manner, the statistical significance of each possible variant (duplications, deletions, translocations, insertions and inversions) against an explicit model for the generation of experimental noise. This statistical model proves particularly useful for the detection of low frequency variants. SV detection performed on a large insert Mate-Pair library from a breast cancer sample revealed a high level of somatic duplications in the tumor and, to a lesser extent, in the blood sample as well. Altogether, these results show that Ulysses is a valuable tool for the characterization of somatic mosaicism in human tissues and in cancer genomes. Availability and implementation: Ulysses is available at
IntroductionOur current understanding of the structural and functional impact of SV onto the biology of genomes has largely benefited from the development of the second generation of DNA sequencing technologies. The computational detection of SV has mainly relied on the development of four methodological strategies, the 'read-depth' method (), the 'split-read' method (), the de novo genome assembly () and the 'Paired-End' method. Some detection tools have increased SV detection specificity and breakpoint resolution by combining several of these detection strategies (). Computational analyses using these approaches demonstrated that large SV are major contributors to the genomic polymorphism between individuals (). Polymorphic SV were shown to contribute to both common diseases and rare genomic disorders and to alter normal gene function during cancer development (). New approaches have also started to reveal the quantitative importance of somatic SV in healthy tissues such as neuron or blood cells (). However, the true level of somatic mosaicism probably remains underestimated, owing to the limitations inherent in classical shortrange PE libraries. More SV are now theoretically accessible thanks to the recent development of long-range Mate Pair (MP) libraries in which the two reads can be separated by several kilobases. MP libraries present major advantages over classical PE libraries because large inserts can span over large repeated regions often involved in SV formation and because MP libraries provide, for the same number of reads, a much higher physical coverage of the genome. Higher physical coverage triggers the possibility of uncovering SV that are present at low frequency in mosaic genomes. However, MP libraries involve a ligation step during the library construction which generates a large amount of chimerical Read Pairs (RPs), making those library prone to higher rates of false-positive SV. In addition, MP libraries suffer from wide insert size (IS) distributions, which bring additional noise to the detection of deletion and insertion events. These limitations explain why currently available SV detection tools that were developed for short-range PE libraries perform badly on MP data. Here, we report a new PEM-based software, called Ulysses, specifically designed to detect SV in MP datasets. Ulysses comprises a SV scoring module, which improves SV detection accuracy in MP libraries. Our algorithm can annotate the full spectrum of SV, including deletions (DEL), segmental duplications (DUP), inversions (INV), small insertions (sINS, with a size smaller than the library IS), large insertions (INS), reciprocal translocations (RTs) and non-reciprocal translocations (NRT). Benchmarks on real MP sequencing datasets from the 1000 Human Genome project, on MP simulated datasets as well as on a breast cancer tumor MP library showed that Ulysses outperforms three commonly used detection tools), GASVpro () and Delly (for all types of SV and notably for low frequency structural variants in MP libraries. In addition, Ulysses is on par with or outperforms the three other tools on PE datasets, making it a highly versatile detection tool.
DiscussionUlysses uses a PEM approach that relies on the identification of groups of discordant RP to detect the full spectrum of SV. This strategy, also implemented in the three other detection tools tested here, is highly sensitive but usually lacks specificity when used alone on MP data with wide IS distribution and high proportion of chimerical RP. To overcome these limitations, we developed in Ulysses a scoring module that statistically assesses the genuineness of all candidates SV, given an explicit model for the generation of chimerical RP. To deal with wide IS distribution, Ulysses evaluates IS consistency between RP and filters out groups of RP with inconsistent IS. To deal with high proportions of chimerical RP (up to 5%), Ulysses uses statistics based on the relative coverage of candidate SV. These two parameters automatically adjust to the characteristics of the library such that no manual tuning is required to achieve detection with good accuracy across all types of SV. As a result, Ulysses is the only tool that performs equally well on MP and PE data. On a real MP sequencing dataset from the 1000 Human Genome Project (NA12878, 30), Ulysses achieves a better sensitivity than the other tools and by several orders of magnitude the best precision. Ulysses also achieves the highest detection accuracy on PE datasets, showing that globally, Ulysses outperforms the other tools no matter the type of sequencing library. Ulysses scoring module brings a major benefit by enabling accurate detection of low coverage variants. Low coverage SV can correspond to rearrangements occurring in genomic regions which are difficult to sequence and where the local coverage could dramatically drop (some regions were shown to be consistently prone to low coverage). Alternatively, low coverage SV could also result from rearrangements only present in a small subset of the cell population. This is of particular interest when analyzing samples that contain polymorphic somatic mutations such as cancer samples. The analysis of somatic mosaicism in a breast tumour sample revealed that Ulysses achieves an efficient detection of both germline and somatic DUP. We also showed that Ulysses is able to detect somatic mosaicism in a blood sample. Furthermore, recent insights onto somatic mosaicism showed that subclonal cell heterogeneity is not restricted to cancer cells and could be common between cells from a single tissue sample. Given such an unsuspected level of somatic genome plasticity, the availability of a SV detection tool like Ulysses, with high accuracy for rare SV is of primary importance.