Interactions of the ESCRT complexes are critical for endosomal trafficking. We identify two domains with potential significance for this process. The MABP domain present in metazoan ESCRT-I/MVB12 subunits, Crag, a regulator of protein sorting, and bacterial pore-forming proteins might mediate novel membrane interactions in trafficking. The UBAP1-MVB12-associated UMA domain found in MVB12 and UBAP1 defines a novel adaptor that might recruit diverse targets to ESCRT-I. Contact: aravind@ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
INTRODUCTIONA key aspect of eukaryotic intracellular trafficking is the sorting of cell-surface proteins into multi-vesicular endosomes or bodies (MVBs), which eventually fuse with the lysosome, where they are degraded by lipases and peptidases. This is the primary mechanism for downregulation of signaling via transmembrane receptors and removal of misfolded or defective membrane proteins (). This process is also utilized by several viruses (e.g. HIV-1) to facilitate budding of their virions from the cell membrane (). Studies in animals and fungi have shown that it depends on an intricate series of interactions, which is initiated via ubiquitination (typically one or more monoubiquitinations) of the cytoplasmic tails of membrane proteins by specific E3 ligases (d'). Ubiquitinated membrane proteins are then captured into endosomes by the ESCRT system and prevented from being recycled back to the plasma membrane via the retrograde trafficking system. The ESCRT system also folds the endosomal membranes into invaginations that are concentrated in these ubiquitinated targets and catalyzes their abscission into intraluminal vesicles inside the endosome. This largely seals the fate of these membrane proteins as targets for lysosomal degradation. The ESCRT system is comprised of four major protein complexes, ESCRT-0 to ESCRT-III, which are successively involved in the above-described steps (). ESCRT-0, containing proteins with multiple Ub-binding modules, is the primary sensor for ubiquitinated membrane proteins. Both ESCRT-I and ESCRT-II have proteins with a single Ub-binding domain and are subsequent successive recipients of the ubiquitinated * To whom correspondence should be addressed. cargo. ESCRT-II proteins also contain lipid-binding modules and are likely to initiate invagination of the endosomal membrane. ESCRT-III, which includes the conserved AAA+ ATPase VPS4 as a component, mediates the final abscission of the invaginated membrane to form the intraluminal vesicle. In this relay, ESCRT-I is the critical bridge between the sensor of ubiquitinated targets and the membrane-binding ESCRT-II. ESCRT-I contains three subunits that are conserved between yeast and animals, namely the inactive E2-ligase protein TSG101/VPS23, VPS28 and VPS37 (). Additionally, both yeast and metazoan ESCRT-I contain a fourth subunit termed MVB12 ['multivesicular body sorting factor of 12 kD' (; however, the MVB12 subunits from the two lineages do not show significant sequence similarity (). Metazoan MVB12 was shown to be critical for receptor endocytosis and also virus release (). Given its key role in receptor downregulation, we were interested in understanding if the lack of detectable similarity with yeast MVB12 might reflect emergence of novel adaptations in animals. Accordingly, we analyzed the animal MVB12 proteins using sensitive sequence and structure analysis methods and identified two novel conserved domains in them. Identification of these domains allowed us to detect several putative, uncharacterized ESCRT-I subunits in animals. Characterization of these domains also provides new insights into recognition of cargo by endosomal sorting regulators.