Unipept is an open source web application that is designed for metaproteomics analysis with a focus on interactive datavisualization. It is underpinned by a fast index built from UniProtKB and the NCBI taxonomy that enables quick retrieval of all UniProt entries in which a given tryptic peptide occurs. Unipept version 2.4 introduced web services that provide programmatic access to the metaproteomics analysis features. This enables integration of Unipept functionality in custom applications and data processing pipelines. Availability and implementation: The web services are freely available at http://api.unipept.ugent. be and are open sourced under the MIT license.
IntroductionUnipept is a web application for biodiversity analysis of complex metaproteomics samples (). The application is powered by a fast index built from UniProtKB () and a cleaned up version of the NCBI taxonomy (). This index enables quick retrieval of all UniProt entries in which a given tryptic peptide occurs. Using the taxonomic annotations of UniProt entries, Unipept also returns the complete set of organisms in which a given peptide occurs. This set of organisms is then processed using a Lowest Common Ancestor (LCA) algorithm to determine the taxonomic specificity of the peptide. All results are presented in clear overview tables and in an interactive treeview. Fast computation of LCAs for given lists of peptides also enables interactive biodiversity analysis of metaproteomics datasets. The biodiversity in complex samples can then be inspected using multiple interactive visualizations such as a treeview (Supplementary), a sunburst view (Supplementary) and a treemap (Supplementary). All visualizations on the Unipept website can be saved as publication-grade graphics, and all analysis results can be exported as Microsoft Excel-compatible CSV files. To guarantee optimal performance and correctness, the Unipept project pursues excellence regarding best practices for modern web application development. One example of this is automatic correctness testing by over 1000 tests after each code change. The entire application including the web services is open source and licensed under the terms of the MIT license. The source code can be found at http://github.com/unipept/unipept. In this article, we present the latest addition to the Unipept toolbox: a set of web services that expose the Unipept analysis functions for use in other applications and data processing pipelines.