Motivation: Clustering of chemical and biochemical data based on observed features is a central cognitive step in the analysis of chemical substances, in particular in combinatorial chemistry, or of complex biochemical reaction networks. Often, for reasons unknown to the researcher, this step produces disappointing results. Once the sources of the problem are known, improved clustering methods might revitalize the statistical approach of compound and reaction search and analysis. Here, we present a generic mechanism that may be at the origin of many clustering difficulties. Results: The variety of dynamical behaviors that can be exhibited by complex biochemical reactions on variation of the system parameters are fundamental system fingerprints. In parameter space, shrimp-like or swallow-tail structures separate parameter sets that lead to stable periodic dynamical behavior from those leading to irregular behavior. We work out the genericity of this phenomenon and demonstrate novel examples for their occurrence in realistic models of biophysics. Although we elucidate the phenomenon by considering the emergence of periodicity in dependence on system parameters in a low-dimensional parameter space, the conclusions from our simple setting are shown to continue to be valid for features in a higher-dimensional feature space, as long as the feature-generating mechanism is not too extreme and the dimension of this space is not too high compared with the amount of available data. Availability and implementation: For online versions of super-para-magnetic clustering see
INTRODUCTIONBiological organisms are able to fabricate intricate machineries from the molecular scale up to the macroscopic scale, without the obvious need to store and to explicitly handle the corresponding information. Synthetic biology, molecular programming and nucleic acid nanotechnology have thus become an experimental playground for the search for systems that carry out humandefined molecular programs, to input, output and manipulate molecular structures (). For chemistry to become the next information technology substrate, improved tools for designing, simulating and analyzing complex molecular circuits and systems are necessary. On the DNA nanotechnology model system, corresponding knowledge is presently quickly growing and the area of alternative computing paradigms starting to take shape. From a physics point of view, biological and physical processes start to converge, so that to describe biochemical computation, concepts from physics can be borrowed and applied (see e.g.;). As will be exhibited below (Figs 1 and 2), most real-world systems exhibit a non-trivial behavior of some observables in time. Many such processes exhibit periodicity (the circadian rhythm, the cell cycle, reproduction), which therefore has often been regarded as a key expression of the essential mechanisms of life. Conversely, irregular behavior is often related to abnormal stimuli or to a defect or disorder of the generating mechanism (the cortex, however, provides an example that shows that this does not necessarily have to be the case; see). Modern methods of measurements and modeling have now provided techniques that permit the observation of dynamical aspects of processes, which in the past, because of a lack of such technology, were described as steady state. Genetic expression processes are an example thereof (). Recently, it has been possible to measure down to single-cell expression, which revealed different kinds of rhythmic to irregular expression patterns (). In our study, we will put forward a generic model that demonstrates that regular and 'stochastic' expression may result from the same non-linear system and that the transition among these states may require small parameter changes only. In Section 5, we will exhibit how more general gene expression complexity may emerge from the generic model. A particular well-known example of regular behavior is the circadian clock. Decades ago, the circadian rhythm was believed to be singularly implemented by means of a central clockwork or pattern generator. It was, however, discovered that the mutation of a single allele of a single locus (called the 'per' gene) triggers Drosophila mutants with different circadian rhythms (). Many of the genes and proteins involved in this process have been evidenced in mammals as well, where the circadian clock arises from the temporally regulated activity of proteingene pairs (). A variety of tissues and cells containing functional autonomous clocks are *To whom correspondence should be addressed. able to maintain their oscillation when placed in vitro, removed from any external cues or signals originating from environmental clocks. This naturally leads to the hypothesis that the circadian rhythm, and more generally periodic dynamics, is dispersed in any living system, with potentially every cell containing a functional clock. From the genetic base, the circadian rhythm is implemented by means of a gene expression network hosting a delayed feedback loop that causes the transcripts to oscillate with an approximate period of 24 h. A recently found period doubling in the mouse () and oscillation bifurcations in the rat () hint at the nonlinear nature of this effect. Non-linearity is also at the heart of the phenomenon that we describe below. The aim of this article is to demonstrate how the distribution of regular and irregular systems is governed by a system's non-linearity in a generic manner and that from this, consequences for the system biology analysis of data may emerge. The two instances of system biological analysis that we discuss at the end of this contribution from this point of view are clustering on a system level and parameter inference. For biological systems, the identification of the areas in parameter space responsible for periodic behavior is therefore an important task.