Motivation: In recent years, large-scale studies have been undertaken to describe, at least partially, protein-protein interaction maps, or interactomes, for a number of relevant organisms, including human. However, current interactomes provide a somehow limited picture of the molecular details involving protein interactions, mostly because essential experimental information, especially structural data, is lacking. Indeed, the gap between structural and interactomics information is enlarging and thus, for most interactions, key experimental information is missing. We elaborate on the observation that many interactions between proteins involve a pair of their constituent domains and, thus, the knowledge of how protein domains interact adds very significant information to any inter-actomic analysis. Results: In this work, we describe a novel use of the neighborhood cohesiveness property to infer interactions between protein domains given a protein interaction network. We have shown that some clustering coefficients can be extended to measure a degree of cohesiveness between two sets of nodes within a network. Specifically, we used the meet/min coefficient to measure the proportion of interacting nodes between two sets of nodes and the fraction of common neighbors. This approach extends previous works where homolog coefficients were first defined around network nodes and later around edges. The proposed approach substantially increases both the number of predicted domain-domain interactions as well as its accuracy as compared with current methods. Availability and implementation: http://
IntroductionCellular processes are regulated by an intricate network of proteinprotein interactions (PPIs) that form both transient as well as more permanent complexes. Different experimental techniques are used to determine PPIs (). However, the molecular details behind the interaction itself are usually not detected and require other types of assays to be determined. In this context, it is well-known that protein function is supported by the underlying structure () and, thus, solving the structure of protein complexes is essential for a detailed understanding of theirfunction. Still, the amount of interactomics data, and the speed at which they are produced, is substantially higher than the pace at which protein structures can be experimentally obtained. Consequently, the development of computational methods to predict some of the details behind sets of proposed PPIs is a must. Lacking experimental structural information about a certain complex, but having that information for its unbound constituent proteins, probably the best approaches fall in the area of protein binding site prediction () or protein docking (). Nonetheless, most of these methods are only suitable when the structure of proteins have been solved, at least partially. This fact has motivated us to focus on the prediction of some characteristics of sets of PPIs based on non-structural information. In this way, we have focused on the important observation that most proteins are composed of one or more domains connected by inter-domain regions (). Moreover, many protein interactions involve a pair of their constituent domains and, thus, how a particular pair of proteins interacts is strongly driven by their domains () (the important case of intrinsically disordered proteins will be discussed in Section 3.3). Consequently, the knowledge of domain-domain interactions (DDIs) is of great value during the analysis of PPIs, helping, for instance, in the identification of potential binding sites (; Moya-Garcia and Ranea, 2013;). The question whether PPIs are mediated via a limited set of domain pairs has been approached in different works. Several studies found that some domain pairs were overrepresented in large datasets of experimentally determined PPIs (). Therefore, the inferred domain pairs were shared by multiple interactions. Using a different type of analysis,studied the relation between structurally derived DDIs and PPI networks of different organisms. Their statistical analysis proved that the number of PPIs attributed to DDIs was significantly larger than expected by random. This result supports the conjecture that PPIs may be driven by a limited catalogue of DDIs. However, the fraction of PPIs to which experimentally determined DDIs could be mapped back in 2006 ranged from 6 to 20% in different organisms. Indeed, in this study, we have observed that the gap between PPIs and experimentally solved DDIs nowadays remains in a similar proportion, so that current experimental data on DDIs can be mapped to 20% of the PPIs for most organisms (Section 3.3.2). Most previous methods to infer DDIs rely on the assumption that an interaction between a pair of proteins involves at least a pair of their constituent domains (one from each interacting protein). One of the first methods was proposed by Sprinzak and Margalit (2001). In their work, the authors analyzed a particular set of PPIs looking for domain pairs that co-occurred more frequently in interactions than expected by chance. Later,used an expectation maximization algorithm to maximize a certain likelihood function over an observed interactome. Protein interactions were described in terms of DDI probabilities, and the expectation maximization algorithm searched for the DDI probabilities that maximized the likelihood function. This work was extended byin their domain pair excluding analysis approach. Riley et al. method calculates different likelihood scores negating interactions coming from particular domain pairs. In this way, the authors improved the performance of previous methods, predicting interaction between domains based on the differences of the likelihood values when a particular domain pair was excluded. Other approaches used a parsimony model to find the minimum set of DDIs that could explain the interactions present in a given PPI map (). Finally, several methods introduced other types of data, such as correlated mutation at protein interfaces (), gene ontology (GO) terms () or co-evolutionary data (). In this work, we describe a new strategy to infer DDIs based on the topology of a protein interaction network. This approach exploits the neighborhood cohesiveness (NC) property of small-world networks (), analyzing the interactions between two sets of nodes that contain proteins with a particular domain. In this way, we have extended previous definitions of NC, first calculated on a network node (), later on a network edge () and in this work defined over two sets of nodes within the network. Particularly, we used the meet/min coefficient () to measure the proportion of interacting nodes between two sets of nodes and the fraction of common neighbors. Although more sophisticated clustering coefficients () could be used, we will prove that this simple cohesiveness measure already has enough discriminative power to differentiate between interacting and non-interacting domains. The performance has been tested using a novel DDI benchmark compiled using 3DID () and Negatome () data. We have compared our methodology against the correlated sequence signature (CSS) method () and DOMINE predicted data (), showing that the proposed approach is competitive with previous methods. Finally, the approach and the PPI data used during the present development have been integrated together into a web platform termed DIMERO (Data Integration for MolEcuar stRucture mOdelling). DIMERO allows both the evaluation of interactions between domains as well as a direct access to source data in the form of the PPIs used for the evaluation. In this way, browsing these PPI data offers the possibility to find additional information about known interactions involving the domains of interest, including experimental data, information from prediction methods and scientific literature.