Motivation: RNA-Seq technology based on next-generation sequencing provides the unprecedented ability of studying transcriptomes at high resolution and accuracy, and the potential of measuring expression of multiple isoforms from the same gene at high precision. Solved by maximum likelihood estimation, isoform expression can be inferred in RNA-Seq using statistical models based on the assumption that sequenced reads are distributed uniformly along transcripts. Modification of the model is needed when considering situations where RNA-Seq data do not follow uniform distribution. Results: We proposed two curves, the global bias curve (GBC) and the local bias curves (LBCs), to describe the non-uniformity of read distributions for all genes in a transcriptome and for each gene, respectively. Incorporating the bias curves into the uniform read distribution (URD) model, we introduced non-URD (N-URD) models to infer isoform expression levels. On a series of systematic simulation studies, the proposed models outperform the original model in recovering major isoforms and the expression ratio of alternative isoforms. We also applied the new model to real RNA-Seq datasets and found that its inferences on expression ratios of alternative isoforms are more reasonable. The experiments indicate that incorporating N-URD information can improve the accuracy in modeling and inferring isoform expression in RNA-Seq.
INTRODUCTIONApplying next-generation high-throughput sequencing technologies to transcriptomes (RNA-Seq) makes it possible to precisely measure the abundances of transcripts. This technology has been widely investigated on the study of gene expressions (), splice variants (), novel transcripts discovery (), RNA sequence polymorphism () and chimeric transcripts () in recent literature. The ability of RNA-Seq to count sequenced reads along transcripts gives digital measurement of transcription levels, and is powerful for identifying and measuring the amount of transcribed isoforms of alternative splicing genes (). Changes of isoforms' expression levels in many genes are of functional importance in particular biological processes. For example, switching between major and minor isoforms of genes plays a crucial role in mouse muscle myogenesis (); isoform expression changes have been shown to be highly related to the development of many complex diseases, such as Lewy bodies () and progressive supranuclear palsy (); studies also obtained the evidence that the expression ratio of two alternative isoforms from human progesterone receptor (PR) gene could result in different outcomes of breast cancer treatment (). Therefore, correctly estimating isoform expression levels is becoming increasingly important for understanding complicated biological mechanisms. In RNA-Seq, under the assumption that the sequenced reads are sampled independently and uniformly on all transcripts in the sample, it is straightforward to model the distribution of read counts of exons as a Poisson distribution (). Using a uniform read distribution model (URD model for short),proposed a maximum likelihood estimate (MLE) method to infer isoform expression levels. However, some studies show that there are substantial biases in high-throughput sequencing data (), which may cause non-uniformity of read distributions in RNA-Seq data (). Recent literatures also pointed out that hexamer priming and local sequence content can affect the sequencing preference (). In our investigations, we observed the distributions of RNA-Seq reads in many datasets are not uniform. Some datasets have a strong bias toward the 3 ends of transcripts, which means that the 3-ends usually have more reads sequenced. This phenomenon may be caused by some pre-sequencing procedures such as the poly(A)-selection step in sample preparation (see Section 4 for details). In such situations, the accuracy of isoform expression inference based on the uniformity assumption will deteriorate. Thus, the motivation of this study is to develop a method that takes the non-uniformity of read distribution into consideration to improve isoform expression inference. Recently, several other groups also realized the importance of this problem and incorporated non-URD (N-URD) information into uniform distribution models in different ways (). In our study, wePage: 503 502508
DISCUSSIONN-URD along a transcript is widely observed in many RNA-Seq datasets. We introduced bias curves to describe such distribution patterns in each dataset and in each gene, and proposed to modify the uniform model with these distribution informations. Experiments show that the proposed non-uniform models can give better estimation of isoform expression levels and identify major isoforms more accurately. Biological reasons of the non-uniformity in the read distribution are not fully understood yet. The degradation of mRNA may play a main role for the global distribution pattern. As reported in literature, mRNA degradation can initiate from either the 5 end or 3 end of mRNAs (). In mRNA studies, usually a ploy(A) selection step is adopted. This purification also removes the RNA molecules decaying from the 3 ends, but not those decaying). For each panel, the three horizontal tracks in the picture from top to bottom are: genomic coordinates, gene structure where exons are magnified for better visualization and the reads falling into every two genomic coordinates, where the red and blue bars represent numbers of reads on the forward and the reverse strand, respectively. from the 5 ends. As a result, if the RNA-Seq library is constructed from total RNA with partially degraded RNA molecules, there would be more reads toward the 3 ends of the transcripts, and the read distribution is therefore similar to what is shown inand examples in Supplementary. One the other hand, local sequence features could explain a large part of the gene-specific distribution patterns (). Sequence constitution such as GC-content along genes may play the most important role in amplification, while other features may lead to biased hexamer priming (). Studying the cause of sequencing preference may help to improve the protocol of RNA-Seq, but recently published RNA-Seq data, such as the data generated by, also suffered from a strong global distribution bias and local biases as well. Recently,and Howard and Heber (2010) also addressed the non-uniform distribution issue from different viewpoints and proposed their models and methods for gene and/or isoform expression-level estimation. Li et al.'s work majorly focused on solving read mapping uncertainty, but their method could accommodate the general distribution bias in the expression inference through the usage of the empirical read start position distribution (RSPD). They did not utilize the local sequencing preference specific to genes (). Our study shows that properly combining the global and local read distribution information is an effective way to improve the expression inference. Howard and Heber proposed a linear model to integrate the nonuniformity information, but their model was based on a normal approximation rather than the Poisson distribution. This makes their model less accurate in the inference. We conducted a series of experimental comparison with these newest methods and the results are summarized in the Supplementary Materials. For the future study, several aspects in N-URD modeling could be addressed. First, as the read length by new sequencing technologies becomes longer, there will be more junction reads crossing two Page: 508 502508or more exons. These junction reads make up 'pseudo-exons' and could be helpful in the inference of alternative spliced isoforms and their expression levels. The proper combination of the GBC and LBCs is another important question. In this study, we used a fixed mixture parameter (0.5) to integrate them according to simulation experiments. More adaptively strategies, such as dynamic weighting of the two bias curves during the iteration of expression inference, would give further improvement. Another issue is about the gene annotation. The current model depends on known gene annotation for the inference. Ideally, it will be more useful if the inference can be done with incomplete annotation. In such scenario, the task of inferring isoform expression level will be integrated with the task of detecting alternative splicing isoforms from RNA-Seq data. Accurately measuring the expression of genes and their multiple isoforms is the first step in applying RNA-Seq technology to many biological investigations. With the promising results obtained by the N-URD models, we believe that the data-adaptive strategy proposed here will benefit downstream analyses such as detecting differentially expressed genes and isoforms in human diseases.