Motivation: Chromatin Immunoprecipitation followed by sequencing (ChIP-seq) detects genome-wide DNA–protein interactions and chromatin modifications, returning enriched regions (ERs), usually associated with a significance score. Moderately significant interactions can correspond to true, weak interactions, or to false positives; replicates of a ChIP-seq experiment can provide co-localised evidence to decide between the two cases. We designed a general methodological framework to rigorously combine the evidence of ERs in ChIP-seq replicates, with the option to set a significance threshold on the repeated evidence and a minimum number of samples bearing this evidence. Results: We applied our method to Myc transcription factor ChIP-seq datasets in K562 cells available in the ENCODE project. Using replicates, we could extend up to 3 times the ER number with respect to single-sample analysis with equivalent significance threshold. We validated the rescued ERs by checking for the overlap with open chromatin regions and for the enrichment of the motif that Myc binds with strongest affinity; we compared our results with alternative methods (IDR and jMOSAiCS), obtaining more validated peaks than the former and less peaks than latter, but with a better validation. Availability and implementation: An implementation of the proposed method and its source code under GPLv3 license are freely available at
IntroductionChromatin immunoprecipitation followed by next-generation sequencing (ChIP-seq) is the most commonly used method to study genome-wide chromatin modifications or proteinDNA interactions. Computational tools like MACS () or ZINBA () are applied on aligned ChIP-seq reads to detect enriched regions (ERs) over the genome (often called 'peaks'), where the local accumulation of sequencing fragments exceeds that of a background distribution, typically estimated from randomly fragmented chromatin or by performing the ChIP-seq protocol with a control antibody (). As the protocol is subjected to multiple sources of noise (), some low-intensity accumulation of reads is possible even in absence of a true interaction with the target. These low-intensity peaks, which are usually present in large amounts, contain therefore a mixture of false positives and true, although weak, interactions; they are typically discarded when stringent thresholds on the peak call are used. This approach leads to the discovery of the strongest interactions only, and might distort the genome-wide picture of the genomic locations of the transcription factor binding sites or histone modifications of interest.Given the intrinsic noise of the ChIP-seq protocol, it is good practice to repeat every experiment at least twice, as the guidelines of the ENCODE project indicate (). The information contained in replicates can then be used to assess the validity of the peaks obtained from a single sample, especially of those with low-intensity. In this paper, we propose a novel method to rigorously combine the results of peak calls in ChIP-seq replicates and to obtain new, sample-specific, peak lists taking into account their combined evidence. Our method takes as input, for each replicate, a list of enriched genomic regions and a measure of their individual significance in terms of a P-value. Starting from a permissive call, we divide the initial ERs in 'stringent' (highly significant) and 'weak' (moderately significant), and we assess the presence of overlapping enriched regions across multiple replicates. Non-overlapping regions can be penalised or discarded according to specific needs. The significance of the overlapping regions is rigorously combined with the Fisher's method to obtain a global score. Finally, this score is assessed against an adjustable threshold on the combined evidence, and peaks in each replicate are either confirmed or discarded (a schematic view of our method is given inand a visualisation of the results of the method on data from the ENCODE project is shown in). In other words, we are able to 'rescue' weak peaks, which would probably be discarded in a singlesample analysis, when their combined evidence across multiple samples is sufficiently strong. We applied our method to ENCODE datasets from ChIP-seq experiments of the Myc transcription factor in K562 human cells, for which multiple samples with replicates are available. As Myc preferentially binds to a well-defined motif, the choice of this TF allowed us to validate our results through motif analysis and DNase-seq data; finally, we compared our findings with other state-of-art methods. The strong aspects of our method, besides the validity and relevance of the results that it provides, are its simplicity and flexibility, together with its efficiency (few minutes for 23 replicates with a few tens of thousands of peaks each).