Motivation: Discriminant analysis is an effective tool for the classification of experimental units into groups. Here, we consider the typical problem of classifying subjects according to phenotypes via gene expression data and propose a method that incorporates variable selection into the inferential procedure, for the identification of the important biomarkers. To achieve this goal, we build upon a conjugate normal discriminant model, both linear and quadratic, and include a stochastic search variable selection procedure via an MCMC algorithm. Furthermore, we incorporate into the model prior information on the relationships among the genes as described by a gene–gene network. We use a Markov random field (MRF) prior to map the network connections among genes. Our prior model assumes that neighboring genes in the network are more likely to have a joint effect on the relevant biological processes. Results: We use simulated data to assess performances of our method. In particular, we compare the MRF prior to a situation where independent Bernoulli priors are chosen for the individual predictors. We also illustrate the method on benchmark datasets for gene expression. Our simulation studies show that employing the MRF prior improves on selection accuracy. In real data applications, in addition to identifying markers and improving prediction accuracy, we show how the integration of existing biological knowledge into the prior model results in an increased ability to identify genes with strong discriminatory power and also aids the interpretation of the results. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONDiscriminant analysis, sometimes called supervised pattern recognition, is a statistical technique used to classify observations into groups. For each case in a given training set a p1 vector of observations, x i , and a known assignment to one of G groups are available. On the basis of these data, we wish to derive a classification rule that assigns future cases to their correct groups. If the distribution of the np matrix X of the data, conditional on the group membership, is assumed to be a multivariate normal, then this statistical methodology is known as discriminant analysis. We consider the typical problem of classifying subjects according to phenotypes via gene expressions and propose a method to * To whom correspondence should be addressed. include a variable selection procedure into the inferential process, for the identification of the important biomarkers. We build upon a conjugate normal discriminant model, linear or quadratic, and include a stochastic search variable selection procedure via an MCMC algorithm. Furthermore, we use dependent priors that reflect known relationships among the genes. Recently, there has been a rapid accumulation of biological knowledge in the form of various genegene networks. The importance of incorporating such biological knowledge into the analysis of genomic data has been increasingly recognized. Here, we view a genegene network as an undirected graph with nodes representing genes and edges representing interactions between genes. We capture this information via a Markov random field (MRF) prior that maps the connections among genes. Our prior model assumes that neighboring genes in the network are more likely to have a joint effect on the relevant biological processes. Similar priors have been used in linear regression models by, Wei and Pan (2010) andand in gamma-gamma models by). We extend their use to the discriminant analysis setting. We illustrate our method for the case of quadratic discriminant analysis, where different groups are allowed to have different covariance matrices. We show good performances on simulation studies and illustrate the method on benchmark datasets for gene expression. In particular, we compare the MRF prior to a situation where independent Bernoulli priors are chosen for the individual predictors and show that employing the MRF prior leads to more accurate selection. Other authors have reported similar results., in particular, comment on the effect of the MRF prior on the selection power in their linear regression setting. They also notice that adding the MRF prior implies a relatively small increase in computational cost.) andreport that their methods are quite effective in identifying genes and modified subnetworks, with higher sensitivity than commonly used procedures that do not use the network structure, and similar or, in some cases, lower false discovery rates. In real data applications, in addition to improving prediction accuracy, we show how the integration of biological knowledge into the prior model results in an increased ability to identify genes with strong discriminatory power and also aids the interpretation of the results. The rest of the article is organized as follows: in Section 2, we introduce discriminant analysis under the Bayesian paradigm and describe how to perform variable selection. We also propose a way to incorporate information about genegene networks into the prior model. In Section 3, we present the MCMC algorithm for posterior inference. In Section 4, we investigate performances of the
CONCLUSIONWe have illustrated how to perform variable selection in discriminant analysis following the Bayesian paradigm. In particular, we have considered the typical problem of classifying subjects according to phenotypes via gene expression data and have proposed prior models that incorporate information on the network structure of genes. Our method allows the classification of future samples and the simultaneous identification of the important biomarkers. Our simulation studies have shown that employing the MRF prior improves on selection accuracy. In applications to benchmark gene expression datasets, we have found that the integration of existing biological knowledge into the prior model results in an increased ability to identify genes with strong discriminatory power and aids the interpretation of the results, in addition to improving prediction accuracy.