Motivation: Most anatomical ontologies are species-specific, whereas a framework for comparative studies is needed. We describe the vertebrate Homologous Organs Groups ontology, vHOG, used to compare expression patterns between species. Results: vHOG is a multispecies anatomical ontology for the vertebrate lineage. It is based on the HOGs used in the Bgee database of gene expression evolution. vHOG version 1.4 includes 1184 terms, follows OBO principles and is based on the Common Anatomy Reference Ontology (CARO). vHOG only describes structures with historical homology relations between model vertebrate species. The mapping to species-specific anatomical ontologies is provided as a separate file, so that no homology hypothesis is stated within the ontology itself. Each mapping has been manually reviewed, and we provide support codes and references when available. Availability and implementation: vHOG is available from the Bgee download site (http://bgee.unil.ch/), as well as from the OBO Foundry and the NCBO Bioportal websites. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONOne of the main approaches to understand biological objects has long been comparative studies, from comparative anatomy in the 18th century to comparative genomics in the last decade. Comparative analysis can notably help identify adaptation, as well as functional or structural constraints (). Many of the data which we would like to compare, such as gene expression or phenotypes, need to be mapped to anatomy and development of organisms to be of use. To facilitate the automatic manipulation of this data, there has been an important effort to build ontologies, which describe the anatomy of human and of animal model organisms (). These ontologies have tended to be species-specific, resulting in an increasing number of ontologies corresponding to different projects (see the OBO Foundry and the NCBO). This makes the comparison between species difficult, since differences in representational schemes and in vocabulary are added to the differences in biology. Yet automatic comparisons are increasingly necessary, with large amounts of functional data generated in diverse model organisms. An integrated view is advantageous both for a fundamental understanding of animal biology and evolution, and for the efficient transfer of information from model organisms to human or veterinary medicine. Multispecies integration within anatomical ontologies poses a number of challenges. One is the criterion of comparison. While comparative studies can be performed in diverse frameworks, homology is the most widely recognized criterion (). This raises further problems. First, homology is always a hypothesis (), which according to the principle of reality followed by the OBO Foundry should not be included within an ontology () (although see). Second, there exist structures which will not be included in a homology comparison between a given pair of species, because they are specific to one or the other, and have no homolog. Third, the exclusion of analogous structures might be limiting for some studies (e.g. comparing insect and vertebrate eye development). Fourth, homologous structures can diverge in function or structure, to an extent that representing them together in an ontology might be difficult. Finally, there can be differences between species in the relationships among structures (). There are several ongoing efforts to create multispecies ontologies for animal groups, which have chosen different answers to the challenges outlined above. The Teleost Anatomy Ontology (TAO) () is a multispecies ontology for teleost fishes. The TAO is based on the Zebrafish Anatomy Ontology (ZFA) (from the ZFIN database,), and uses general (higher level) terms from the Common Anatomy Reference Ontology (CARO) (). The CARO was created to provide a common basis for all future anatomy ontologies and facilitate their interoperability. Several other efforts follow the same model as the TAO, and include the Amphibian Anatomy Ontology and the Hymenoptera Anatomy Ontology. In each of these cases, there is an effort to describe the morphological diversity of the clade. Consequently, each ontology will include terms that are found in several species of the clade. The use of a term for several species in the TAO does not imply homology (). A species-specific ontology (e.g. ZFA) is considered a subset of the multispecies ontology (e.g. TAO).
CONCLUSIONFine-grained yet large-scale comparisons between model organisms, especially vertebrates such as mouse or zebrafish and humans, is increasingly important. In addition to providing a framework for evolutionary studies, the vHOG provides a unique tool for relating humans and model organisms. Additionally, the association files of vHOG and HOG are unique resources in providing detailed judgments of homology between anatomical structures, with supporting evidence from the literature.