ViewDock TDW is a modification of the pre-existing ViewDock Chimera extension (http://www.cgl.ucsf.edu/chimera/) used to visualize results of virtual screening experiments. By combing TDW hardware and an enhanced ViewDock interface, dozens of ligand–protein complexes are rendered simultaneously to parallelize the analysis of candidate ligands. The ViewDock TDW GUI allows the user to easily and interactively manipulate the molecules on the TDW as an entire set, a selected subset or a single ligand–protein complex and preserves all Chimera functionality. Availability and Implementation: ViewDock TDW is an open source software; freely available on the web at
INTRODUCTIONAs an alternative to costly high-throughput empirical screening of millions of compounds, virtual screening has led to tremendous success in drug discovery () by computationally identifying compounds with higher probability of strong binding affinity to the target protein. These data are used to make 'informed' decisions in constructing a shorter list of compounds to purchase and test in the lab, significantly reducing the cost and time to discovery. Growing databases of small molecules () and rigorous virtual screening methods demand greater computational resources. High performance computing solutions, such as Grid computing (), have proved to be useful tools but visual analysis of resulting data remains as a bottleneck in the workflow. Visualizing hundreds to thousands of ligandprotein complexes one at a time, limits a researcher's ability to compare and contrast candidate compounds. Identifying details of chemical binding poses, recurring or unique chemical moieties, and false positives are more likely when multiple structures are analyzed simultaneously, whether this be two side-by-side or more than 20 structures. A Tiled Display Wall (TDW) is a computing cluster with one or more displays (tiles) connected to each computer (node) of the cluster. They are typically dedicated for visualization of large