Motivation: The precise quantification of intracellular metabolic flow rates is of fundamental importance in bio(techno)logy and medical research. The gold standard in the field is metabolic flux analysis (MFA) with 13 C-labeling experiments. 13 C-MFA workflows orchestrate several, mainly human-in-the-loop, software applications, integrating them with plenty of heterogeneous information. In practice, this had posed a major practical barrier for evaluating, interpreting and understanding isotopic data from carbon labeling experiments. Results: Graphical modeling, interactive model exploration and visual data analysis are the key to overcome this limitation. We have developed a first-of-its-kind graphical tool suite providing scientists with an integrated software framework for all aspects of 13 C-MFA. Almost 30 modules (plug-ins) have been implemented for the Omix visualization software. Several advanced graphical workflows and ergonomic user interfaces support major domain-specific modeling and proofreading tasks. With that, the graphical suite is a productivity enhancing tool and an original educational training instrument supporting the adoption of 13 C-MFA applications in all life science fields. Availability: The Omix Light Edition is freely available at http://www. omix
INTRODUCTION
DISCUSSIONThe presented comprehensive plug-in suite for the Omix visualization software complements the recently published 13CFLUX2 software and graphically supports the complete well-established 13 C-MFA workflow. The new 'look' and 'feel' enables experimentalists who are not familiar with programming or scripting to use the 13 C-MFA computational machinery immediately. The classical command-line orientation of 13 C-MFA tools has thus become history, although certain special requirements still might require a scripted solution. At the time of writing, 27 Omix plugins can be orchestrated to tailored evaluation workflows (cf. Supplementaryand Supplementary Table S1.2). These plug-ins have been extensively tested and used in several 13 C-MFA studies with toy examples as well as with realistically complex real-life examples. As a typical use case, the developed suite is used to analyze a variety of Corynebacterium glutamicum strains for a broad range of dilution rates and bioreactor working volumes (unpublished data). Once a reference network model was set up, 420 datasets were quickly processed and visually evaluated with no overhead. Resulting flux maps were visualized with a tailored OVL script (e.g.), making it easy for the experimentalist to comparatively assess and characterize the CLEs according to their biological, analytical and experimental reproducibility. With that an in-depth understanding of experimental and biological robustness of C.glutamicum is conveyed. In similar studies, the graphical workflows was found to strongly reduce the development time for flux models and ease serial, yet interactive, fluxome analyses. Equally important, the graphical look-and-feel makes it much easier for 13 C-MFA newcomers to get started. Therewith, our graphical suite delivers productivityenhancing tools that accelerate 13 C-MFA learning, execution and dissimilation processes. Apart from practical issues, the implementation of a complete graphical tool suite supporting 13 C-MFA is not just a simple WYSIWYG task. A collection of innovative ideas and algorithms were developed to exploit the potential of interactive graphical visualization. Non-trivial, domain-specific, yet universal, algorithmic solutions are the derivation of CAMs from information contained in databases, full copy/paste functionality and compatibility of CAMs, graphical proofreading and editing of CAMs, interactive determination of free flux sets, threedimensional representation and exploration of carbon labeling networks, interactive path tracing, as well as the automatic generation and drawing of mixture diagrams (cf. Supplementary.3 for a complete list). Although bare simulation times at present are in the range of milliseconds for single simulation runs, extensive analyses should preferably be distributed to dedicated computing resources. Purchase-on-demand compute models are an option for largescale 13 C-MFA workflows (). Future work will be dedicated to alleviating (post-)processing tasks on distributed HPC resources to meet the increasing need for real-time accessibility and the control of fluxomics workflows, which, undoubtedly, presents new challenges for our visual workflow.