The identification of good protein structure models and their appropriate ranking is a crucial problem in structure prediction and fold recognition. For many alignment methods, rescoring of alignment-induced models using structural information can improve the separation of useful and less useful models as compared with the alignment score. Vorescore, a template-based protein structure model rescoring system is introduced. The method scores the model structure against the template used for the modeling using Vorolign. The method works on models from different alignment methods and incorporates both knowledge from the prediction method and the rescoring. Results: The performance of Vorescore is evaluated in a large-scale and difficult protein structure prediction context. We use different threading methods to create models for 410 targets, in three scenarios: (i) family members are contained in the template set; (ii) superfamily members (but no family members); and (iii) only fold members (but no family or superfamily members). In all cases Vorescore improves significantly (e.g. 40% on both Gotoh and HHalign at the fold level) on the model quality, and clearly outperforms the state-of-the-art physics-based model scoring system Rosetta. Moreover, Vorescore improves on other successful rescoring approaches such as Pcons and ProQ. In an additional experiment we add high-quality models based on structural alignments to the set, which allows Vorescore to improve the fold recognition rate by another 50%. Availability: All models of the test set (about 2 million, 44 GB gzipped) are available upon request.
INTRODUCTIONProtein structure prediction is one of oldest and most investigated problems in bioinformatics. Many methods have been proposed and for quite some time systematically assessed in the CASP experiment (Critical Assessment of techniques for protein Structure Prediction since 1994). Despite the hardness of the problem, homology-based methods appeared to be quite successful due to improved alignment methods and more and more available template structures. These methods produce targettemplate alignments and associated alignment scores. The alignments can be employed to derive structural models for the target using the 3D coordinates of the template structure according to the alignment. The alignment score can be used to rank several candidate templates and the associated alignments to identify the best suited one. * To whom correspondence should be addressed. A large range of methods have been proposed for both of the two related but not identical problems: the alignment problem and the model scoring problem. A consensus on the ultimate method have not been reached in both cases as can be seen from the results and discussion in the CASP experiments. Typically, different methods have their strengths for different targets. Often computing the correct alignment is the crucial step in homology-based modeling, as wrong alignments typically cannot be corrected later on during the modeling. On the other hand, the scoring system of the alignment methods is far from perfect. In some cases the method can recognize the best template with high confidence (for this usually a Z-score or P-value is used). But in the absence of highly similar templates, e.g. when only templates from the same fold but neither from the same family nor the same superfamily are available, the scoring is critical. Even if the scoring system would be appropriate to identify the best alignment between the target and a single template this would not necessarily imply that the score can be used to compare and rank different alignments to different template structures or the resulting model structures. On the other hand, in many cases the alignment between the target and an appropriate template is good enough to build a good model, but the alignment method ranks this alignment lower than an alignment with a wrong template. This can be due to the fact that the alignment scoring is not comparable between different template structures. Thus, many approaches have been proposed to rescore the produced models using more involved scoring functions which are not and in many cases cannot be directly optimized by the alignment method. A wide variety of those methods, so-called model quality assessment programs (or MQAPs), have been used with good success in the CASP experiments, e.g. as so-called MQAP metaservers employing some consensus of several MQAPs (). In principle, the rescoring approaches can be classified into physics-based systems used for model scoring in de novo folding approaches such as Rosetta and heuristic scoring systems using different physico-chemical features and empirically tuned functions. In this article, we propose a particularly simple rescoring system used in the successful structure alignment program Vorolign (). Moreover, the Vorpsi and Vorescore methods show how to employ a structure comparison approach for structure prediction. Our results demonstrate that conservation in structural neighborhoods is an important feature for sequencestructure relationships and a determining factor for protein structures.