Motivation: Water molecules are key players for protein folding and function. On the protein surface , water is not placed randomly, but display instead a particular structure evidenced by the presence of specific water sites (WS). These WS can be derived and characterized using explicit water Molecular Dynamics simulations, providing useful information for ligand binding prediction and design. Here we present WATCLUST, a WS determination and analysis tool running on the VMD platform. The tool also allows direct transfer of the WS information to Autodock program to perform biased docking. Availability and implementation: The WATCLUST plugin and documentation are freely available at
IntroductionWater molecules play an essential role in the structure/function of proteins, participating in enzymatic reaction mechanisms, ligand binding and release and proton/electron transfer processes, among others. Importantly, due to the shape and electrostatic potential of the protein surface, water molecules are not placed randomly and display instead a particular structure that can be characterized by the presence of hydration or water sites (WS). These sites are defined as confined space regions, adjacent to the protein surface, where the probability of finding a water molecule is higher than in the bulk solvent. They can be determined from explicit water Molecular Dynamics (MD) simulations (). Moreover, using the theoretical basis of the Inhomogeneous Fluid Solvation Theory (), WS can also be structurally and thermodynamically characterized. Once identified, they constitute a precious knowledge that can be used in several applications, such as analysis of protein-ligand and protein-protein complexes (), determination of hydration free energies of simple solutes (), small ligands uptake by heme proteins () and, as shown by us and others, significant improvement of molecular docking results, both in terms of accuracy and selectivity (). To date, there are few methods for WS detection and characterization. WaterMap () is a grid based method part of the Schrodinger package which is not freely available. WATsite () is restricted to perform MD simulations only with GROMACS. Finally, there are other programs that do not require MD simulations () or use alternative thermodynamic calculation methods (). It should be noted that none of them allow to use the WS information directly in docking calculations. Extended application of MD simulations to understand protein function boosted the use of the open source graphical), one of the most widely used open source docking programs, in order to perform WS biased docking (WSBD) ().
ConclusionWe present an application that works as a plugin under the widely used VMD program. Based on an explicit water MD simulation trajectory, it allows the characterization of the solvent structure through the identification and analysis of WS. The program features are a flexible definition of the WS finding algorithm, determination of each WS structural and thermodynamical parameters and visualization of results on VMD with all its functionality. The method is thus ideally suited for studies of the solvent structure on protein surfaces and cavities with a wide range of applications, such as (i) determination of WS in protein-ligand binding sites and (ii) proteinprotein interaction surfaces that evidence hydrophilic hot-spots, (iii) determination of water structure in water/ion channels and (iv) characterization of catalytic waters, among others. It also allows to build modified Autodock grid maps to perform WS biased docking calculations, which we have shown to give significantly better results when compared to conventional docking, especially for ligands having hydrophilic moieties (). The only drawback is that the method relies on the presence of specific protein-water interactions, so it should not be used on large highly hydrophobic surfaces or regions with too high mobility.