Motivation: Copy number variations (CNVs) are a major source of genomic variability and are especially significant in cancer. Until recently microarray technologies have been used to characterize CNVs in genomes. However, advances in next-generation sequencing technology offer significant opportunities to deduce copy number directly from genome sequencing data. Unfortunately cancer genomes differ from normal genomes in several aspects that make them far less amenable to copy number detection. For example, cancer genomes are often aneuploid and an admixture of diploid/non-tumor cell fractions. Also patient-derived xenograft models can be laden with mouse contamination that strongly affects accurate assignment of copy number. Hence, there is a need to develop analytical tools that can take into account cancer-specific parameters for detecting CNVs directly from genome sequencing data. Results: We have developed WaveCNV, a software package to identify copy number alterations by detecting breakpoints of CNVs using translation-invariant discrete wavelet transforms and assign digitized copy numbers to each event using next-generation sequencing data. We also assign alleles specifying the chromosomal ratio following duplication/loss. We verified copy number calls using both microarray (correlation coefficient 0.97) and quantitative polymerase chain reaction (correlation coefficient 0.94) and found them to be highly concordant. We demonstrate its utility in pancreatic primary and xenograft sequencing data. Availability and implementation: Source code and executables are available at https://github.com/WaveCNV. The segmentation algorithm is implemented in MATLAB, and copy number assignment is implemented Perl. Contact:
INTRODUCTIONDNA copy number variations (CNVs) are associated with a wide range of diseases including cancer where detection of copy number alterations has led to guided-therapeutic interventions. For example, amplification of the ERBB2 locus is used to identify patients for trastuzumab treatment. Although Comparative Genome Hybridization (CGH), microarrays have an intrinsic kilobase (kb) resolution for CNV detection, the advent of highthroughput next-generation sequencing (NGS) technologies offers us the potential to probe genomic structural variation at base-pair level. However, with the increase in signal resolution comes a substantially increased noise signature and the problem of how to remove false positives. Recent efforts by various groups () have attempted to mitigate the noise by carrying out a smoothing (binning) of the sequencing read depth on scales of tens to hundreds of base pairs and examining this smoothed read depth. The smoothing process is performed on a set, arbitrary, scale, which can smooth-out physically interesting features of a signal. This is of significant concern for cancer genomes, which are known to have unstable genomes that constantly evolve. Smoothing methods also assume that the noise signature of the signal is overwhelmingly concentrated on a single base-pair genomic scale (high frequency) and ignores the possibility of strong long-range (low-frequency), systemic, correlated noise that may increase the false-positive rate of any detection algorithm. Another recent effort, Varbin () uses a variable binning approach to take into account an uneven distribution of mappable reads. Although this method is suitable for low or sparse coverage as illustrated in single cell sequencing (), it does not fully harness the available basepair-scale genomic resolution. Assignment of digitized copy number to genomic segments in tumors is further complicated in cancer genomes due to a number of sample-specific confounding factors. For example, primary tumor tissues may contain low tumor cellularity due to an admixture of diploid/non-tumor cell fraction in patient samples, including pancreatic cancer where tumor cellularity can vary from 5 to 80%, thus making the detection of cancer driver mutations difficult (). In addition to primary tumors, patient-derived samples grown in mouse *To whom correspondence should be addressed. y The authors wish it to be known that, in their opinion, the first two authors should be regarded as joint, which permits non-commercial re-use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided the original work is properly cited. For commercial re-use, please contact journals.permissions@oup.com xenograft (PDX) models are being increasingly used in pre-clinical settings to understand tumor biology and therapy response (). Assignment of digitized copy number to CNVs in these models becomes increasingly difficult due to mouse contamination of the tumor samples that introduces noise in the sequencing coverage as well as allele frequencies for SNVs (both of which are integral to CNV calling methods). Although algorithms such as qpure (), genoCN (), ASCAT (Van) and ABSOLUTE () model for stromal contamination and ploidy estimation on SNP array data, they do not function for genome sequencing data. Also these methods cannot correct for the additional effects of xenograft mouse contamination. To fill this need, we have developed WaveCNV, a tool that uses DNA sequencing data to model for complex cancer genomes. The algorithm estimates ploidy, tumor cellularity in primary tumors, mouse content in xenograft models and assigns digitized copy numbers and alleles to indicate which parental chromosome pair was affected by each copy number event. Also to overcome limitations associated with binning-based approaches, we use the well-established theory of wavelets to take full advantage of the genomic resolution available in sequencing data.illustrates the overall flowchart of data generation and copy number modeling.
DISCUSSIONWe have developed a computational algorithm to detect CNV boundaries from whole-genome sequencing data and assigned digitized copy number by modeling for sample-specific confounding factor such as aneuploidy, normal/diploid contamination of primary tumors and mouse contamination in xenograft models. The segmentation algorithm based on wavelet transform provides a unique opportunity to probe the genome in any, the second part of WaveCNV provides a statistical framework to assign CN and merge neighboring events carrying the same copy number. This corrects for false shearing of copy number events that may arise due to poor quality of sequencing data. A key component of WaveCNV is the matchednormal-based copy number correction. Being aware of the diploid control ensures that any systemic artifacts that may appear in both tumor and normal genomes, including platform-specific biases, unsequenceable regions and so forth, are effectively removed or corrected for. This resulted in a high concordance between somatic CN calls from our algorithm in sequencing data to both microarray data and qPCR. Xenograft models for many types of primary tumors have increasingly become useful tools to understand cancer biology and to test therapeutic targets. Our model estimates mouse contamination and the reported allele and copy number reflects the correction for mouse contamination. The mouse contamination estimate matches well with our mouse-specific qPCR data. On the same note, most directly sequenced primary tumor samples contain stromal contamination, and our algorithm can quantify and model for the presence of contaminating diploid cells in that sequencing data.
CONCLUSIONOur segmentation algorithm is unique from its methodology perspective, and can potentially improve the boundary assignments on the smaller CNV events found via whole-genome sequencing. In addition, the assignment of specific alleles to copy number losses/gains can give researchers the ability to explore relationships between selected sequence mutations and structural variation. For example, in pancreatic cancer a KRAS activating point mutation is often coupled with duplication events, thus amplifying the effect of this oncogene. Being able to identify similar correlations based on reports from our algorithm could prove useful in prioritizing-specific genes for further study.