Motivation: Many practical tasks in biomedicine require accessing specific types of information in scientific literature; e.g. information about the methods, results or conclusions of the study in question. Several approaches have been developed to identify such information in scientific journal articles. The best of these have yielded promising results and proved useful for biomedical text mining tasks. However, relying on fully supervised machine learning (ML) and a large body of annotated data, existing approaches are expensive to develop and port to different tasks. A potential solution to this problem is to employ weakly supervised learning instead. In this article, we investigate a weakly supervised approach to identifying information structure according to a scheme called Argumentative Zoning (AZ). We apply four weakly supervised classifiers to biomedical abstracts and evaluate their performance both directly and in a real-life scenario in the context of cancer risk assessment. Results: Our best weakly supervised classifier (based on the combination of active learning and self-training) performs well on the task, outperforming our best supervised classifier: it yields a high accuracy of 81% when just 10% of the labeled data is used for training. When cancer risk assessors are presented with the resulting annotated abstracts, they find relevant information in them significantly faster than when presented with unannotated abstracts. These results suggest that weakly supervised learning could be used to improve the practical usefulness of information structure for real-life tasks in biomedicine. Availability: The annotated dataset, classifiers and the user test for cancer risk assessment are available online at
INTRODUCTIONMany practical tasks in biomedicine require accessing specific types of information in scientific literature. For example, a biomedical scientist may be looking for information about the objective of the study in question, the methods used, the results obtained or the * To whom correspondence should be addressed. conclusions drawn by the authors. Similarly, many biomedical text mining tasks (e.g. information extraction, summarization) focus on the extraction of specific types of information in documents only. To date, a number of approaches have been proposed for the classification of sentences in scientific literature according to categories of information structure (or discourse, rhetorical, argumentative or conceptual structure, depending on the framework in question). Some of the approaches classify sentences according to typical section names seen in scientific documents (), while others are based e.g. on argumentative zones (), qualitative dimensions () or conceptual structure () of documents. The best current approaches have yielded promising results and proved useful for information retrieval, information extraction and summarization tasks (). However, relying on fully supervised machine learning (ml) and a large body of annotated data, existing approaches are expensive to develop and port to different domains and tasks, and thus intractable for use in real-life applications. A potential solution to this bottleneck is to develop techniques based on weakly supervised ml instead. Making use of a small amount of labeled data and a large pool of unlabeled data, weakly supervised learning (e.g. semi-supervision, active learning, co/tri-training, self-training) aims to keep the advantages of fully supervised approaches. It has been applied to a wide range of natural language processing (nlp) and text mining tasks, including namedentity recognition, question answering, information extraction, text classification and many others (), yielding performance levels similar or equivalent to those of fully supervised techniques. In this article, we investigate the potential of weakly supervised learning for Argumentative Zoning (az) of biomedical abstracts. az provides an analysis of the argumentative structure (i.e. the rhetorical progression of the argument) of a scientific document (). It has been used to analyze scientific texts in various disciplinesincluding computational linguistics (), law, (), biology () and chemistry ()and has proved useful for nlp tasks such as summarization (). However, the application of az to different domains has resulted in laborious annotation exercises that suggests that a weakly supervised approach would be more practical for the real-world application of az.Taking two supervised classifiers as a comparison pointSupport Vector Machines (svm) and Conditional Random Fields (crf)we investigate the performance of four weakly supervised classifiers for az: two based on semi-supervised learning (transductive svm and semi-supervised crf) and two on active learning (Active svm alone and in combination with self-training). We apply these classifiers to az-annotated biomedical abstracts in the recent dataset of. The results are promising. Our best weakly supervised classifier (Active svm with self-training) outperforms the best supervised classifier (svm), yielding high accuracy of 81% when using just 10% of the labeled data for training. When using just onethird of the labeled data, it performs as well as a fully supervised svm, which uses 100% of the labeled data. The abstracts in the dataset ofwere selected on the basis of their suitability for cancer risk assessment (cra). This enables us to conduct user-based evaluation of the practical usefulness of our approach for the real-world task of cra. We investigate whether cancer risk assessors find relevant information in abstracts faster when the abstracts are annotated for az using our best weakly supervised approach. The results are promising: although manual annotations yield the biggest time savings: 1013% (compared with the time it takes to examine unannotated abstracts), considerable savings are also obtained with weakly supervised ml annotations: 78% (using active svm with self-training). In sum, our investigation shows that weakly supervised az can be employed to improve the practical applicability and portability of az to different information access tasks and that its accuracy is high enough to benefit a real-life task in biomedicine.