Motivation: Integrative network analysis methods provide robust interpretations of differential high-throughput molecular profile measurements. They are often used in a biomedical context—to generate novel hypotheses about the underlying cellular processes or to derive biomarkers for classification and subtyping. The underlying molecular profiles are frequently measured and validated on animal or cellular models. Therefore the results are not immediately transferable to human. In particular, this is also the case in a study of the recently discovered interleukin-17 producing helper T cells (Th17), which are fundamental for anti-microbial immunity but also known to contribute to autoimmune diseases. Results: We propose a mathematical model for finding active subnetwork modules that are conserved between two species. These are sets of genes, one for each species, which (i) induce a connected subnetwork in a species-specific interaction network, (ii) show overall differential behavior and (iii) contain a large number of orthologous genes. We propose a flexible notion of conservation , which turns out to be crucial for the quality of the resulting modules in terms of biological interpretability. We propose an algorithm that finds provably optimal or near-optimal conserved active modules in our model. We apply our algorithm to understand the mechanisms underlying Th17 T cell differentiation in both mouse and human. As a main biological result, we find that the key regulation of Th17 differentiation is conserved between human and mouse. Availability and implementation: xHeinz, an implementation of our algorithm, as well as all input data and results, are available at http://software.cwi.nl/xheinz and as a Galaxy service at http://services. cbib.u-bordeaux2.fr/galaxy in CBiB Tools.
IntroductionMany computational methods have been proposed for the analysis of molecular profiles under different conditions. Studies employing these methods aim to better understand the molecular changes in the underlying cellular processes or to discover biomarkers as to classify between different conditions. Traditionally, analysis methods have been gene-centric, that is, they consider genes in isolation to establish differential patterns by simple statistical methods based on univariate statistical tests. For example, one of the first studies used gene expression measurements to differentiate between two leukemia classes (). With the availability of increasingly reliable biological network data for human and model organisms, gene-centric approaches have been increasingly complemented by integrative network analysis methods (). These methods yield active modules, that is, sets of genes that are connected in the network and show overall differential behavior. By taking the network topology into account, integrative analysis methods allow for a more robust interpretation of the measurements and result in more meaningful mechanistic insights. Frequently, for ethical or practical reasons, molecular profiles are measured and validated on animal or cellular models and the results are therefore not immediately transferable to human (). In fact, the low phase-II survival rate of 25% of potential drug compounds is largely attributed to the lack of transferability between model systems and human (). This is also an issue in the recently discovered interleukin-17 producing helper T cells (Th17). These cells form a separate subset of helper T cells with a differentiation pathway distinct from those of the established Th1 and Th2 cells (). Th17 cells are known to contribute to pathogenesis of inflammatory and autoimmune diseases such as asthma, rheumatoid arthritis, psoriasis and multiple sclerosis and play also a role in cancer immunology (). Understanding the pathways and regulatory mechanisms that mediate the decision making processes resulting in the formation of Th17 is a critical step in the development of novel therapeutics. Unfortunately, the vast majority of data collected so far originates from studies performed on mice () and, most importantly, a comprehensive comparison of the Th17 differentiation process in model organisms and in human is missing. Several studies indicate that the differentiation and phenotype of human and mouse Th17 cells are similar (). Both subsets serve similar pro-inflammatory functions and produce the same hallmark cytokines and similar receptors. Furthermore, most of the already identified regulator genes show high sequence conservation. Other studies, however, show stimulus requirements for effective differentiation of human cells that differ from those required for mice (). A characterization of the similarities and differences will not only increase our understanding of this fundamental process, but is also essential for sound translational research. To do so, we suggest finding conserved active modules whose comprising genes show overall differential behavior, induce a connected subnetwork and are largely conserved across the species. Well-conserved modules make it possible to perform the experimental work and data analysis on the model organism. At the same time, the results are likely to be transferable to human. In addition, conserved modules carry a stronger signal than individual species modules because they integrate the signal of the individual data sources. Finding conserved active modules, however, is a difficult task. Separately computing species-specific active modules generally results in modules that are not conserved, which partially explains why experimental results are so often not transferable. Conversely, the largest conserved modules, as established, for example, with methods for network alignment, are not necessarily active. A computational model for finding conserved active modules requires thus a notion of both, activity and conservation (see). Several authors already identified the benefits of combining and comparing cross-species experiments. At the single gene level, vanhave demonstrated that conserved co-expression is a strong co-evolutionary signal. More recent studies suggested to identify conserved biological processes.analyzed transcriptomics profiles of human and mouse macrophages and dendritic cells to derive common response genes involved in innate immunity.proposed a method for the analysis of gene expression data that takes the homology structure between the different species into account.found that murine and human responses to lupus nephritis involves similar gene networks. They first derived species-specific networks of significantly differentially expressed genes and then determined common subnetworks using a graph matching algorithm.presented a multi-species integrative method to heuristically identify conserved biclusters. In their setting, a conserved bicluster is a subset of orthologous genes and a subset of conditions that achieve a high score with respect to co-expression, motif co-occurrence and network density. Dede and Og  ul (2014) introduced a method that finds triclusters consisting of genes that are coexpressed across a subset of samples and a subset of species.suggested the neXus algorithm for finding conserved active subnetworks. The authors use average fold A B C. Conserved active modules. Given two species-specific protein networks and, for each species, two sets of expression profiles of many different samples measured under two different conditions (A), we can annotate the nodes in the networks with activity scores (B), and identify modules that are at the same time highly differentially expressed and well-conserved (C). Cross-species conservation is indicated by dotted lines. Note that the best active module is not necessarily the best conserved active module change of genes in a module as a measure for activity. To deal with conservation, they collapse paralogous genes within a cluster of orthologous genes (COG) () into single nodes in the respective networks. They find modules using a seed-and-extend greedy heuristic that starts from a pair of orthologous seed nodes and then tries to simultaneously grow the two subnetworks by including pairs of neighboring orthologous genes. This strategy enforces a very stringent conservation policy: only modules whose genes are fully conserved are found. In addition, the locality of the greedy search strategy impairs the ability to find larger conserved modules and extending the search space around the seed genes drastically increases the runtime. In recent work,introduce ModuleBlast, a method that, similarly to neXus, represents groups of orthologous proteins as single nodes in a combined network and tries to find connected subnetworks that are differentially expressed. The novelty of the method is the classification of the found modules according to the sign of the log fold change expression values. By doing so, the authors are able to assess whether conserved active modules show consistent or inconsistent expression patterns. Like neXus, ModuleBlast requires strict conservation of module genes. Here, we propose a mathematical model for identifying conserved active modules for two species. It builds upon a model for single-species modules described in () and inherits its notions for modularity and activity: A set of genes forms a module if it induces a connected subnetwork. The activity of a module is the sum of the activities of its genes, which are determined using a beta-uniform mixture model on the distribution of P-values that characterize the differential behavior. Instead of enforcing a stringent conservation policy, our model allows to specify the fraction of nodes in the solution that must be conserved. We cast our model as an integer linear programming formulation and present xHeinz, a branch-and-cut algorithm that, given enough time, solves this model to provable optimality, or, if stopped before, reports a solution with a quality guarantee. xHeinz is the first method that flexibly deals with conservation. We apply xHeinz to understand the mechanisms underlying Th17 T cell differentiation in both mouse and human. As a main biological result, we find that the key regulation factors of Th17 differentiation are conserved between human and mouse and demonstrate that all aspects of our model are needed to obtain this insight. We further demonstrate the robustness of our approach by comparing samples of the differentiation process obtained at different time points, in which we search for optimal, conserved active modules under a wide range of conservation ratios. Using a permutation test, we show that our results are statistically significant. Finally, we discuss the main differences between our results and the results obtained by the neXus tool on the same data set.
ConclusionWe introduce a mathematical model for the problem of finding active subnetwork modules that are conserved between two species and thus contribute to formalizing the notion of conserved active modules. A key feature of our model is a flexible notion of conservation, which is controlled by a parameter a 2 0; 1: We require that at least a fraction a of the nodes are conserved between the speciesspecific modules of a solution. Note that in case of more distantlyrelated species a smaller a value may be more appropriate. We have translated our model into an integer linear programming formulation and have devised and implemented an exact branch-and-cut algorithm that computes provably optimal or near-optimal conserved active modules in our model. Our computational experiments for understanding the mechanisms underlying Th17 T cell differentiation in both mouse and human demonstrate that the flexibility in the definition of conservation is crucial for the computation of meaningful conserved active modules. We have found two conserved Th17 modules at time points 2 h (a  0:8) and 48 h (a  0:8) that thoroughly encompass the biphasic Th17 differentiation process. This result can not be revealed by requiring full conservation (a  1) or by independent modules without requiring conservation (a  0). Likewise, neXus, an alternative approach based on a stringent conservation model, is not able to capture the key regulatory program of the differentiation process. A key characteristics of our model is its flexibility. This allows its extension to multiple species and time points, which we will address in future work. In this case, however, realistic instances will be harder to compute to optimality and will require the development of powerful algorithm engineering techniques.