Motivation: Chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry (XL-MS) provides structural information for proteins and protein complexes in the form of crosslinked residue proximity and distance constraints between reactive residues. Utilizing spatial information derived from cross-linked residues can therefore assist with structural modeling of proteins. Selection of computationally derived model structures of proteins remains a major challenge in structural biology. The comparison of site interactions resulting from XL-MS with protein structure contact maps can assist the selection of structural models.
IntroductionThe prediction of protein structures is a major goal of computational structural biology. Accurate prediction of protein structures remains a significant challenge. Chemical cross-linking with mass spectrometry provides residue level distance constraints (DCs) that are useful for refining protein structural models (). Yet few tools exist for integrating cross-linking data with protein structure prediction. To accommodate this lack of tools, herein we describe the development of XLmap, an algorithm implemented in R, to integrate cross-linked sites originating from cross-link mass spectrometry (XL-MS) data with protein contact maps. A protein structural model can be represented as protein contact map consisting of a binary two-dimensional matrix of the distance between all possible amino acid residue pairs of a three-dimensional protein structure. Euclidean distances between cross-linked residues can be displayed on protein contact maps. The coincidence of cross-linked residues and contact points derived from protein structures can then be determined and quantified, herein as residual scores. We define the sum of all residual scores determined in this way as the CMScore and lower CMScores correspond to better agreement between the cross-linked residue map and the structure-derived protein contact map. These CMScores can then be used to integrate XL-MS experimental data into the process of selection of optimum predicted structural models ().